The opening sentence of Richard Gott's article on Argentina states: "The late Guido di Tella, the intellectual and Anglophile foreign minister in the 1990s, hoped that Argentina, after its tragic experiences after 1950, would one day become a 'normal' country" (Architects of the new Argentina, April 2).Di Tella was, in fact, following a tradition of distinguished economic historians from Argentina, Australia and Britain, trying to explain the very different outcomes of "lands of recent settlement" in terms of economic success.Gott then moves his focus to Argentina's current rulers, Nestor and Cristina Kirchner. "This impressive political couple have presided over the country's economic recovery after the collapse of 2001", and have established "the best and most popular government in more than half a century". If "best" means spectacular rates of growth after the 2001 collapse, and a considerable reduction in unemployment and poverty levels, then a comparison with similar results in Brazil and Chile, not to mention Peru and Mexico, points to exceptionally favourable international factors, not the Kirchners' policies.More importantly, if "best" refers to the quality of democracy in Argentina, the Kirchners have abused the presidential system, riding roughshod over the separation of powers and denouncing the press as part of an undefined "conspiracy" against them.The "new" Argentina of Richard Gott remains the "old", based on confrontation and a Manichean division between "the people" and "the anti-people". Violence and constant breaches of the law are tolerated or encouraged; the business of government is conducted almost secretively. The "most popular" Mrs Kirchner was elected in October 2007 with the lowest proportion of the vote since the return to democracy in 1983. Recent opinion polls indicate her popularity ratings hover around 40%.Argentina's culture minister, who is "financing a research programme that delves into the social history of the past two centuries", told Gott: "We need ... to explain 'how and why we are what we are' ... Only then can the people of Argentina decide how their country's direction might be changed or maintained." I thought that elections, not government-funded research programmes, decided such things.Gott's claim that "Argentina is more of an Indian country than the history books have led its people to suppose" is absurd. He says that "20 million people are of indigenous origin, while only 16 million can trace their ancestry back to Europe". Yet repeated censuses have noted that the population of Argentina is 90% white. Di Tella's mistake, the normality that he envisaged, was to have dreamed of a country where the rule of law and the institutions of a liberal democracy would replace decades of arrogance, violence and authoritarianism. Tragically, the Kirchners' "new Argentina" and their view of normality seems to hark back to that sad past, as does Richard Gott.· Celia Szusterman is principal lecturer in Spanish and Latin American studies at the University of Westminster c.szusterman@westminster.ac.uk