After a month in Colombia, the tour returns with recommendations ranging from Jorge Isaacs's Maria, described by dande as "One of the most notable works of the Romantic movement in Spanish literature" to Tomás González's La Luz Difícil, a newly released novel which according to K "Colombian Literature junkies are giving … outstanding reviews".Along the way Daryl suggested Elena Garces's Colombian Women "deserves to be read as an indicator of the contemporary situation of women in many other Latin American countries", while Rafael Leal cited the "reactionary" philosopher Nicolás Gómez Dávila, who apparently "did not believe in translations and read everything in its original language" – though his own works, consisting "mostly of aphorisms" are available in "Polish, German, Italian and French". For Leandro, whereas Gabriel García Márquez describes "Latin-American reality", Fernando Vallejo "describes Colombian reality" in particular, so that Colombians reading Vallejo feel "pain, anger" from descriptions which "destroy our hearts". Thanks for all these recommendations, especially the outpouring of love for Victor M Roselló's East of the Orteguaza.This month the tour travels the length of South America and winds up in Argentina – straight into the meta-fictional labyrinth inhabited by Jorge Luis Borges. With his infinite libraries, fictional texts and rewritten novels, Borges carved out new territory for the short story, but after pausing to admire his convoluted charms, perhaps we can find a way out from his tangled fictional universe and discover where to start with the gaucho literature of the 19th century, or the realists who followed them. And what about literature under Perón, and the great Argentinian authors of today?We're looking for books which capture something of Argentinian life, whether novels or plays, poetry or non-fiction, whether already available in English or yet to be translated. We'd also like to hear about voices from abroad who offer a fresh perspective. All you need to do is visit the boxes below, filling in the country – that's Argentina this month – the title, the author, the translator and some indication of why it's great. I'm off to add a paean to Ficciones, and one of the best novels I've read in the last couple of years, Martin Kohan's Seconds Out, but don't forget to add your votes for the tour's next stop. Even if you haven't got a favourite Argentinian author on your shelf, your votes still count. Next stop Kenya?