The Argentine justice ministry is currently concerned about national safety, and its preoccupation has nothing to do with terrorism, violent crime or drug trafficking. Instead, it is worried about a shortage of coins and the growing black market where coins are purchased. As strange as this may sound from abroad, a lack of coins can become a nightmare for bus users, retailers and average citizens in Argentina.The ministry's concern started some three months ago when the Chamber of Chinese Supermarkets, which represents the hundreds of grocery stores owned by Chinese citizens in Argentina, filed a legal complaint arguing that private money transport companies were selling coins. Like most small- and medium-sized retailers, grocery stores need large amounts of coins to use as change.They usually get the coins from banks, but banks have been handing them out sparsely, because they say there is a coin shortage. Therefore, small retailers must find other providers, and this is when money transporters, who can hoard the coins they transport and replace them with bills, step into the picture in the guise of coin salesmen. Retailers pay around 100 pesos for roughly 88-95 pesos worth of coins. Experts say this business is more profitable than, for example, manufacturing fake coins.Hoarding coins is not in itself a crime, so when the chamber filed the complaint, the justice ministry intervened to find a way to fill the legal loophole. It came up with the idea of charging coin hoarders and dealers with putting national security at risk. In a subsequent raid in Buenos Aires on October 9, police seized 134 barrels full of coins from a private money transport company. After three weeks of counting, the police announced that 21 barrels contained fake coins while the rest had to a total of 4.5 million pesos (some $1.3m or £876,700).If it ended there, the story would be no more than a witty scheme to make some extra money through shady operations. However, the problem is not reduced to one company and a few stores. The central bank, which regulates bank activities, fined five banks last year for not handing out coins to clients, as is mandatory, and 10 other banks are now under investigation.And if the shortage troubles retailers, it is more disturbing for Argentineans who must use buses or want to do small shopping. According to regulation, banks are under the obligation to give up to 20 pesos worth of coins to any person who requires it (the amount was lowered last year from 100 pesos because it was impossible to meet). Banks regularly dismiss the regulations, however, and hand out as little as three pesos in coins. With bus fares ranging from 0.90 to 1.50 pesos, this is obviously not enough.The shortage is considered a national problem, but it is mainly centred in the greater Buenos Aires area, whose population of roughly 13 million people represent around 30% of the country's population. The core public transportation in this metropolitan area is a bus network of more than 200 lines owned by dozens of different companies. Unlike other cities in the country and abroad, buses cannot be used with pre-paid magnetic fare cards. Save a few exceptions, the only way to pay the bus fare is onboard with coins, which are therefore in large demand. Because all their income is in metallic, metropolitan bus companies are suspected of acting in cohorts with money transportation companies to sell coins instead of depositing them in banks, which would return them to the financial system.In a Wall Street Journal op-ed this week, an American university professor, George Selgin, offered some advice to solve the problem. Selgin believes that the Argentine government should allow private companies to issue distinct coins that people can choose or not to use. But Argentine monetary history shows that such as system is likely to fail.Until the early 1990s, coin-sized tokens were the only way to pay for underground fares and public phones, and they are still used in some video game arcades. Tokens were cumbersome to carry, as they could be used only for specific situations and were truly "distinctive private money", as they were not interchangeable (phone tokens could not be used in the underground and vice-versa). Another variety of counterfeit money has existed recurrently in Argentine history in the form of provincial and national government bonds used to pay workers whenever cash was scarce. During the 2001-2002 national economic crisis some 20 different bonds circulated in the country at the same time in parallel with legal money. The first system is recalled as highly unpractical for users, the second as harmful to monetary policy.While it is accused of inefficiency, the central bank says 2007 marked an all-time high in the number of coins manufactured and says that production went up an extra 12% in 2008, setting a new high in circulation. According to the central bank, there is an average of roughly 100 pesos worth of coins on the street for every Argentine citizen.Meanwhile, people must struggle to pay their bus fares and argue with shop clerks over change. Want to buy a 2.50 peso Coke? Better pay with a fiver so the attendant can give you a 2-peso bill and 0.50 in change. Paying with four pesos (two 2-peso bills) would require the shopkeeper to part with at least a 1 peso coin and a 0.50 coin – too much of a commodity.Argentina has always been a country where larger bills – 50s and 100s – are far easier to come by than small change, be it coins or 5- and 10-peso bills. When pennies existed in this country during the 1990s, they were not usually accepted by shopkeepers because they were considered a nuisance. Thus, in Argentina and unlike other countries, the phrase "Got any spare change?" is common to most people, not only the corner beggar. The current shortage has simply made it more popular then ever.