In the eyes of many, Argentina is out of place in the G20. Its GDP may still be among the world's 30 largest, but its financial record this century is, at best, shady, according to the standards of international investors and financial institutions. Those are the same standards, by the way, that allowed for the current international crisis.Even so, the Argentinian president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, is convinced the country can pass on both its experience and economic model to a battered world in need of financial guidance. Almost from the day Lehman Brothers went bust, Kirchner has spoken about how the developing world was peacefully going on with its life when the developed world showed up to complicate everybody's existence with its crisis. As she told the UN General Assembly in September: the world has been hit by "the Jazz Effect".When people talk of the biggest crisis in 60 years – a crisis so big it is leading to the implosion of long-standing financial structures – Argentinians can nod with the self-assurance of those who know. In 2001, the country suffered a life-changing crisis of its own – one that ousted presidents, set off months of social upheaval and led to the downfall of an ingrained economic system. The roots of that crisis lay in a model based to the dot on the rules of the market.The recovery started in 2002 under the stewardship of a caretaker president, Eduardo Duhalde, who was replaced in 2003 by Cristina Kirchner's husband, Néstor. Starting with Duhalde, but mainly under the two consecutive Kirchner administrations, Argentina has gone from financial hubris to the longest period of economic growth in the country's history.The Argentinian presidential couple like to say they set the domestic economy on course by turning a deaf ear to the dictates of the market. There is some truth here: foreign debt was not taken in traditional financial markets; International Monetary Fund officials fortunately lost their say over domestic policies; export taxes on commodities became a key factor in fiscal accounts; and the privatisation frenzy of the neo-liberal 90s was replaced by a number of re-nationalisations, active government intervention in the economy and a "no worries" approach towards the size of state. "Buy Argentinian" was also promoted, as was a higher participation of value-added products in total exports, and higher salaries. If all this sounds familiar, it is because countries all over the world are working on similar policies now.Kirchner has another strong argument to promote: financial markets cannot form the backbone of the economy. If one of the essential talking points of the London summit is going to be a revamp of the IMF and other financial institutions, then Argentina has a lot to say. It can, after all, offer an example of what life is like without the IMF and ratings agencies.There is another of capitalism's many layers that the Kirchners have sniffed at and G20 members should study. Under their mandates, Argentina has stopped being a government of the kind that is, to quote Amartya Sen, reliant "only on a profit-maximizing market economy and on personal entitlements confined to private ownership".However, the Argentinian model is far from being a dependable reference point, for several reasons. First, it has been sustained by an export-friendly currency, hard to concert among all of the world's largest economies. Second, the model has failed to keep inflation on a leash and, in the past two years, to keep poverty rates from increasing. Third, and most important, it is a model that flourished during years of robust trade and a healthy global economy. The current scenario is the opposite, and different recipes will be needed.Also, on the political front, the Kirchner administrations have been plagued by accusations of cronyism. They have suffered the desertion and disillusionment of members who accuse the government of steadily turning to the right and of acting out of instinct rather than reflection. There has also been concern about the political use of public funds.Because of this, the Argentinian experience should be considered as a case study in need of perfection – and not the holy economic grail the Kirchner administration would have us believe it is.There is one more lesson Argentina may teach the world – one about "life after capitalism", a recurrent theme in op-eds worldwide. It was only three or four years ago that Néstor Kirchner assailed international financial outfits like the IMF almost on a daily basis. But now the government of his wife – an administration where he has a strong voice – is looking for an elegant way to return to the the fund. As Argentinians can tell, the fall of capitalism comes with a lot of stormy winds – but once they die down, "life after capitalism" looks quite similar to life as we know it.