A year ago, Cristina Kirchner crashed into a mid-term crisis that threatened her survival as Argentina's first elected woman president. Robbed of a congressional majority in legislative elections and plagued by a hostile press, farm strikes and protests over high inflation, the "new Evita" was written off as a lame duck destined for political oblivion.But like Evaita and her husband, General Juan Perón, co-founders of the Perónist party nearly 70 years ago, Cristina and her husband, Néstor, thrive on adversity.Overcoming a collapse in approval ratings to under 20%, the Kirchners now seem poised to win a third successive presidential election – something not even the Peróns achieved."I have never seen a case before of an Argentine president bouncing back in the polls like this," said Eduardo Fidanza of the Poliarquía polling company.An unexpected economic recovery fuelled by government spending has helped double the president's rating to just under 40%, which is considered enough to win presidential elections set for October 2011.After stalling last year, economic growth is predicted to grow by 8.5% this year. Tax revenue is up, and shopping malls are full despite inflation estimated at around 25%."Inflation was mainly responsible for the president's sagging numbers," said Fidanza. "But nobody seems to mind any more now that there is growth."The government has two good years ahead of it, said Agustín Rossi, head of the Kirchner bloc in congress's lower house. "This economic growth will mean greater social inclusion and more jobs."The divided opposition's failure to consolidate last year's capture of congress has played into the first couple's hands. All the opposition presidential contenders lag behind them."Either Cristina or her husband would defeat the opposition easily if elections were held today," said Fidanza.Néstor, 60, who is more popular than his wife and preceded her as president, is tipped to run next year; he would hand the baton back after his term. There is concern, however, about his health: he was released from hospital last week after a heart procedure to unblock a coronary artery for the second time this year.María Eugenia Estenssoro, a senator with the Coalición Cívica party, said Argentina's democracy was at risk from a couple who hoped to keep power until 2020. "This married couple have usurped power through what amounts to an elective dictatorship," she warned. "Argentina is looking for a saviour who can take on the Kirchners."Several major media outlets have echoed the accusation, notably the conservative daily La Nación and the middle-of-the-road Clarín. Both newspapers have sided with the opposition while reporting government corruption, triggering a vicious battle with the first couple.To end what she described as an "information monopoly" by Clarín's media empire, Kirchner pushed new regulations that will force it to halt lucrative cable and internet access concessions. "There is an evident official strategy against the media, a plan to silence the press," said the Clarín CEO, Héctor Magnetto.Things turned personal last month when Kirchner presented a voluminous report accusing the two newspapers of conspiring with the 1976-83 military dictatorship to imprison and torture the family of David Graiver, a financier who died in a mysterious plane crash in Mexico in 1976. His widow, Lidia Papaleo, sold one of Graiver's companies, the newsprint manufacturer Papel Prensa, to Clarín and La Nación. A few months later, the dictatorship kidnapped and tortured Papaleo and members of her family.Kirchner has ordered a criminal investigation into the role of Magnetto and La Nación's director, Bartolomé Mitre, accusing them of "crimes against humanity".Both men reject the accusations. "Papel Prensa has been in operation for over 30 years and the purchase was approved by the courts after the return of democracy in 1983," Magnetto told the Guardian.The accusation has also been rejected by Graiver's brother, Isidoro, who said the sale had been completed before the kidnappings.Fidanza said the president was prevailing: "Clarín is the clear loser in this war. Young people are cynical about big media and feel they have a negative viewpoint of the Kirchners."Young viewers are abandoning traditional news outlets in favour of the MTV-style news programme, 6,7,8 on the state channel Canal 7, which criticises the first couple's enemies.It is the creation of the self-professed "Kirchnerista" producer Diego Gvirtz. "I am paranoid," he said by way of greeting at his production office, "and I don't believe in press objectivity."A former producer for Clarín's TV channel Canal 13, Gvirtz has no love for his ex-employer Magnetto. "People who committed crimes must go to jail," he said. Gvirtz's partisanship (the show's musical theme chants "We are officialist bullshit") has viewers enthralled.Fidanza said it all added up to a probable dynasty for the first couple. "The president's recovery is remarkable," he said.