 Spain pledged to wage diplomatic and industrial war on Argentina after the country's populist president, Cristina Fernández, announced plans to nationalise the Spanish-owned part of oil company YPF."With this attitude, this hostility from the Argentine authorities, there will be consequences that we'll see over the next few days," industry minister José Manuel Soria pledged, calling it a hostile action against Spain. "They will be in the diplomatic field, the industrial field and on energy." Retaliatory measures for the expropriation of the Spanish Repsol company's shares in YPF will be announced after a cabinet meeting on Friday, while the European Union was also pulled into the dispute.Spanish president Mariano Rajoy had blistering words for Fernández, speaking at the World Economic Forum on Latin America in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico. "This damages Argentina's international reputation," said Rajoy. "What happened yesterday could happen to any other investment." Spain's foreign minister, José Manuel García-Margallo, claimed that Fernández had originally planned to time her announcement to coincide with the 30th anniversary of the Falklands war on 2 April."We expect Argentinian authorities to uphold their international commitments and obligations, in particular those resulting from a bilateral agreement on the protection on investments in Spain," said European commission president José Manuel Barroso. European foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton called off a meeting of the EU-Argentine joint committee on Thursday.A Chinese website, meanwhile, reported that Repsol had been preparing to sell YPF to the China Petrochemical Corp (Sinopec) for $15bn. Repsol, which has Sinopec as a strategic partner in Brazil, did not comment on the claim. China has far greater clout than Spain in Argentina, whose economy is heavily dependent on soya exports to the Asian giant, leading to speculation that Fernández might strike her own deal with Sinopec, effectively handing even greater control over Argentina's economy to Beijing.Repsol chairman Antonio Brufau accused Fernández of trying to divert attention from her political troubles with the nationalisation and demanded the market rate of $10.5bn (£6.6bn) for his firm."This is only a way of covering up the social and economic crisis Argentina is facing," said Brufau, pointing to high inflation and energy prices.Fernández had accused the company of failing to invest in oil prospecting in the country after buying YPF from the state in 1999. But Brufau said it had invested $20bn. Repsol also claimed the recent discovery of abundant shale oil and gas reserves in the Vaca Muerta area of Argentina had sparked the takeover. Spanish analysts said price controls imposed by the Argentine government had made investment much less profitable for Repsol, although Repsol said 33.7% of the group's recent investments had been going to YPF, which provided 21% of the net income.Argentina's hydrocarbons output has been in decline for years at a time of strong demand from industry and consumers. Crude production fell 5.9% and natural gas output slipped 3.4% last year as power demand rose 5.1%, according to the Argentine Institute of Petroleum and Gas. YPF's proven reserves of crude and natural gas – which do not include the new shale finds – fell 15% and 31% respectively between 2007 and 2010. Imports of fuels such as liquefied natural gas and diesel doubled last year to about $9.4bn, eroding the country's trade surplus.Brufau was furious that Argentine officials had thrown Spanish executives out of the YPF headquarters in Buenos Aires. He pledged a legal battle at the United Nations and the World Bank against Fernández, accusing her of being "an expert manipulator". "She carried out an illegal act and made unlawful allegations which followed a campaign aimed at knocking down the price of YPF shares and allowing expropriation at a bargain price," he said."It will be a long (legal) battle," Brufau warned.Argentina has not said how much it intends to pay for YPF, which has 42% of Repsol's global reserves, but Brufau said Repsol's YPF stake was worth $10.5bn. Analysts, however, said it would probably be offered the much lower book value of about €4bn. (£3.3bn)."Repsol will not have much bargaining power given the limited legal recourse at its disposal," said Laurence Allan and Juliette Kerr of IHS Global Insight, pointing to Argentina's refusal to pay out on other World Bank arbitration claims. "Yesterday's performance is a continuation of recent rhetoric over the Falkland Islands," they added."The government's record of running state-owned companies does not bode well and the fallout from the issue seems set to remain at the centre of political and business life in Argentina for the foreseeable future."Argentina now runs the risk of scaring away other foreign investors needed to develop the larger Vaca Muerta area. Analysts said the move, announced live on television amid the increasingly populist and nationalist paraphernalia that accompanies Fernández, would have far-reaching implications."The government's record of running state-owned companies does not bode well and the fallout from the issue seems set to remain at the centre of political and business life in Argentina for the foreseeable future."The takeover of Repsol's shares in YPF will leave Argentina with a 51% stake in the company, Repsol with 6%, the Argentine group Petersen with 25%, with the remainder distributed among private shareholders. The company has more than 13,000 employees and had sales of $56bn last year, producing about 111 million barrels of oil last year with profits of more than $5bn.