Thirty years after liberating British forces hoisted the union flag in Stanley, the Falklands flag flew defiantly above 10 Downing Street on Thursday as David Cameron pledged to continue defending islanders from Argentina's "aggressive threats".Eight thousand miles away at the liberation monument in the Falklands' capital, veterans, widows, politicians and Falklanders braved thick snow at a wreath-laying commemoration and military parade on the anniversary of the end of the South Atlantic conflict.It was a day of high emotion, both in the UK and on the bleak, treeless islands, as heads were bowed in memory of the 255 British military and merchant navy personnel, the three Falkland islanders and estimated 650 Argentinian soldiers who died during the 74-day war.Three decades after Margaret Thatcher sent 27,000 troops and more than 100 ships to repel the invaders, Buenos Aires continues lay claim to the territory. But, Cameron stressed, Britain's resolve to support this remote British Overseas Territory "has not wavered in the last 30 years and it will not in the years ahead".Meanwhile, the Falklands' legislative assembly announced a referendum on its sovereignty, to be held next year, in a bid to cool the dispute between the UK and its South American neighbour.Argentina's president chose the 30th anniversary to attempt to press her country's claims to the islands they call the Malvinas before a United Nations committee on decolonisation.Cristina Fernández de Kirchner told the 24-member committee in New York on Thursday night that distance undermined the UK's argument and accused Britain of abusing its privileged position as a permanent member of the UN security council."How can it be claimed that, 14,000 kilometres away, that it can be part of the British territory?" she said. Fernández insisted that Argentina just wanted to "talk" about the islands' sovereignty. "Can someone in the modern world deny that possibility?" she added.Her appearance was preceded by an advertisement, taken out in Thursday's Guardian newspaper, in which she described the Falklands as "an anachronistic colonial case in the South Atlantic".Claiming that the UK had refused to comply with UN resolutions requiring the UK and Argentina to "negotiate a peaceful solution", the notice said: "We, Argentines, ask all of you – citizens and governments of the world – to put an end to colonialism and to demand compliance with UN resolutions."Cameron hit back at Buenos Aires in a speech on Thursday night at the annual Falkland islands government reception in London, warning Fernández: "When it comes to the sovereignty of the Falkland islands, there will be absolutely no negotiation. This is not some game of global Monopoly, with nations passing a territory between them."It's about the islanders determining their own future. This has been their home for almost 180 There are children whose ancestors have lived there for generations. The roots go deep, and they will not be ripped out.years." He added: "So my message to the government of Argentina is this: the UK has no aggressive intentions towards you. Accusations of militarisation and nuclear threats are hyperbole and propaganda."But do not under-estimate our resolve. Threats will not work, attempts to intimidate the islanders will not succeed, because Britain stands ready and willing to stand up for the Falkland islanders at any time. As long as they wish to remain a British territory, that is the way it will stay."At the Downing Street ceremony the surrender of Argentinian commander General Mario Menéndez to the British, Cameron said: "For the last 180 years, 10 generations have called the Falkland Islands home and have strived hard to secure a prosperous future for their children. And despite the aggressive threats from over the water, they are succeeding. The Falklands economy is growing, the fishing industry is thriving and tourism is flourishing."Next year's referendum will establish the definitive choice of the Falkland Islanders once and for all. And just as we have stood up for the Falkland Islanders in the past, so we will in the future."Britain's UN ambassador, Mark Lyall Grant, said it was "very sad" that "the Argentinians for obviously purely domestic political reasons have hyped up the rhetoric in a massive way and are using every opportunity to try to internationalise the issue and get support from the regional organisations and make a song and dance at the UN".At a thanksgiving service held at Stanley's Christ Church cathedral, memories were vivid of the day when Argentina's military dictatorship finally surrendered."Thirty years on, I've grown increasingly aware how very close to the surface all this has become again for many of you," the Rev Richard Hines told the packed congregation. "This 30th anniversary is serving again to remind each one of you Falkland islanders just how much you endured and how … you found inner strength during 74 days of foreign occupation."Foreign Office minister Jeremy Browne, who attended the commemorations, said the islanders were "enthusiastic" about their liberation in 1982 and proud of the achievements of the British armed forces. "It is also a commemorative event ... a more sombre reflection on the sacrifice on both sides," he said.Gavin Short, chairman of the Falklands' legislative assembly, accused the Argentinian government of deploying "absurd" and "misleading rhetoric" to the international community to imply that the islanders are "being held hostage" by the UK. Of the referendum, he said: "I have no doubt that the people of the Falklands wish for the islands to remain a self-governing overseas territory of the United Kingdom".Among commemorations held in Britain, paratrooopers paraded in their hometown of Colchester in tribute to the Parachute Regiment's involvement in the 1982 conflict.A Downing Street spokesman said the Falklands flag above No 10 was flown "in tribute to all those who lost their lives in the conflict and in solidarity with the Falkland Islanders who continue to face aggressive threats from their neighbours across the water".ends