Former Argentinian president Néstor Kirchner – the current leader's husband and a contender to succeed her next year – has died of a heart attack.Kirchner, who was 60, was considered President Cristina Fernández's closest adviser and a powerbroker in her government. He died after being taken to hospital while suffering a severe heart attack. "It was a sudden death," Kirchner's doctor, Luis Buonomo, told Reuters.President from 2003 to 2007, Kirchner, a left-leaning member of the Peronist party, oversaw Argentina's recovery from a devastating economic crisis. He was famous for fiery, leftwing speeches, and criticism of private companies and the International Monetary Fund. His death sparked a rally on world financial markets as investors looked forward to the prospect of a more investment-friendly regime.Kirchner had undergone two arterial procedures earlier this year. He died in the southern city of El Calafate. Fernández was at his side when he died.The news shocked Argentinians, who by law were staying at home to be counted in a census. Kirchner's supporters planned a mass gathering tonight outside the Casa Rosada, Argentina's presidential palace.Argentina's most powerful union leader, Hugo Moyano, expressed his allegiance to the president, ordering an emergency board meeting of the General Labour Confederation: "We will express our total support for the tenure of Cristina Kirchner so that the political and economic model her husband began in 2003 goes forward.""A great patriot has died," said Juan Carlos Dante Gullo, a ruling party politician. "This will leave a huge hole in Argentine politics. Argentina has lost one of its greatest men."The leader of the human rights group Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo, Estela de Carlotto, said Kirchner "gave his life for his country. Our country needed this man so much. He was indispensable."Even more than Fernández, Kirchner was seen as the heir to Argentina's strongman president, Juan Domingo Perón, and one of the few figures capable of managing Argentina's unruly and chaotic political scene. Fernández is now likely to face many new threats to her leadership.The couple met at law school in the 1970s, and took turns in the political limelight. She was his adviser during his presidency, and he a key economic adviser since she succeeded him in December 2007.He was seen as a contender in next year's presidential race, and his popularity closely followed the approval ratings for his wife's presidency, which had rebounded from lows of about 20% as the economy improved.