Argentines are very worried about their future. On Sunday farmers began their fourth strike in three months in reaction to the government's introduction in March of a new sliding scale of tax tariffs on grain and oilseed. The farmers are demanding that the president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, performs a U-turn on these laws.At least 300 motorways in the country were blocked by protesters, which saw dramatic clashes with police on Saturday and Sunday. Alfredo De Angeli, the prominent farming leader and a rising voice of dissent against the Argentine government, was briefly arrested at a roadblock in Entre Rios province (north of Buenos Aires).In response to these protests, and very symbolically for many Argentines, pro-government groups have called for a rally in Plaza de Mayo tomorrow, in front of the Casa Rosada. The roadblocks have caused things to deteriorate rapidly; there are shortages of basic goods such as flour, milk and meat, an incomprehensible situation for a country well known for its agricultural economy. Argentines were shocked to see up to 880,000 gallons of spoiled milk being drained from milk tankers and horrified by the sight of grain being burned alongside the motorways. The blockades are sparking fuel shortages, which has led to reduced bus services, and has sparked social unrest.The anger and frustration has led to hundreds of Argentines taking to the streets, many banging pots and pans to show their discontent with the government. For most citizens these scenes are vividly reminiscent of the economic collapse after the country defaulted on its national debt in 2001.According to a report to be published this week by the Argentine institutions and markets research centre at Eseade business school, Argentina's debt levels are now higher than they were when the economy crashed – at that time the largest crash of its kind in history. The paper's authors, Martín Krause and Aldo Abram, believe that a worsening crisis of confidence in the government has brought the spectre of a new default closer. Despite radical restructuring just three years ago, public debt has reached $114.7bn or 56% of gross domestic product, compared with $144.2bn, or 54% of GDP, in 2001.Argentina is now being affected by a problem without precedent; a conflict between the state and the farmers, which is virtually crippling Argentina's traditional economic activities. Yet, there is a much more serious underlying problem; the general sense of national impotence with the state failing to find even short-term solutions to the problems at hand in order to help resolve the crisis – in the Argentine collective imagination there is the fear, perhaps well-founded, that the country is descending into anarchy.Unless the farmers or the government begin to discuss their differences, Argentina could face even more violence in the streets, and the real possibility of social disintegration and political collapse.