The critics may have been expecting a win for Jacques Audiard's A Prophet or Michael Haneke's The White Ribbon, but victory for Argentina's El Secreto de Sus Ojos (The Secret in Their Eyes) in the foreign language section at Sunday night's Oscars has reportedly sent the South American nation into raptures.The Oscars, broadcast there in the early hours of Monday morning, was yesterday's most-watched television programme, and newspapers scurried to print second editions carrying the country's win on their front pages. Throughout the day, news programmes continued to report on the victory and the reaction to it.Juan José Campanella's thriller, based on a novel by Eduardo Sacheri, is set in Buenos Aires in 1999. It centres on a retired investigator trying to solve the 1974 rape and murder of a woman, and highlights the turbulent nature of Argentina in the 1970s, a period in which the country was controlled mainly by military dictatorships.The Secret in Their Eyes emerged as victor despite the high-profile nature of some of its competitors. Audiard's gangster flick had taken the Grand Prix at Cannes, as well as a foreign language Bafta, while Haneke's austere black-and-white drama took the Palme D'Or at Cannes and the foreign language Golden Globe."This is a historic moment," veteran actor Guillermo Francella, a member of the film's cast, said following the victory. "The people felt it personally, which is why there is so much joy in Argentina.""It was really miraculous because the films they were competing against were excellent," said Ricardo Darín, who plays the lead role of detective Benjamín Esposito.Earlier this year The Secret in Their Eyes became the second most successful film in the history of its country at the box office, surpassed only by Leonardo Favio's 1975 classic, Nazareno Cruz y el lobo (Nazareno Cruz and the Wolf). It had already taken the best Hispanic-American film prize at the Goyas, ahead of Peruvian rival The Milk of Sorrow, which also lost out at the Oscars."We're happy because we won ... It was a fantastic film I saw twice and which had an impact on me," said the Argentinian president, Cristina Kirchner. "With Campanella's talent and the huge public success in Argentina, we showed that this film could win the Oscar."The last time Argentina won the best foreign language Oscar was in 1986, for Luis Puenzo's Official History (La Historia Oficial). The country remains the only country in Latin America to have won the award.Campanella himself is relatively well-known in Hollywood, having directed episodes of House and Law & Order, among other series. His film Son of the Bride (El Hijo de la Novia), which also starred Darín, was nominated for the Academy Award for best foreign-language film in 2002.