Sex clearly drives Britain and Argentina as they vie to dominate islands of interest. The two great nations are rivals in producing academic studies of whether and how people stare at women's breasts or buttocks.Britain fired the first shot in this war. In 2007, Adrian Furnham and Viren Swami of University College London published a report called Perception of Female Buttocks and Breast Size in Profile, in the journal Social Behaviour and Personality.Professor Furnham is, by his own reckoning, one of the most productive academics alive, publishing many hundreds of papers in dozens of far-flung fields.Professor Swami, now at the University of Westminster, also beavers relentlessly, both in Britain and abroad. He has launched treatises in topics from the physical attractiveness of women and men in London's boroughs to the opinions of Austrian students as to the personalities of butchers and hunters.The Furnham/Swami breast/buttocks paper gathers together many facts known only to a small number of specialists. Here's one. Furnham and Swami write: "It is widely recognised, for example, that the African Hottentot (Caboid) tribe and certain tribes in the Andaman Islands show a preference for large fat deposits on the buttocks, a condition known as steatopygia. It has been suggested that such fat deposits on the buttocks and thighs may signal resource accrual…"Furnham and Swami studied the reactions of 114 British undergraduates – men and women. They write: "The stimuli consisted of nine nude female silhouettes, prepared … in such a manner that the size of breasts and buttocks could be varied systematically." Their conclusion: "The participants in this study showed a preference for small breast size, although buttocks size did not appear to alter ratings of attractiveness. It would be useful for future research to include a larger range of breast sizes and shapes … to investigate the possibility that optimal breast size … varies across individuals".Argentina took five years to respond to this provocation.Mariano Sigman, director of the Laboratory for Integrative Neuroscience at the University of Buenos Aires, and two collaborators concentrated their analytical firepower on male undergraduates. Their study called Eye Fixations Indicate Men's Preference for Female Breasts or Buttocks has just been published in the Archives of Sexual Behaviour.The Sigman team reports that: (1) "Argentinian males tended to define themselves as favouring breasts or buttocks"; (2) "the distribution was biased towards buttocks"; and (3) individuals who say they prefer to gaze at one of those body parts behave as if they do.The British and Argentinian projects both exhibit indomitable focus. The authors and test subjects apparently refuse to let anything seriously distract them from what they want to study.(Thanks to Diego Golombeck for alerting me to the Argentinian study.)• Marc Abrahams is editor of the bimonthly Annals of Improbable Research and organiser of the Ig Nobel prize