 The UN special rapporteur on torture is an Argentinian, and, for the first time since the position was created in 1985, not a European. He was once a torture victim himself.The lawyer Juan Méndez, 65, was arrested and tortured in Argentina in 1975 because he represented political prisoners. "I think I have a particular sympathy for victims," he said on a trip to Geneva in November to meet UN leaders and non-government organisations.Méndez was arrested before the military coup in March 1976. At the time there was a violent rift between Peronist factions. Several of his friends or acquaintances in Mar del Plata were victims of officially sanctioned death squads. "The Mar del Plata killers and the prosecutor who protected them will soon be on trial," Méndez says. "It will be the first trial [in Argentina] for crimes against humanity committed before the military takeover."Méndez was held at U9, the prison in La Plata (the administrative capital of Buenos Aires province), instead of "disappearing" into one of the clandestine detention centres set up after the coup. But life at U9 got much worse after the military took control of the prison system. At their trial this October a dozen officials in charge at U9 were found guilty.The prison was linked to 30 murders, most of them of friends or relations of political prisoners. Inmates were killed, too; it was claimed they tried to escape while being transferred to another jail.Méndez was released in February 1977, on condition that he left Argentina. He settled in the US and began an academic career: "I teach international law, human rights and the law of war at the American University in Washington." He has also worked for Human Rights Watch and the International Centre for Transitional Justice, easing the passage between dictatorship and democracy, armed conflict and peace. He was active in Liberia, Kenya and Colombia, and was on the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.In 2004 he was appointed as the UN secretary-general's special adviser for prevention of genocide. He admits having been disappointed by US "ambiguity" on Darfur: "The US ambassador John Bolton prevented me from presenting my mission report to the security council after my second trip to the area."His mandate as special rapporteur concerns not only torture, but also cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. His competence extends to prisons. His first visits will be to Zimbabwe, Kyrgyzstan and Cuba. "Human rights campaigners are also pressing us to visit Russia," Méndez added. As an advocate of dialogue, he hopes to convince national authorities that his visits are not necessarily a prelude to condemnation.UN special rapporteur is an unpaid position supported by three salaried assistants.Méndez thinks the war on terror has made torture seem commonplace: "Torture is intolerable and no one has proved it is effective." He would like to clear up the issue of CIA "black holes", the clandestine detention centres said to operate in other countries. He deplores the fact that Barack Obama has not fully investigated possible irregularities committed under the Bush administration.This article originally appeared in Le Monde