In the late 19th and early 20th centuries Brazil couldn't find enough migrants. Seeking to fuel the Sao Paulo coffee boom, authorities actively recruited impoverished Europeans and later Japanese citizens.Today migrating to Brazil is no longer so easy. Aside from marrying a Brazilian or having a Brazilian child – as did the great train robber Ronnie Biggs – several options exist for those hoping to relocate to South America's largest nation.Work visas are routinely issued to directors and high-level employees from foreign companies operating in Brazil. Over 50s, who can prove a monthly income of over $2,000, are issued with retirement visas.Another possibility is an "investment visa", granted by the work ministry to foreigners who commit to investing at least $50,000 in an existing Brazilian company or a start-up that will create at least 10 Brazilian jobs in five years.A number of European immigrants work in Brazil illegally, renewing 90-day tourist visas by leaving the country and returning. During a 2009 amnesty on illegal immigration around 2,400 Europeans legalised their status with the federal police.Unlike Brazil, Argentina has an open-doors policy, with immigrants from Europe particularly welcome. No specific skills or country quotas are in place. All an applicant needs is a letter from an employer or potential employer and a certificate of good conduct from the police of their country of origin.It is also possible to look for a job once in Argentina on a tourist visa. Europeans can travel to Argentina without a visa and are automatically given a free 90-day tourist visa upon arrival. After finding a job immigrants can go to the migrations department with a letter from their employer and a certificate of good conduct from their country of origin. Application requirements are fairly straightforward but the same cannot be said for Argentina's often nightmarish bureaucracy. It can take several months until a visa is actually issued.Migration to Australia is also not as easy as it once was. In the year to June 2011 there were 113,850 places for skilled migrants to Australia. The skilled occupation list determines which professions or trades can apply for unsponsored migration.As well as occupation, applicants are assessed on the basis of their age, qualifications, English language ability and employability. Australian employers can also sponsor potential migrants to fill vacancies in their businesses.Several government initiatives encourage migration to regional and low population growth areas of the country. A business skills visa allows business owners, senior executives or investors to apply for a temporary visa, and later for residency if requirements are satisfied.Canada's immigration programme was comprehensively revised in 2002, and now lists three main objectives of its immigration policy: reuniting families, contributing to economic development and protecting refugees.Family class migration allows foreign nationals to migrate to Canada under the sponsorship of close relatives (typically spouses and partners, parents, children or grandchildren) already permanently (and legally) residing in Canada.Options for economic migrants include applying from outside Canada on the basis of having skills and experience matching a number of specific "in-demand" categories identified by the Canadian government, or applying from within Canada for individuals with sufficient (typically two years) relevant Canadian work experience – for example through a temporary employment visa granted by a Canadian employer.Other avenues exist for business immigrants who intend to set up a business in Canada, or can invest a set sum (currently C$800,000, or £500,000) with the Canadian government for a period of five years, have a minimum net worth of C$1.6 million and can demonstrate they have business experience.