Argentina has tightened controls on all shipping to and from the Falkland Islands in another escalation of its row with Britain over oil and gas exploration in the south Atlantic.President Cristina Kirchner issued a decree obliging vessels which use Argentine ports to seek a government permit if they enter or leave British-controlled waters."Any boat that wants to travel between ports on the Argentine mainland to the Islas Malvinas, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands … must first ask for permission from the Argentine government," Aníbal Fernández, the cabinet chief, told a news conference in Buenos Aires yesterday.Argentina lost a brief 1982 war over the islands, which it calls the Malvinas, but still claims sovereignty and describes the British presence as an occupation.Its ire has been stoked by imminent exploration for hydrocarbon deposits which could turn the archipelago's 2,900 inhabitants into oil barons. A rig, the Ocean Guardian, is expected to arrive today and soon start drilling 100 miles offshore. Geological surveys suggest up to 60bn barrels may lie beneath the seabed.A British company, Desire Petroleum, has hired the rig to drill prospects in the North Falkland basin and will later lease it to two other British companies and an Australian one – Rockhopper, and Falklands Oil and Gas; and BHP Billiton – which also have exploration contracts.They will use the rig in rotation throughout 2010. It will be the first drilling in Falkland waters since Shell suspended exploration in 1998 after oil prices slumped to $12 a barrel.Oil companies are bullish about prospects this time round but island authorities caution that no commercial deposits have yet been found.Earlier this month Argentina lodged a formal diplomatic protest. Last week it prevented a cargo ship from sailing on suspicion it was carrying oil drilling equipment to the islands and the foreign minister, Jorge Taiana, met the governor of Tierra del Fuego province, Fabiana Ros, to co-ordinate Argentina's response.Yesterday's decree will force all ships – not just those involved in hydrocarbon exploration – bound for the islands or travelling through waters claimed by Argentina to secure the new permit.The decree did not specify, and officials did not elaborate, what sanctions Argentina may levy on ships which do not comply. Analysts said Buenos Aires was giving companies a warning and driving up the costs of business with the Falklands.A British embassy spokesman played down the decree's significance. "The way in which Argentina applies its laws within Argentine territory is a matter for Argentina … the United Kingdom has no doubts about its sovereignty over the Falkland Islands and the surrounding maritime area."Despite mounting domestic woes for the Argentinian and British governments neither is expected to seek diversion in another military conflict. The 1982 war, which cost 649 Argentine and 258 British lives, doomed Argentina's dictatorship and forged Margaret Thatcher's reputation as Britain's "iron lady" prime minister.