In a Studies of Youth Literature class at the University of Buenos Aires, my teacher picked on me, the only native speaker, to read aloud from our copy of Roald Dahl's Charlie and the Chocolate Factory. Never has my rather ordinary south-east London accent been met with such raptures. I felt like a parrot who surprises their owner with a perfect rendition of Shakespeare's Sonnet Number 18. One girl told me I had "beautiful sonority". I was inundated with requests for conversation exchange. But, while Her Majesty's English was winning the hearts of my classmates, right outside the door of the classroom (my faculty being notorious for its political zeal) hung a disfigured picture of Margaret Thatcher emblazoned with the angry words: "Brits Get Lost", among other less savoury phrases.While living in Buenos Aires last year, I came to realise the importance of a good grasp of English for students and young, aspiring professionals in Argentina. Regardless of their attitude towards Great Britain more generally, verbally the British empire is still ever-present in Argentina today. In recent years, Argentinians, fervently patriotic by nature, have reluctantly acknowledged that learning English is crucial if they want to succeed in a country racked, as theirs is, with economic turmoil.Currently the Argentine economy is in dire straits, almost as bad as the crisis in 2002. Amid rising temperatures, rising tempers and rising supermarket prices, Argentinians, led by their president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, have become increasingly hostile towards foreign parties.Fernández points the finger at those who refuse to bury the hatchet on the large international debts the nation has racked up in recent years. Not for the first time, Argentinians lamenting over extortionate costs find themselves cursing the colonial spectre under their breath.But Daniel Scioli, governor of the province of Buenos Aires, recently proposed one solution to the financial woes: create a secure labour and economic infrastructure by aligning with more stable international economies. And to enter into this kind of global trade, for the next few decades at least, you need to speak high-level English. Even in the face of this new crisis, there appears to be no choice but to embrace the enemy.Argentinian primary school children are taught to mistrust the English. Stories of British invasions, of Falkland travesties, of colonial rapes, are shovelled into the minds of youngsters like hot coals onto an already blazing nationalistic fire. And yet, in the barrio of Belgrano, the Chelsea of Buenos Aires, the up-market streets are lined with dozens of bilingual schools. The Language Faculty at the University of Buenos Aires offers three times as many classes for beginners' English than it does for neighbouring Brazilian Portuguese.In common parlance on Argentine streets are robust anglicisms such as "a-full" (meaning very busy: as in "Today I am a-full") and "heavy" (meaning intense: as in "Studying medicine is very heavy"). In fact, people who accidently bump into you while out and about will cry "sorry!" (with a rolled "r"). British culture is similarly ubiquitous, with Argentine pedestrians right, left and centre sporting Union Jack print T-shirts.This paradox between animousity towards Brits and desire to learn their language is a part of the age old internal battle between "European" civilisation and "Latino" savagery discussed at great length by Argentine great Borges. It is a paradox that today manifests itself in the location of several dubiously authentic "Irish bars" in the centre of town lining the aggressively named "Malvinas Argentinas" street.Last year I experienced at close hand the force of this paradox. To supplement my student-loan I took a job as a waitress and receptionist in one of the many Tango restaurant-show complexes in the city. Earning a pittance which would be illegal in the UK and at the beck and call of my boss, I came to appreciate the power I wielded simply by opening my mouth. Picking up the phone and offering an answer otherwise unremarkable save the fact it was delivered in native English was enough to send my boss into a fit of jealousy. He would sulk for 10 minutes, before cheering himself up by rudely demanding I empty the office bin, a childlike attempt to reassert the hierarchies of power that had crumbled at the sound of my native pronunciation.With this embarrassing and reluctant but apparently necessary assimilation of British culture and language in Argentina, no wonder Fernández has adopted a defensive attitude towards the current crisis. Argentina cannot be blamed for wanting to rid itself once and for all from the still-devastating vestiges of colonialism, but neither can it be blamed for its people attempting to invest in stable, international economies.It now strikes me as obvious, although I didn't realise at the time, that as we sat in my class and I obediently read out a section of Roald Dahl, my peers didn't simply hear the dull tones of my normal speaking-voice, they heard the mysterious and exclusive sounds of international success: English – the golden ticket to sought-after economic stability.