A former Guantánamo detainee who obtained refugee status in Uruguay last December, made a surprising visit to neighbouring Argentina to ask the country to take in detainees.Abu Wa’el Dhiab, also known as Jihad Ahmad Diyab, made an impassioned plea for Argentina and other South American countries to accept prisoners still held at Guantánamo Bay. Uruguay accepted six former Guantánamo inmates last December, Dhiab among them.“I’m never going to forget my companions [in Guantánamo],” Dhiab said in an interview with the leftwing Argentinian website Barricada released on Thursday. “That’s why I came here to fight.”Throughout the 19-minute interview, Dhiab sported the orange jumpsuit he wore during his 12 years in US detention.“These clothes are part of me,” Dhiab said in the video, speaking Arabic with a Spanish translator. “Before leaving they told me to change and put on a brown suit. I put it over this, because this is symbolic and very important to me. The Americans made us wear this to terrorise the whole world. Thank God that has flipped around now.”The former Guantánamo inmate refused to give details of torture at the base. “I would need many hours to develop that subject, but speaking generally, we were tortured from the first moment we arrived until the last moment we left Guantánamo.” Related: Guantánamo prisoners released to Uruguay: 'We are so happy to be here' “They thought we’d go crazy in six months but we resisted years and years, thanks to God and thanks to our patience.”The 46-year-old Syrian claimed that there are prisoners in Guantánamo on never-ending hunger strikes who have been force-fed since 2005. “We hear Obama say that prisoners at Guantánamo have to be treated humanely, but every time he appears saying that on television we see that has a very negative repercussion,” he said in the interview.Dhiab said he himself had been on hunger strike, starting in 2005. “I started having health problems in 2004 and I would write on my food plate, I handed back my food, because I felt that food was not good for my health.”“Before leaving Guantánamo I was in a place where I was force-fed. It was a tube through my nose that forced me to eat. There I spoke to a companion from Yemen who said: ‘Don’t forget us when you leave.’”Dhiab said he will continue to fight for the release of those left behind. “The Argentinian government could accept prisoners from Guantánamo for humanitarian reasons. I am requesting the governments here to accept more people, more Guantánamo prisoners to save them, at least for humanitarian reasons.” Related: America can't handle the truth – about Guantánamo, torture or a man now free from both | Cori Crider The Argentinian government declined to comment on Dhiab’s presence here.Dhiab is still waiting for his wife and children to be brought to Uruguay to join him. He said he can’t go back to Syria because of the situation there.Since 2002, 779 inmates have been held at the US military base in Cuba, according to Reprieve, the British human rights organisation that secured Dhiab’s release to Uruguay two months ago. Only eight have been been convicted of crimes by a Guantánamo military commission. A total of 122 detainees are believed to remain under detention today.