The sniggering of the northern hemisphere's sophisticates was predictable enough. What, the Aussies were going to present the world with a cinematic spectacular that would not only capture the essence of life and love, but also define the character of their nation? Stand by for a giggle.Baz Luhrmann hasn't disappointed. In Australia, he's somehow managed to turn Hollywood's most alluring and elusive goddess into a charmless puppet. Her romance with the sexiest man alive is about as enthralling as a Vegemite sandwich. The best acting comes from the cattle, and the next best from the Never-Never desert.All of which will have come as no surprise to those who opined from the outset that the very idea of an Australian Gone With the Wind or African Queen was wholly ridiculous, an Australian Pearl Harbor even more so. Look what happens, they'll doubtless be thinking now, when colonials get ideas above their sheep station. The Ockers should get back sharpish to the likes of Mad Max and Crocodile Dundee, and in future remember their place.Well, that's one point of view. Nonetheless, in spite of the derision that Luhrmann's film has attracted, many who've seen it have found it oddly compelling. Could it, after all, perhaps have something to tell us? Some of the critics have complained that the film is composed almost entirely of Australian cliches. And indeed, dusty badlands, grizzled he-men, walkabout and even kangaroos are all present and correct. However, these are only the film's clothing. Its skeleton is constructed out of a quite different set of cliches.To define his country, Luhrmann has trawled not the Dreaming, but that other dreamscape far away on the other side of the Pacific. Australia, the movie, is a caricature Hollywood romance, a caricature Hollywood western and a caricature Hollywood war film. Even its vapid Aboriginal mysticism carries the smack of Tinseltown, rather than the unfathomable outback.Some might see this as inevitable. Australia has no culture of its own, they'd say, so it must clamber on the back of its Anglo-Saxon heritage. Others might detect the fabled Cultural Cringe – Australia can't believe in its own success unless it's expressed in terms set by its imperial begetters.Whatever. The Lucky Country has no need to defer to the rest of the anglo-sphere. Australian English is the world's most vigorous. When they choose to, Australians can win the Booker and create world-class films aplenty. Aussie actors excel in Hollywood itself. Today, the world's real Citizen Kane happens to hail from Melbourne.Nonetheless, Australian creative types continue to be consigned more often than they deserve to the edges of the stage. In Britain, Clive James, a formidable poet, is treated as a comic turn. Kylie Minogue, one of the great performers of our age, is noted mainly for the pertness of her bottom. Germaine Greer, one of our few original thinkers, is written off by some as a wacky eccentric.However, marginal status seems to provide the unregarded Aussies with a clearer view of the game. Australians have become perpetual jesters at the anglophone cultural court. Wry and self-deprecating, they're the wise fools who can shatter the pretensions of their supposed betters with no more than an earthy quip.Luhrmann's film can be seen as just such an Aussie joke, if an unintended one. You can view it as a kind of unwitting Tropic Thunder, minus Ben Stiller's mind-numbing self-indulgence and self-regard. Its innocence helps it highlight not just the methods of Hollywood's myth-makers, but also the aspirations and delusions that they feed on and exploit.Few of us are likely to lose ourselves in Luhrmann's improbable tale. Many will remain unmoved by its romantic passion, unstirred by its racial guilt, unshocked by its villainy and unscared by its enemy action. Yet, its shameless aggregation of so many such elements invites us to reappraise the sentiments that such cinematic staples are so often deployed to evoke.Plenty of more lauded and almost equally expensive movies have done less. Australia isn't Gone with the Wind, but it is indeed an achievement, if not in quite the way its creator may have intended.It's the national epic that Sir Les Patterson might have funded, but like Sir Les it's a hell of a laugh in an enlightening kind of a way. If the joke's partly on Australia itself, well, even the country's worst enemies have never said that the Aussies can't take a jest.Bonzer, Baz.