Elizabeth II is in town, and on the front pages in Australia once again. Not many countries have a head of state who has only set foot in the place 15 times over 60 years. How did we end up like this?Whenever you travel overseas, there's always curiosity and excitement when you introduce yourself as Australian. People want to hear your accent, to buy you drinks, to ask questions about spiders and crocodiles and Neighbours and maybe the cricket. We all know Australia's the greatest country in the world, so why do we cart around a diminutive 80-year-old British grandma as our head of state?Even as we export Australian sporting, acting and musical talent around the rest of the world, at home we're a little bit less sure of ourselves, a little bit insecure. On our own, we're quietly afraid that nobody remembers us for the right reasons. We started off as a dumping ground on the other side of the world for convicts and undesirables and ended up as a place like America where a white settler society was grafted on to land forcibly taken from the local inhabitants. But unlike America, we never fought a war to win our independence. We became a federation not because we were worried the British Empire was oppressive, but because we were worried nobody in it cared enough about us.We like to talk ourselves up but however much we might brag at the pub, when you take us home it turns out we're in need of a tender cuddle and to be told we're special. We're worried that if we take the picture of the Queen off the walls of our courtrooms and the backs of our coins, we wouldn't know what to put there instead.You won't hear this from monarchists. They're still crowing and dining out on their victory in the referendum of 1999 as if Australians actually positively chose to have a funny-sounding hat-wearing old lady who visits us once every decade or two as our head of state, as if monarchy is essentially Australian. Nobody in the rest of the world believes that. When Elizabeth II travels overseas, she travels as the British head of state. When Australia and England were competing to host the 2022 Fifa world cup, there was no doubt in anyone's mind who the House of Windsor backed to win. Everywhere you look, royal coats of arms are being taken down, the Queen is being removed from oaths, and the last generation of Queen's Counsels are heading towards retirement.And superficial as it might seem, the fact that our prime minister didn't curtsy in front of the Queen, instead making some sort of strange bob motion, does say something. We're not good with bowing and scraping.Even monarchists can't deny that most Australians think a republic is inevitable. Keeping true to our laid-back reputation, we're just not in any hurry to get there. A few things could hurry the process up, of course - Prince Charles ascending to the throne would certainly put a rocket under it. A bit of courage from the politicians who pledge themselves to republicanism but never seem to find the time to do anything about it wouldn't hurt either. But what makes the most difference are the times when we speak for ourselves with confidence, and we are doing that more and more. For one thing, we're way more ethnically diverse than we used to be. Australia in 2011 is not the Australia of 1951, or even the Australia of 1999. The beautiful moment in 2007 when our prime minister officially said "sorry" for generations of dispossession and destruction of indigenous Australians and their culture was a time when we knew who we were, and we were proud of it.All this is leading towards us bringing out not just self-confidence, but also one of our greatest characteristics, the spirit of equality, of all of us being in it together, not separated by the class and genetic divisions of the past. Australians just aren't built to be reigned over, and one day we'll show that to the world.