Among the indigenous peoples of islands that few have heard of in the Torres Strait, off the north-eastern tip of Australia, there are fears that climate change may soon overwhelm them, with communities vanishing under rising seas. But these islands are 1,700 miles from Canberra, and their protests risk being drowned out by the prevailing clamour against Julia Gillard's government's plans to curb pollution generated by the nation's big companies.When parliament returned recently, there were 2,000 protesters outside, equipped with placards bearing slogans such as "ditch the witch". The opposition leader, Tony Abbott, partly distanced himself from such language, but demanded Ms Gillard scrap her planned carbon tax and call an early election. And last week lorry drivers converged on Canberra to demand an instant poll.This has long been a toxic issue in Australia. Ms Gillard's once famously popular predecessor as Labor leader, Kevin Rudd, lost first that popularity and then his leadership partly because he failed to steer through the legislation he had promised to deal with what had earlier been called "the greatest moral, economic and social challenge of our time". Ms Gillard, who led the plot to displace him and took on his job, was more sceptical. At the August 2010 election, she specifically promised voters: "no carbon tax".The issue had done for an opposition Liberal leader too. Malcolm Turnbull, leader of the conservative coalition in which the Liberals are the dominant force, ordered his troops to support the government's plans to combat climate change. He was toppled, and replaced by a man – Tony Abbott – who no doubt on the basis of long and subtle scientific analysis dismisses the whole case for man-made climate change as "crap".In the August 2010 election Labor clung to power only by deals with the Greens and two independents. To win their support, Ms Gillard had to ditch her previous promise and proceed with a carbon tax, thus allowing the opposition to charge her with deception. Mr Abbott's intention, which opinion polls suggest is being fulfilled, is to use the issue to prise Labor's blue-collar voters away from the party. Additionally, the Liberals now hope a developing scandal surrounding the Labor MP Craig Thomson, a former union general secretary, involving his alleged misuse of its credit card in a Sydney brothel, may come to deprive Ms Gillard of her majority.On any assessment, her position is precarious. It may make little sense in those distant islands, but, as often in climate change debates, while most scientific assessments point to one conclusion, politics points to another.