It is the oldest surviving clipper ship in the world, apart from the Cutty Sark, and in its heyday carried emigrants from Scotland to Australia, where an estimated 250,000 people can trace their origins to its passengers.For years, the City of Adelaide has lain rotting on a slipway in Irvine. But now, nearly 150 years after the ship was built, preparations are under way for one last voyage – to Australia, where the vessel is to become a tourist attraction in Adelaide.According to the National Historic Ships Committee, the 176ft passenger and cargo ship is one of the most important in British maritime history, the last survivor of the timber trade between North America and the UK.Despite its early splendour and pedigree, the future had looked bleak for the City of Adelaide after it sank in the River Clyde. It became a political issue, with various parties laying claim to ownership until a bid from Australia secured its future.The ship was built in 1864 in Sunderland and launched on 7 May that year. It spent 23 years making 10,000-mile trips to and from Australia, and played a fundamental role in the development of the young nation.In 1893, the City of Adelaide was converted to a hospital ship at Southampton, and after being commissioned into the Royal Navy in 1924 was converted to a training ship at Irvine and renamed HMS Carrick. The ship was moored at Greenock, on the River Clyde, until 1950 and later in Glasgow, where it was used as a clubhouse for the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve.It became a landmark on the Clyde before it sank in 1991. After a year under water, it was raised by the Scottish Maritime Museum and later moved to its site in Irvine, Ayrshire. The Carrick was repaired and opened to the public in 1995 but there were problems with funding and the museum applied for consent to dismantle the vessel, which has listed building status, in May 2000.Experts said the amount of restoration required was so extensive it would be akin to building a new ship. They suggested breaking it up, but the proposal provoked a fierce campaign by several interested parties, including a group from Sunderland, to save the ship.In 2010, the Scottish government announced that the ship – once more named the City of Adelaide – would not be dismantled, and that Adelaide, the capital of South Australia state, had been identified as a preferred bidder.Engineers in Australia constructed a special 100-tonne cradle, costing £680,000, which has now arrived in Irvine. Once assembled and checked, the hull of the ship will be jacked up to allow the cradle to slide underneath. The clipper will be transported to Australia on a lift ship to become the centrepiece of a maritime heritage display in Port Adelaide.Jim Tildesley, the project co-ordinator for the Scottish museum's trustees, said the cradle was being assembled in Irvine under the supervision of one of its Australian designers. He added: "The initial assembly is a test assembly to ensure that everything fits as it was made in 20 different locations in South Australia and so is coming together in Irvine for the first time. It is then subject to loading tests to meet Lloyd's [of London] and insurance requirements before being disassembled prior to fitting around the vessel."No date has been fixed as there are a number of stages and conditions still to be met and, having cleared each of those stages, any movement has to await an appropriate tide."On arrival in Adelaide, the ship will move to a location gifted by the state. A long-term conservation plan has been prepared, together with a business plan to ensure public access. Numerous events have been planned to mark the arrival of the vessel.