Australia's election results are a puzzle. Here was a Labor government which had breasted the world financial crisis better than almost any other developed state. Here was an administration facing up to the realities of Australia's environmental situation, the constraints represented by the country's limited water supplies and agricultural land, and its vulnerability to fire, flood, drought and other hazards made worse by global warming. Here was a leadership with plans to impose more realistic taxes on the extractive industries that control the nation's most important assets. Here was a government, in other words, ready to discard the myth of "Big Australia", of a nation that could be pumped up to super-size by immigration and the breakneck exploitation of its mineral resources, and settle for a more modest vision of the future. And this reining-in carried with it the possibility of attending more effectively to the social inequality that had been increasing in Australia in recent years.In all this it had the broad backing of most of the electorate. So how did this translate into a performance at the polls so dismal that the Australian Labor party is either headed for opposition, or, if it stays in power, will have only a tiny majority provided by a handful of independent MPs and one Green? The answer is a cautionary tale involving the power of Australia's mining and energy industries, the loss of nerve in the face of that power by two Labor leaders in succession, and the determination of the leader of the opposition Liberal National party.Kevin Rudd was a popular prime minister who lost his popularity, and then his job, because he could not get his way on his policies, in particular an emissions trading scheme, without calling for a double dissolution of parliament and going to the country on the issue. Because he could not bring himself to take the risk, some Australians saw him as lacking in guts, while colleagues in the party saw an opportunity, or a need, to get rid of a leader supposedly becoming a liability. They brought him down, a black mark against them for many voters who saw disloyalty rather than political necessity in the change. Julia Gillard, his successor, compounded the problem by running an election campaign that lacked focus, failed to underline Labor's considerable achievements in limiting the impact of the global financial crisis on the country, and fudged the global warming issues. She also initially locked up Rudd in his own constituency, allowing him to campaign nationally only after leaks about the plotting that had led to his deposition damagingly highlighted that murky period in the minds of voters. The industrial lobbies inevitably threw their weight into the contest, while the new Liberal leader, Tony Abbott, ran a largely negative but shrewd campaign that capitalised on Labor's mistakes without offering much of a target to his opponents. Labor's initial lead shrank in the last weeks of the campaign and a partial recovery came too late to make any difference.Australian eyes are already straying across the oceans to Britain, where a coalition government seems to be managing well enough. But the parallels are limited. The handful of MPs who can make a difference in the lower house there are from very different points in the political spectrum. There would be no coherence in a Labor-led coalition or minority government with, or supported by, independents whose leaning is toward the right.But, equally, a bargain between the much-strengthened Greens and the Liberals would be very hard to strike, given their fundamental differences on environmental matters. No doubt something will be bodged up, but in the longer term Australia needs political renewal. A choice between one party that persists in throwing away its advantages and another that persists in ignoring critical issues is not much of a choice.