Australians were informed by politicians in Canberra yesterday of a change of prime minister. The coup was quick, unexpected and effective. A nation whose political life seems to run at double the speed of everyone else's – federal elections every three and a bit years, five leaders of two main parties in this parliament alone – has upped the pace.For outsiders, Kevin Rudd's fall may seem inexplicable. An internationally minded Mandarin-speaking former diplomat whose country has sailed through the recession and financial crisis unscathed, and who is still, just, ahead in the polls, did not seem an obvious candidate for defenestration. In late 2007 he won by a landslide, offering grand plans to construct a tolerant and environmentally aware nation. Last year he was still the most popular prime minister in Australian history. Early this year he was on course for re-election. Yesterday he was kicked out by his fellow Labor MPs in a plot that caught alight faster than a bushfire. Within hours his successor, Julia Gillard was answering questions in parliament as Mr Rudd blinked away tears.If it was cruel, it was also necessary. The trigger was an impending federal election against a Liberal opposition that has been taken to the right under its new leader, Tony Abbott. Ms Gillard - Australia's first female prime minister and the first prime minister anywhere to have been born in Wales - appears electable as Mr Rudd did not.Australian politicians have never been afraid of slaughtering leaders who look like losers. The suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne are full of bitter men with bruised egos, ejected before they believed their time was up. The Australian Labor party has none of its British cousin's queasiness about sacking its chiefs. But Mr Rudd, from Queensland and not part of the ALP's heavily factionalised culture, forfeited his prime ministership largely through his own failures. After declaring climate change to be the greatest moral challenge, he dropped plans for even a modest carbon trading scheme. He launched a justifiable tax assault on the mining industry, spending A$38m on advertising, without winning it. He ended isolated from his party and isolated from his country.Ms Gillard is likely to prove a briskly competent replacement, toughened by a raucous political culture. Her country is prosperous and confident and she has a solid chance of winning a second term for Labor later this year. Mr Rudd, the shortest-serving Australian prime minister in almost 40 years, may yet find a place as foreign affairs minister. The pity of it all is that his vision for Australia was a decent one, lacking only the courage and skills to see it through.• This article was amended on 25 June 2010. The original described Julia Gillard as the first prime minister anywhere to have been born in Wales since [David] Lloyd George. This has been deleted, as the latter was born in Manchester.