Australia's television advertisements are enticing. 'So where the bloody hell are you', the slogan reads, splashed on a backdrop of gorgeous beaches, tanned natives and blue skies. With the never-ending sunshine and an active outdoorsy lifestyle, it's hard to imagine you'll give healthcare a second thought. However, chances are you'll need medical help one day – and it's best to get to grips with it before, rather than when, you need it. Like Britain, Australia has both public and private health systems, but unlike Britain, it's not a matter of opting for one or the other; the two are more integrated.Australia's public health system is called Medicare. Brits can use the services as much as Australians because reciprocal agreements are in place between the countries. However, this does not apply to anyone who has moved to Australia on a retiree visa (Subclass Visa 410) since 1998. Once you're there, you can apply for a Medicare card, which health practitioners will ask for when you visit. The pharmaceutical benefits scheme (PBS) provides subsidised medications, and prescription costs are comparable with British charges. Residents contribute to funding Medicare via the Medicare levy. This charge (1.5% of taxable income) is calculated annually when lodging a tax return (compulsory in Australia). If you earn above AUS$50,000 as a single person, or $100,000 as a family, and you don't have private hospital insurance, there's a surcharge of 1%, aimed at encouraging those on higher incomes to go private. If you visit a public hospital, any treatment you receive is free. Medicare is usually charged directly for the cost of your consultation (known as bulk billing) – or you might have to pay up front and claim a portion of the cost back from Medicare. Typically, you'll pay a general practitioner about $50 and reclaim $30 from Medicare. Approximately 75% of services are bulk billed, and if you're cutting costs you can usually find a clinic that bulk bills all patients – although bear in mind appointments may be harder to get and waiting times longer. Children, pensioners and anyone receiving benefits are usually bulk billed. Referrals for blood tests, x-rays or specialists, however, incur extra costs.When it comes to speed and flexibility, Australian healthcare compares favourably with Britain. Karen Coleman moved to Sydney from England nine months ago and says she's been impressed so far. 'I recently needed to have pelvic ultrasounds. An appointment was made within a week and the results were available on the same day,' she explains. 'I had to pay, but Medicare refunded half the cost. I considered it money well spent. Had I been in England I would have waited weeks for the test itself and further weeks for the results, adding to the worry.'Medicare also offers a rebate if you choose to have procedures done privately, rather than join a public hospital waiting list for elective surgery. The decision to go private for a knee operation in Australia hinges on whether you can afford to pay half the bill, rather than the entire bill you'd have to pay in the United Kingdom if you opted for private surgery without insurance. In Australia, you can be registered at any number of GP clinics at the same time. Rebecca Tubman, who moved to Adelaide from Cumbria 18 months ago, finds that it's easier to see a doctor when she needs one. 'You can phone up and get an appointment on the same day,' she says.What the government does not do is cover ambulance services, except in Queensland and Tasmania. If you have to be taken to hospital by ambulance you're likely to receive a bill for as much as $600. You can buy 'ambulance insurance' – and peace of mind – for about $50 a year. Medicare provides only extremely limited dental subsidies, so make sure your teeth are in good condition before leaving. Access to allied health is also restricted under the public system. According to the private health insurance administration council, or PHIAC, about 44% of the Australian population now has private hospital insurance. There is a huge variety of policies on offer, ranging from basic hospital care to cover for dental work, allied health and even the gap between Medicare rebates and consultation costs. Waiting times for elective surgery are much shorter for private patients. In 2000 the government introduced a lifetime health cover, or LHC, to encourage people to go private younger. Anyone signing up under the age of 31 need only pay the regular insurance premium, while older people pay an extra 2% on their premium for each year over 30 they are – up to a maximum of 70% extra. This means a 40-year-old signing up for the first time will pay 20% more each year than someone of the same age who signed up before they were 31. The good news is that if you're a new migrant, regardless of your age, the extra charge will not apply if you sign up for private healthcare within one year of arriving.Particularly if you are a high-income earner, it's worth calling insurers to work out if taking out private insurance could save you money. Depending on your earnings, the Medicare levy surcharge could cost you more than an annual health premium, so you may be better off with private hospital cover. In addition, the government provides a 30% rebate on premiums, increasing for those over 65. If you have frequent health costs it may also be cost-effective, so make time in your first year to look into your options. That is, if you can drag yourself away from the beach. www.medicareaustralia.gov.auwww.privatehealth.com.au