Australian soldiers who served in Iraq were given a rousing reception by about 10,000 people yesterday at a 'welcome home' parade in Brisbane that marked the country's withdrawal from combat operations.Well-wishers waved flags and banners and cheered as some 700 troops, many only recently returned from the war zone, marched through the streets in desert camouflage uniforms with an army band playing 'Waltzing Matilda'. The Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, was among a host of dignitaries who paid tribute at the ceremony, described as Australia's biggest military homecoming parade since the Second World War.'Today the Australian nation says "thank you" to you, the men and women of the Australian Defence Force, for your service in Iraq,' said Rudd as he took the official salute outside City Hall. 'Freedom is not for free. Freedom comes at a price, and you are our front line in the defence of our freedom.' Parents, partners, children and other relatives of those who 'answered the nation's call' were thanked for supporting the soldiers.Private Dean Smith said he was happy to be home and was proud of having served in Iraq. 'It's really great to come home to such an amazing welcome from the public,' he said, waving to his family.Major John Papalitsas, commanding officer of the Australian Counter Insurgency Detachments, returned home last week after spending the past seven months in Iraq. 'I think it's very difficult for people to understand exactly how complex the nature of operations in Iraq are,' he said. 'It's a spider's web of complexity and I don't think people really understand what a good job the coalition forces are doing.' His mother, Rosemary, said she was relieved to have her son safely home. 'I don't think I can really hide my pride,' she said.Troops were deployed to Iraq by the former Liberal Prime Minister, John Howard, a strong supporter of the 2003 invasion. He has been criticised by Rudd, his Labor successor, for backing the war 'without accurate information or full assessment of the consequences'. Rudd made it a key election promise to withdraw combat troops as quickly as possible, though 300 will stay in Baghdad to help guard Australian diplomats and a further 500 will remain in the region.