A sharp fall in demand from Indian international students has pushed the Australian education industry to a long overdue turning point – one that, ironically, may ensure a more robust future for the sector.Scandal erupted earlier this year with a number of reports in the Australian press of violent attacks on Indian students. The reports were amplified in the Indian media, with Australia being widely condemned as a "racist" nation. A flurry of diplomatic missions to India ensued, with visits by the deputy prime minister, ministers of foreign affairs and trade, and two state premiers. Prime minister Kevin Rudd is due to visit this month.The attacks were the most obvious blow to Australia's ambitions for the Indian student market, but unfortunately two other factors have also contributed.The global financial crisis was already slowing demand for overseas study, not helped by the Australian dollar's dramatic appreciation against the rupee. But most important were changes to immigration rules, including much more rigorous scrutiny of visa applications, which have shattered the perception in India – encouraged by many migration agents – that education is an easy way to secure permanent residency in Australia.The alarm was raised in July by Australia's universities-owned recruiter IDP, which said the "head count" of inquiries in its Indian offices was down by 80%. Another recruiter, Hobsons Asian Pacific, said last month that it had seen inquiries in India halve.To date, universities are taking the downturn in their stride. Monash University's deputy vice-chancellor international, Professor Stephanie Fahey, said that the latest figures suggested a 10% drop in enrolments in 2010 from Indian students, who last year numbered only 500 of the university's 12,000 international students.Likewise, RMIT's pro-vice-chancellor international, Michelle Hoodbhoy, said next year's enrolments are expected to dip 7% or 8%, before recov ering. "We have seen substantially lower numbers of applications, but we have found the quality remained high," she said.The real pain is being felt in the vocational education and training (VET) sector, where many small colleges are likely to close or fail to retain their government accreditation as state governments clamp down on "shonky" operators set up to take advantage of the educational route to permanent residency – New South Wales and Victoria in particular have launched a large number of lightning audits of suspect colleges.Before the recession, when Australia was experiencing serious skills shortages, the department of immigration published an extensive Migration Occupations in Demand List (Modl) – students studying for a qualification covered by the list had their "general skilled migration" visa fast-tracked.In March, the Modl was replaced with a much tighter "critical skills list" that eschewed a host of previously accepted trades such as catering and hairdressing. Accountancy remains on the list but the English language skills requirements have been raised to the equivalent of level 7 in the Ielts test of English.The stipulation of Ielts 7 for accoun tants' visas is an important step forward – Australian institutions at all levels have long stood accused of enrolling students with inadequate English, then preparing them for careers that demand high-level communication skills.This is one matter under consideration in a full review of the federal Education Services for Overseas Services Act led by former federal MP Bruce Baird. It is due to report in February. In a newspaper interview published last week, Baird said that he supported arguments for imposing a compulsory minimum level of English for incoming students."I certainly have sympathy with that idea of lifting it to a mandatory minimum. As I understand it, some universities are insisting on level 7 [in the Ielts test] and others 6.5, and the closer you get down the voca tional end, some people are requiring only 4.5 and even lower, I've heard."So 5.5 is common, but it seems to me that opening up the gates as widely as we have creates problems. I think we certainly need some confidence."Baird revealed that he is considering proposals that a minimum level could be set at Ielts 6. He also said he was investigating a loophole that allows vocational colleges to bypass language requirements by offer ing foreign students a guaranteed place on a vocational course if they enrol on an English language programme on campus before their studies start. "That needs to be looked at," he said. Baird also indicated that he supported demands that the English language proficiency of students be tested when they graduate. The Business Council of Australia said recently that many students were leaving tertiary education with the skills required for the workplace but were rejected by employers because of inadequate English, especially written."I'm very sympathetic to the view there should be testing of English competence at the end of courses if the individual is wanting permanent residency in Australia,'' Baird said, indi ca ting that such a regime would stem the flow of migrants using education as an easy entry into the country.Tony Pollock, chief executive of IDP, supports exit testing, which he says is already in use in Hong Kong's universities, but said it should be voluntary. "It would be a huge competitive advantage for Australia if it could introduce exit language testing across the board for international students, but I don't think it requires regulation. Once a couple of universities start offer ing it, students will start demanding it everywhere," said Pollock.Stephanie Fahey says Monash has begun looking at introducing exit testing, though she points out it would not be compulsory.Employers are already pressing for more assurance that "qualified" graduates are able to communicate at the appropriate level. Accountants KPMG and Ernst & Young are both looking to international students to help fill their graduate programmes and require an Ielts score of at least 7.