I am an Australian petrol-head. My first car as a teenage high school graduate was a modest Datsun, but as soon as the bank would lend me any money I sunk it into a 1970s Ford Landau hard top. It had two doors, four seats, bright green paint, a nearly six-litre engine and a monstrous appetite for petrol.Australia is a country built on the motor car. So is a big chunk of its heavy industry. New car sales are as much of an economic indicator as house construction. The Ford Falcon and Holden Commodore are the mainstays, family cars that are monsters by European standards. The standard models have a basic six-cylinder engine of around four litres, but if that fuel bill isn't enough you can have turbocharged or V8 motors of up to six litres. The Australian male is defined in part by whether he is a Holden man or a Ford man.Our automotive industry is kept afloat in no small part by tariffs and design rules that push up the price of imports, new or secondhand, and has even been propped up by huge subsidies. Governments have argued that the heavy industry that comes along with building Aussie muscle cars is essential to our economy and defence capacity, and must be maintained. Many car buyers still subscribe to the outdated 1970s argument that smaller, more efficient European or Japanese models are not suited to tough Australian running conditions.We have the motor car to thank for much of our quality of life in Australia, a country of vast distances where a three or four-hour drive is nothing. Australia as a nation grew up with the car: it contributed to our spacious suburban layout, with wide streets and ample free parking. Our driveways were made big enough to fit the wife's Sigma and the son's XU-1 Torana with the Monaro stowed safely in the garage.But soon we will no longer be able to afford keeping our big sixes, V8s and diesel-gulping four-wheel drives on the road: running even a small car is becoming a struggle. Australia has its own oil and gas stocks, but we are tied to the world price. Even our cheap, clean and relatively abundant liquid petroleum gas (LPG) is subject to the vagaries of the world market - the economic rationalist argument goes that if the LPG price was kept as low as it should be based on Australia's plentiful supplies, producers would export the gas instead for more money.So any time now, Australians are going to ponder putting their Falcons and Commodores in the classifieds and start thinking about using their country's public transport. And they will soon realise that by and large, it's woefully inadequate.Outside the big cities, there is no efficient way of getting around unless you have access to a car. Britons complain about the state of their public transport, but living in the UK, I am amazed by how small a British village can be while still having municipal bus services and a railway station, and by the speed of inter-urban trains.In my home state, Queensland, governments of the 1980s and 90s busily set about getting rid of what little public transport infrastructure we had in the countryside. They tore up railway lines to outlying towns, selling the tracks for scrap metal. In the rush to run all public services along corporate, profit-seeking lines, these rail routes had been declared much less efficient than the many gigantic road trains, B-doubles and semi-trailers pounding the highways of the country on cheap diesel. But now, with diesel roaring up towards two dollars a litre, ripping up those lines seems like it wasn't such a great idea. Furthermore, Queensland's rail lines are narrow gauge, whereas its nearest and more populous neighbour, New South Wales, uses standard gauge – a foot wider. Thus, both states are full of rail stock that cannot be taken across the border. There is a passenger service running on standard gauge between Brisbane and Sydney, but it takes all day or night to cover the 600 miles; that, combined with the cost of a ticket makes a carbon-spewing short-haul flight a no-brainer. Queensland does have beautiful electrified rail lines running from the economically vital coal mines to the ports, of course, and a "high-speed" passenger service up the coast – the tilt train, but it is a slow and expensive mode of travel compared with European equivalents. Brisbane, the capital of Queensland, has a passable suburban overground train service. But Toowoomba, a city less than 100 miles to the west, has no daily rail connection to Brisbane. You have to drive or take a privately operated coach to the big smoke.Pretty soon, then, car-loving Queenslanders and their interstate brethren are going to realise that Australia needs to spend billions of dollars over about 50 years to build a public transport network to meet international obligations on carbon emissions and to end dependence on the motor car.But of we will get bitten yet again by the timeless mantra of economic-rationalist governments: "We can't do it without private-sector investment." It's a lie. We can, and we must. Huge distances and small population centres mean that public transport in Australia will never be profitable. Even if private investors were interested, while chipping in for the infrastructure, they would also take their cut – not to mention the endless private consultants and researchers along the way. The public would ultimately get less than it paid for, so the government might as well spend all the money on getting the job done itself.