Just shy of midnight on Saturday night, I left the sixth and final act of Angels in America at Belvoir. That’s a late finish for any production, but my fellow audience members and I had started the day at 2pm. Even when we went in, there was a sense of camaraderie: together, we were committing a day of our lives to seeing what is largely considered to be the seminal American play.And yet, as we left, I couldn’t help but feel that what we had seen was undeniably Australian. The text, the setting, and the accents were all American, but from director Eamon Flack the production felt like a new Australian work, comfortably part of an Australian canon of contemporary theatre.So often when we talk about “new Australian work” we get caught up in only looking at the text and new scripts. Who wrote it? Where is it set? Is it an adaptation of a foreign script or book? Is it perhaps time to think of “new Australian work” in a much broader context? When does ownership through text end, and ownership of performance begin?Angels in America is certainly not a new Australian work in terms of its text, and the production makes no pretensions to be. The story may not be ours in 2013 – and probably never was ours even when Tony Kushner wrote his story about AIDS in a 1985 New York City. But the theatre of the piece feels firmly ours of today.It’s both surprising and exciting how Flack’s production has this spirit to it, and he has found this largely through an Australian irreverent sense of humour. While Kushner said it’s “okay if the wires show” in his stage directions, in this production Flack’s stage magic is, for the most part, so delightfully rudimentary there aren’t even wires to hide.The cast – and the audience – celebrates the humour in “appearing” and “disappearing” on stage under thrown handfuls of glitter, or an angel “floating” by standing on a ladder. Far from diminishing Kushner’s text, this irreverence seems to weight his words further. Flack celebrates the sense of deliberateness in every tightly wrought word.Here, by embedding the work with a very contemporary Australian sense of humour, Flack brings it closer to the world of his audience, which is, of course, the same aim of directors and writers when adapting a text.When we talk about new Australian work, and when we look at plays in particular, the focus so often seems to be on the script. When classic texts are adapted to an Australian setting, we ask: “Are they more a product of Australia or the country of the playwright?”But even when being faithful to the script at the heart of text-based theatre, the resulting productions are simultaneously a product of the time they were written, and the time they are presented. The world of a play is made up by so many people beyond the writer – if, indeed, there is a writer involved at all.Not that it necessarily follows that a work will feel particularly Australian even if it comes from an Australian creative team. If a work is produced by Australians but feels American, or British, where do we place it then?Angels aside, in my experience it is rare that Australian productions of foreign texts in foreign settings feel Australian. But if this is a way we can think about new Australian work I think it’s exciting – not only about the text, but the way we connect to, and leave, the work.