As Australia’s first Indigenous opera, Pecan Summer, prepares to open at the Adelaide Festival Centre for its fourth season, creator and composer Deborah Cheetham well remembers the opera’s premiere. Her work tells an epic story of black Australian history; its central narrative considers historical events from 1939, when 200 people of the Yorta Yorta nation defiantly walked away from the white Cummeragunja mission that had corralled them. Cheetham, who found original success as an opera singer, extended her commitment to creating Indigenous work for Indigenous artists by premiering the work in a respectful cultural context: “I made the decision the opera was going to premiere on country,” she explains. It “just so happened” that a mere kilometre from where the Yorta Yorta settled after their 120-kilometre trek from Cummeragunja, the composer discovered a proscenium arch theatre with an orchestra pit in the small town of Maroopna, Victoria, not far from Shepparton. Not only was the venue large enough to accommodate the 40 performers, including a 15-strong children’s choir, but many of the Yorta Yorta’s descendants were among those in the audience – and in the cast. At the premiere, the audience was 80% Aboriginal. Several children in the choir are descendants of the Yorta Yorta, and over the course of researching the story, Cheetham – a survivor of the Stolen Generations – discovered that her own grandparents, whom she never met, were among those to have walked away from Cummeragunja.The traditional anxiety of the composer/librettist on opening night was intense; Cheetham had family in that audience – her cousin Frances and Uncle Jimmy had travelled down to see it, and the curtain was late to go up. Cheetham describes “looking at the backstage clock, five minutes, three minutes … then it’s two minutes after it was supposed to up … and then it was 15 minutes before the stage manager came down – and I was like: why are we late? I don’t do late!” As it was, it was her uncle who was indirectly responsible for the delay; “Jimmy” was no less than Australian music legend Jimmy Little, and he was mobbed by fans as soon as he’d emerged from his car. “Thing is,” says Cheetham, “he's mobbed by fans in their 70s, so their mobbing was really slow. It took 15 minutes to get him into the theatre.”Since its first appearance, Pecan Summer has enjoyed popular success and stellar reviews. Cheetham’s creative inspiration was her own experience. “I’m not the first Aboriginal opera singer,” she says. “That honour goes to Harold Blair, a tenor who had a career in the 50s and 60s. I just felt that I didn’t want to be the only or last Indigenous singer to have a career in the world of opera. The only thing that stands in the way of more Aboriginal people taking this road is opportunity, so I set out to create this opera so more people would have that opportunity.” Through Cheetham’s company, Short Black, this ambition has been realised; six company members who got their break in Pecan Summer have now graduated from degrees in classical vocal performance – some winning the Harold Blair scholarship from Melbourne’s Opera Trust. As the singers gain recognition in the state national companies, so, too, was the contribution of Cheetham and her company recognised in the Queen’s Birthday honours this year.“I have always loved opera and I wanted to create a story of Indigenous Australia,” she says. “Opera tells the big stories, and this is the story of the exodus of a people from their homeland. At the same time, opera is capable of dealing with intimate moments as well. Think of Aida, and that enormous triumphal scene that brings that second act to a close – but the rest of that opera is intimate moments, a love triangle over here, a betrayal over there. It deals with epic scale and intimacy. Pecan Summer is about the epic journey of the Yorta Yorta people, but it’s also about the intimate connection of a mother and a daughter, and what happens when that connection is broken.“When that first curtain went up I felt the full weight of responsibility for telling the story of people who took that action all those years ago,” Cheetham says. “I felt the responsibility to tell that story right and do honour to it. It was overwhelming. They tell me there were 15 minutes of applause at the end. It felt that I’d done something, and that something was more than make an opera.“In the arts, it’s always more. A song is never just a song. For Aboriginal people, a song is a map – it’s a way of finding your way home. And that’s what Pecan Summer is for me. It’s a way of finding my way home.”