An extraordinary experiment in open democracy, the Australia 2020 summit, was held last weekend in Canberra.A range of people - business leaders, academics, artists, economists, journalists, social workers, nurses and politicians - travelled to Canberra at their own expense and invaded Parliament House to talk. And talk they did, under the glare of relentless media attention, for two intense days. Putting all these people together in one place resulted in a wealth of policy suggestions. If the Rudd government wanted ideas, it got them in spades.Culture, under the rubric "Creative Australia", was one of the 10 topics slated for discussion. Australia's cultural community was heartened to find its work considered one of the "critical areas" of Australia's future, and it responded with energy and enthusiasm. A diverse group of 102 "creatives" arrived in Canberra to meet Rudd; starpower was provided by Cate Blanchett and Hugh Jackman.It wasn't only the creatives who complained that the ideas generated in discussion were not reflected in the initial report announced to the Australian public at the end of the weekend. As the website states: "Logistics in getting the Initial Report prepared and printed didn't allow for the capturing of some of the ideas from the final Sunday sessions."It was evident to those who participated that this was about more than logistics. What was presented as the intellectual fruit of the "best and brightest" had a curious tendency to align with Labor policy. In fact, some of the summiteers' alleged bright ideas - such as a plan for one-stop childcare and health centres - actually came from the prime minister himself.Cynics have dismissed the event as a cheap public relations stunt designed to validate Rudd's policies; a level of healthy scepticism is perhaps in order. The message at the end of the weekend was that the summit was the beginning of a conversation, not the end of one. A final report is due in a few weeks, which will include the full range of ideas suggested during the weekend, and the promise is that each will be read and considered. It's even possible that some might be put into action - as long as they don't cost any money.What might have more radical implications is that this event got together a total of 1002 people who discovered that, for all their differences, had a lot of concerns in common. Artists spoke to nurses who explained how they used works of art to teach ethics in nursing people with senile dementia. A roomful of corporate women in the productivity stream were told by their facilitator that he had had enough of them talking about how much they needed the arts. Just as important were the conversations between the creatives themselves: writers, curators, producers and musicians sharing ideas and learning from one other.Under prime ministers like Gough Whitlam and Paul Keating, the Australian Labor Party has a record of strong support for the arts. It's not as if culture hasn't had its supporters on the other side of politics - Victorian Liberal premier Rupert Hamer, for example, was a famous patron - but under the Howard government, although funding increased, the arts were consigned to a policy-free zone that was mainly confined to crisis response. Producers and artists were also subject to unprecedented political interference. Several major funding bodies reported directly to the minister, undermining the principle of arms-length funding that informed earlier policies.Whatever their difficulties under Howard, many in the arts community are anxious about the Rudd government's cultural policy. The minister for arts, heritage and environment is Peter Garrett, lead singer of Midnight Oil and environmental activist before being reborn as a celebrity Labor politician. He hasn't inspired confidence: one of his first acts in government was to axe an international touring fund set up by foreign minister Alexander Downer. Ironically enough, a proposal for just such a fund was offered last weekend.All the same, this is a government which says it actually likes the arts, and everyone agrees that this makes a nice change. And last weekend's experiment was spectacularly successful in galvanising and engaging a group of strategically placed people from a broad cross section of Australian society. What's more, it was startling and profoundly encouraging to witness how people were able to put self-interest aside and bend their minds to the common good.This is a model of consultation that could be fruitfully adopted by any government. (And cheap to boot. The entire summit was staffed by volunteers, and participants paid their own expenses.) In terms of harvesting ideas, it was a brilliant success. What remains to be seen is whether the Australian government will use them as more than decoration.