If voters in the US are about to put back the clocks on a presidency dedicated to radical change, it is heartening to see other nations further south doing the opposite. As he reads the projections on the eve of the midterm elections, Barack Obama must envy the ovation at the polls given to Dilma Rousseff, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva's handpicked successor. Brazil's first woman president won after a tough and, at times, ugly campaign, in which she was accused of being anti-Christian, for wanting to legalise abortion, and a terrorist, for resisting a military dictatorship which jailed and tortured her. Ms Rousseff was made of sterner stuff, and her election is first and foremost a sign that Brazil wants "Lulismo" to continue through her.Inevitably, she will disappoint. After two terms, Lula has the status of a divine entity at home. A born negotiator who presided over an economic boom, Lula pulled more than 20 million Brazilians out of extreme poverty while 30 million joined the middle class. Per capita income grew by just under a fifth from 2002 to 2010 and unemployment reduced to a record low. It was change that Brazilians could feel.Ms Rousseff comes to power in different circumstances and with very different skills. She is a no-nonsense technocrat with a quick temper. She had to check her natural anger with the Jeremy Paxman of Brazil when an electronic clock malfunctioned during a live television debate. Perhaps that was why she was kept away from the foreign press during her campaign. While the managerial issues of her presidency will present her with no difficulty, the politics of it might. Flattering and cajoling is not her strong suit, although she arrives in power with majorities in both upper and lower houses.The economic boom that Brazil has enjoyed also presents different challenges. It is set to be the world's fifth largest economy by the time it hosts the Olympic Games in 2016, and will not be immune to growing pains. Not unlike Russia, another member of the "Bric" countries, its export boom comes from primary products such as iron ore, crude oil, soya beans and wood pulp. China, Brazil's largest trading partner, is hoovering it all up. But exports in cars, shoes or textiles are a different matter. Like Russia, Brazil faces deindustrialisation if it fails to compete as a manufacturer. But for that it needs to tackle the more intractable problems – like salaries, pensions, the tax system, and public debt – which Lula showed little desire to reform.Ms Rousseff has her work cut out, and may face a shorter honeymoon than her creator enjoyed. The important thing is that the vision of a nation that pulls millions from poverty as its economy grows is kept alive.