As every editor knows, a writer should never inflict too many numbers on the reader. Rankings, dates, figures, indexes and percentages can be off-putting – if not a downright bore. With this in mind, here is a little collection, gleaned recently from the Brazilian press, which may help to decipher a few local realities.Let's start with 30,000. That's the number of bills pending in Brazil's congress, the legislative body in the capital Brasilia, composed of 513 deputies and 81 senators. Among these dormant bills are 975 constitutional amendments awaiting ratification. The oldest has been pending for 16 years. There are also 2,180 draft laws that have been vetoed by successive presidents. Technically, their fate should have been decided within 30 days of the veto.And that's without the 50 international treaties, one of which, ratified last month, was dated 1994. Were the Brazilian congress to examine just these bills, it would take a century at the current pace. The federal delegates have mostly abandoned their prerogative of controlling the president's accounts. No fewer than 12 budgets are still awaiting debate, the oldest of which dates back to 1990.The Brazilian congress has a singular talent for indecision. Split into numerous parties, it is stifled by bureaucracy, and subject to clientelism.So the executive legislates, not the legislature. The constitution authorises the head of state to take "provisional measures", and 1,127 of these have been taken over the last 22 years, an average of one a week. Itamar Franco, a former Brazilian president, recently concluded: "We're pathetic legislators."Brasilia has become one of the most expensive cities in the world, with São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro close behind. In Buenos Aires commuters can buy six underground tickets for the price of one in Brasilia. The list of goods and services costing more in Brazil than elsewhere includes clothes, shoes, medicines, toys, perfumes and restaurants. The Big Mac is the fourth most expensive in the world. A croissant in a cafe costs five times more in Brasilia than in Paris, a pizza half as much again as in London, and a Japanese car two and a half times more than in the US.The high cost of living is mainly due to the over-valued real, which has risen 110% against the dollar in eight years. Other factors, such as heavy import duties, high labour costs, saturated infrastructure, and the persistence of oligopolies, don't help.Thanks to the strong currency, Brazilians travel more and use the opportunity to stuff their luggage with goods purchased in the US or in Europe. Foreign travel now equates to massive shopping sprees.São Paulo alone counts 21 billionaires, in dollar terms. According to Forbes magazine, which tracks the geographic location of wealthy individuals, São Paulo ranks sixth, before Los Angeles and Tokyo. A sign of the enrichment of the Brazilian elite: the city acquired seven new billionaires this year, privileged people whose assets doubled in the last 12 months. Rio de Janeiro "only" has three billionaires, but one of them, the entrepreneur Eike Batista, is the richest man in the country and the eighth-richest in the world.Sadly, there are more modest figures too, such as the percentage of illiterate adults who have learned to read and write over the last 10 years: 7%. Illiteracy fell from 13.6% to 9.6% of the population between 2000 and 2010, but mainly among those under 20 who benefitted from the country's education policy. Progress remains marginal among adults.The oldest living person in the world is also Brazilian, 114-year-old Maria Gomes Valentim, who recently entered the Guinness Book of Records. She was born only eight years before the abolition of slavery in Brazil, married in 1913, was widowed in 1946, and has spent her life in a small town in Minas Gerais. "Grandmother Quita", as she is known, attributes her longevity to her daily breakfast of bread and fruit. This article originally appeared in Le Monde