When a 12-year-old contestant of Brazil’s Junior MasterChef became the subject of sexually explicit tweets, women and girls took to social media to share their experiences of the first time they were sexually harassed or assaulted. The #MeuPrimeiroAssedio hashtag – which translates as “my first harassment” – was used more than 82,000 times on Twitter over five days.An NGO called Think Olga, dedicated to empowering women through information, was one of the forces behind the campaign. Born as a blog back in 2013, Think Olga has now grown into a social phenomenon, responsible for women’s causes being debated in mainstream media and social settings. Related: Meet the feminists changing the world for girls from Kenya to Egypt  Numerous campaigners are seeking to combat the misogyny which they claim is so prevalent in Brazilian society. They point to the fact that abortion is still a crime except in cases of rape and anencephaly of the foetus. In October, legislators pre-approved a law to restrict access to the morning-after pill for rape victims, while the theme of a national high school exam essay – asking students to write about the prevalence of violence against women in Brazilian society – provoked backlash from right-wing Christian legislators, academics and students alike. The question was deemed to be controversial, leftist and feminist.Only 397 of Brazil’s 5,565 municipalities have specialised police stations to deal with crimes against women, so those registering sexual assaults must often speak to male police officers who might be unprepared to deal with such crimes. Victim-blaming is not unusual, either; the official police website recommends that women do not walk alone on badly lit streets as a prevention against attacks.Think Olga was created by Juliana de Faria, a journalist from São Paulo who created #ChegaDeFiuFiu (no more catcalls), another game-changing action that put the issue of street harassment on the public’s radar.An online survey of 8,000 women and girls conducted by the Think Olga NGO found that 98% of respondents had suffered some form of harassment. The research also found that 90% of respondents have changed their outfits before leaving the house because they feared harassment, and 81% have given up doing something or going somewhere for the same reason.In response to the findings, Think Olga started an online campaign to educate men and women about street harassment and how it impacts women’s day-to-day lives. “The first step was to make society see catcalls as a problem, so we could collectively find a solution,” says De Faria. For De Faria, it was important to make people understand that catcalls are not a compliment but a manifestation of issues far more complex and ingrained in society.  Related: Altered images: photography as a tool for gender equality Although she received multiple threats along the way, De Faria persisted and now Chega De Fiu Fiu has a harassment map where women can pinpoint locations all over the country where they have felt violated. In partnership with the Public Defender Office of São Paulo state, the map was distributed on the city’s public transport systems.Think Olga’s work goes beyond sexual issues. The NGO is also addressing women’s representation in academic and scientific fields by raising the profile of female experts. The Interview a Woman campaign was created after De Faria discovered data published in The New York Times about the lack of female sources used in the media.“We could have written a long blog entry expressing our sadness and outrage, but instead we decided to create a platform where anyone can register as a potential source, and any journalist can have access to it,” she says.I reali​​sed that the women around me were probably as afraid as I was of walking alone in the dark.Think Olga is not only the only group to challenge women’s oppression in Brazil. The Vamos Juntas (Let’s Go Together) Facebook page was created by Babi Souza, a journalist and self-proclaimed feminist from Porto Alegre. The movement encourages women to approach each other when walking alone so they can go to places together. “When I was walking home one night, I realised that the women around me were probably as afraid as I was of walking alone in the dark. That reminded me that our biggest fear is sexual violence. Only a woman understands what it is like to look over our shoulder and feel relief on realising that the person behind is another woman,” Souza adds.Through collective funding and the help of a technology company, Vamos Juntas is launching a mobile app where women can log badly lit streets, dangerous places and areas where they were harassed. Using that data, the app will suggest safer routes. Souza calls it “the Waze of abuse”, referencing the popular traffic and navigation app.There’s a reason why women are using the internet and social media to fight for their rights in Brazil, says Ana Lucia Keunecke, legal and business director of Artemis, an NGO that has been fighting to eradicate violence against women for 10 years. Related: An Arab spring of love matters – Al Hubb Thaqafa defies sexual taboos “Judges, parliamentarians, politicians and executives are unaware of international treaties signed by Brazil that promote gender equality,” she says. “Not even lawyers are aware that such documents can be used in petitions.” Although the scenario seems worrisome, 63,090 women have called Brazil’s domestic violence helpline this year, 40% more than in 2014, which may just go to show how these social media campaigns are proving to be strong allies of women’s causes.Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow @GuardianGDP on Twitter.