Brazil has been a regular fixture in the news recently, with coverage spanning from the carnival celebrations in February to the resilience of the Brazilian economy amid global recession (Brazil is now the sixth largest economy in the world, having overtaken the UK). Additionally, the 2014 World Cup and 2016 Olympics, both of which Brazil will host, will boost the country's image further.Likewise, recent achievements in the realms of sustainability seem to reinforce the good reputation. After all, this is the country that boosted world expectations for social and environmental responsibility 20 years ago at the ECO-92 UN Conference and managed to help the Rio+20 conference avoid complete failure. It is also the nation that can brag about having the cleanest energy matrix on the planet and one of only a few countries that got close to meeting the GHG emissions targets agreed at the COP-15 meeting. It is the birthplace of companies winning GRI awards year after year and the land where citizens remain unabashed by the wave of climate change skepticism running across the world, so we are told by the polls.So will Brazilians teach us the way towards a bright sustainable future?Public opinion surveys conducted over the past decade by Market Analysis and the Ministry of Environment reflect as many certainties as paradoxes. Brazilians lead in concern about environmental issues, with over 90% perceiving air pollution, climate change, biodiversity loss or water availability as very serious problems – at least 30 percentage points more than the international average. High awareness translates into a majority that puts a premium upon environmental protection over economic growth and enthusiasm to engage in domestic recycling if given the chance. Awareness also drives a record level of interest in corporate sustainability, well over 70% since we began tracking it in 2002. Equally relevant, one in two adults admits being willing to pay more for an ethical product.Yet, when it comes to consumers taking action on sustainability, the results are surprising. Ethical consumer action, for example boycotting or rewarding brands and products based on sustainable credentials, is accredited by less than one fifth. Seven in 10 adults mix up batteries and e-waste in the residence garbage. And an overwhelming majority still relies on free non-biodegradable plastic bags when shopping at the supermarket. What is it that makes Brazilians leaders in attitude but laggards in green behaviour?According to GIFE, the largest Brazilian social investors' network, the amount of corporate investment in social and environmental projects exceeded R$2.5bn (nearly US$1.3bn) in 2012, a figure that rivals state investment in social inclusion, community development and environmental protection. In a survey of 400 companies, over half of them already have a department overseeing sustainable policies and on average 3% of their revenues are allotted to socio-environmental programmes. Corporate sustainability reporting is 11 times higher than it was in 2000 and Brazil now comes fourth in the GRI disclosure ranking. Printed media followed this boom, increasing its coverage of the sustainability agenda by nine times the amount since 2000.In other words, sustainability issues have entered the daily language in Brazil and, unlike other countries in Latin America, here one can find a tremendously stimulating context for bringing sustainability into the public agenda.But attentiveness and positive attitudes towards sustainability issues are being overshadowed by long-standing barriers. Recycling is impaired by the fact that less than a third of the 5,565 municipalities provide selective waste collection. Greenwashing has already forced the national council for advertisement self-regulation (CONAR) to set up a specific code that bans false claims by brands. An average annual per capita income slightly exceeding US$10,000 makes it very difficult to afford the premium prices of most sustainable choices or lifestyles. And, on top of all that, the repressed consumption felt by almost 42 million Brazilians who have moved into the new middle class in the past few years cannot form a base for responsible consumerism.When asked who is responsible for socio-environmental degradation, Brazilians blame the government; when asked who should lead, they point to government once again. Yet it is the government that, since early 2011, has been encouraging deforestation and pollution through the building of mega-dams in the Amazon basin, a petrol rush in the pre-salt ocean layers detrimental to the biofuel industry and tax-break schemes for the car industry without emissions compensations. It is the same government that over the past couple of years has launched an avant-guard solid waste regulation and made concerted efforts with the private sector to curb illegal logging as well as meat and soy trade from deforested areas. Somehow, the apparent lack of direction from politicians, and the inaction of most people, ultimately condenses the conundrum of sustainability within Brazilian society.So what can the public mood towards sustainability in Brazil teach us about people's reaction to a challenging agenda? It tells us that in order to mobilise consumers and citizens, you must go beyond highlighting the gravity of an issue. It shows that awareness of and attention to sustainability can be perfectly divorced from sustainable action and that while corporate and social leadership are extremely positive, they are not sufficient conditions to help society walk the talk of sustainability. Brazilians, like most citizens around the globe, have a long and winding road ahead to meet sustainable prosperity.This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox