Between three and five million people took part in Sao Paulo's twelfth gay pride parade last weekend, making it the largest event of its kind anywhere in the world.The organisers of the Pride, Associação da Parada do Orgulho GLBT (LGBT Pride Parade Association), "twinned" the event with Moscow Pride which was viciously attacked last year, as reported and experienced by Peter Tatchell here.The Moscow Pride organiser, Nikolai Alekseev flew in from Russia to be awarded a Brazilian Pride's "Citizen Award for Respecting Diversity" in a special ceremony last week.Over the last 10 years, Sao Paulo's LGBT Pride Parade has grown from 2,000 people in 1997 to being recognised by the Guinness Book of Records as the biggest Gay Pride event ever. The parade itself draws on Brazil's colourful carnival reputation with 20 open-decked trucks carrying sound systems down the skyscraper-lined Avenida Paulista, in the heart of Sao Paulo's financial district.The parade caps a full week of attractions, including the Cultural Gay Fair, Gay Day and the International GLS Tourism Forum, which are sponsored by the city's tourism department and Petrobras, Brazil's state-owned oil company. It also includes workshops and debates throughout the city that help to spread awareness about LGBT human rights and STD/Aids prevention.Brazil has one of the most effective anti-HIV/Aids campaigns in the world, which prevented the type of epidemic that has devastated other developing countries. Although it is the world's largest Catholic country, it has always had a very open attitude towards sexual activity. It has never criminalised same-sex sexual activity, for example, although it does not provide sexual minorities with protection against discrimination and violence, and has high recorded incidences of homophobic violence.Brazil's tourism minister, Marta Suplicy, a former Sao Paulo mayor, took part in the parade on one of its floats and said: "This is the diversity the country wants, the diversity that we have to foster as a country seeking a tourist niche among the gay community." The parade attracts nearly 330,000 tourists to the city, who bring in a revenue of about $115m to the city. However, only around 5% of these tourists come from abroad, mainly from the United States and other parts of Latin America.Suplicy also called for the Brazilian Congress to pass a law making homophobia a crime, and said: "We still see cases of homophobia in the country. That needs to change." Suplicy is a prominent member of the Brazilian Workers Party (PT) and is being widely tipped as a potential successor to President Lula.The law that she is proposing is being fiercely resisted by religious politicians, and it is becoming a serious political issue in the country. On a visit last year to Brazil, Pope Benedict spoke out against homosexuality and called for traditional family values to be reinforced. Organisers of the LGBT event, which was officially themed as "Homophobia Kills! Defending the Secular State", were quick to point out that fewer than one million had turned out for the papal visit, far fewer than attended last weekend's pride event.