The future is older. With demographics telling us that the numbers of people who will need care and support into old age are rising inexorably, the pressures on resources are increasing. Through implementing personal budgets, government is hoping that people will both opt for fewer services and obtain better services more cheaply, thus reducing the pressure on already overstretched budgets. However, there are two serious flaws in these underlying assumptions. With no incentive to spend less, there is no guarantee that people will do so. And then there is the question of finding better value: over the past few years, local authorities have taken a more active role in driving prices of services down in nearly all areas; as prices approach an irreducible minimum, consumers are likely to find they cannot obtain sufficient support to meet their needs within allocated budgets, leading to a rejection of the personal budget concept. But other branches of government are pursuing linked agendas on community participation, engagement and empowerment that are seen as a key mechanism for re-energising communities and local democracy. Opportunities exist to allow both personalisation and community participation to flourish. In order to resolve the conflict between the imperative to save taxpayers' money and the desire to give people more control over the support that they receive, there needs to be a robust incentive for people to seek alternative ways of meeting their own needs and for those around them - family or local communities - to help to provide both direct and indirect support.Assume that individuals are told that they will be able to keep, personally, some of the "savings" that they make. Local authorities would also be allowed to retain some of this "surplus" for their own use. Most importantly, local communities would receive a third portion of the savings to be spent, as they saw fit, on things that would positively enhance their interests and meet their collective needs, for example "purchasing" a community policeman or upgrading community facilities. In fact, they could spend their money, just like the individual budget holder, on anything they liked. The magic of this possibility is clear: vulnerable people would become community assets instead of a problem. They would be a source of local collective benefit; the more vulnerable people a community supports, the greater the potential income from savings. This, surely, lies at the heart of the community empowerment and individualisation agendas - local people incentivised to help their vulnerable neighbours and value each others' presence.Small-scale local communities, either urban or rural, involving local people and/or existing community organisations, would control and spend budgets of up to £100,000 each. Local authorities would also achieve a payback to reinvest and incentivise them to facilitate the process. The greatest difficulty is imagining that individuals would be able to keep some of their "surpluses" for their own purposes. But there is a precedent: the ordinary benefits system does not ask individuals to return unspent amounts, so why should this "income" be different?If public services are squeezed further in the recession, there is a real risk that modernisation will disappear in favour of tighter rationing. Blending together elements from both the personalisation and community empowerment agendas offers a chance to retain the momentum of these radical policies and really stimulate collective and community benefits.• Ritchard Brazil is a director of the Stamford Forum thinktank. He is speaking at Society Guardian's Managing New Realities conference on March 3 and 4. More at theguardian.com/managingnewrealities