Tiradentes, along with Diamantina, Ouro Preto and Mariana, is one of the Brazilian Klondike towns that exploded during Brazil's 18th-century gold rush. Beautiful mountains, extravagant baroque churches with interiors bedecked in gold make for one of the most interesting parts of Brazil. Tiradentes is a smaller town with fewer tourists, some great restaurants and an independent film festival.• Stay: Pousada Villa Bizuca with 13 guestrooms from £39 per nightChris VineItacaré is a great place to be ... a small town with beautiful beaches right in the middle of the jungle. It is the gateway to the most beautiful stretches of coastline in Brazil, where the dense forest rolls right down to meet a chain of coves and inlets, many only accessible by forest trails. The surrounding countryside provides wonderful forest walks to isolated beaches or waterfalls. It also has the best rafting in Brazil. • Stay: Pousada Tãnara, just seconds from the sand, has doubles from £42Vinicius NascimentoAround 30km from the Amazon rainforest city of Santarem, Alter do Chao is the jungle's answer to the Caribbean – and, after the jungle, Alter do Chao is the perfect place to relax: you can lounge on the river beaches in the morning and gorge yourself on a local grilled fish in the afternoon.• Stay: Pousada Tupaiulandia is not very expensive and pretty small, like all places in Alter do Chao, but has a lot of characterPieca LevyA granite outcrop in the Mantiqueira mountains in the state of São Paulo, close to its border with the state of Minas Gerais. With peaks of around 2,000m, Pedra do Baú has an almost alpine feel at its higher levels. The surrounding countryside, which is something like a sub-tropical north Wales with its rolling hills and peaks, contains a number of small towns such as São Bento do Sapucaí and Gonçalves.ThorpetowersThe Rubber Museum (officially the Museu Seringal da Vila Paraiso) is actually a set for a Brazilian film – based on the 1930 novel A Selva (The Forest) by José Maria Ferreira de Castro – which lovingly recreates a real rubber plantation on the Rio Purus at the turn of the 20th century. The set includes various buildings as well as a trail along which visitors are shown how rubber is tapped and the latex treated. It is one of relatively few genuine attractions in Manaus and is usually missed by visitors because it is only accessible by boat and is in the wrong direction if you also want to see the Meeting of Waters – the confluence of the Rio Negro, a river with dark water, and the sandy-coloured Amazon River – and the city centre all in one day.It is relatively easy to reach, costs only R$5 (£1.30) to get in, and is a fascinating insight into the lives of the rubber tappers and the rubber barons of the age. It puts Manaus and the famous rubber boom in context and is a perfect half-day trip (more if you want to spend some time at the beach you pass en route). The guided tours are in Portuguese only, but the enthusiasm of the guides generally overcomes any communication difficulties!•  Igarape Sao Joao, Taruma. A 20-minute boat ride (R$7, £1.90) from Marina Daví near the Hotel Tropical. Admission is £1.30. Open daily 8am-4pm (except Mon) Clive Maguire, The Amazon HandbookThe Football Museum at Pacaembu Stadium in São Paulo celebrates the history of the beautiful game in Brazil and the special place that the seleção (national team) – the most successful team in history, winning five World Cups, and the only nation to compete at every World Cup – holds in the pantheon of the sport.• Praça Charles Miller, Pacaembu, stadiumguide.com/pacaembu. Open Tues-Sun 9am to 5pm. Entrance R$6felfsilIlha do Mel (Honey Island) is a beautiful island about a 30-minute ferry-boat ride away from Paranaguá in southern Brazil. Most of the car-free island is a nature reserve and the numbers of visitors are restricted to about 4,000. On the east coast of the island, which faces the Atlantic, the wind is strong and the waves are usually very big. I've been told that this is the best surfing in Paraná. On the more sheltered west, the waves are very gentle and there is practically no current, making it perfect for families. The view is somewhat spoiled by the huge ships coming into port, but you can ignore them after a few caipirinhas from the beach front bar. Explore the island along its sandy paths, lounge around in a bar or on the beach, or take a dolphin-watching boat trip around the island. • Stay: Enseada das Conchas is a four-room family-run guesthouse. Little English is spoken but the welcome is warm, rooms commfortable and the owners very helpfulblueinbrasilLocated in the centre of the city (not too far from Republica station), this restaurant is open 24 hours a day, seven days a week and is guaranteed to be packed over the weekend. Why? The pernil (pork) sandwich. Costing less than R$20 (£5) and cooked to perfection, this isn't just great value for money, it is like nothing I've ever tasted before. The diner-like restaurant is just on the right side of chaotic, with incredibly fast service and some pretty interesting looking people eating here. You're not likely to find many tourists, so don't expect to see the place listed in too many guide books (though the staff are incredibly accommodating to foreign visitors). However, Estadao comes highly recommended (and advertised) by the crowds queuing for food at any given time of the weekend.• Viaduto 9 de Julho 193, Triangulo, estadaolanches.com.brID2398616Since 1969, Geraldo Simplício, nicknamed "Nêgo" has been carving huge sculptures of women into the slopes of his garden in Nova Friburgo. There are nearly 20 sculptures made of clay scattered throughout the garden – giant mermaids, a Potira Indian giving birth, a shepherdess. You'll usually find him working in the garden and he's happy to talk to visitors about his work.• Highway Teresopolis Friburgo (RJ-130), 55 km, Nova Friburgo, Rio de Janeiro. Open daily 8am-5pm. Entrance R$15Gabriela SilveiraThe coast between Paraty, in the state of Rio de Janeiro, and Juqueí beach, in the state of São Paulo, offers literally hundreds of near-empty beaches with the rainforest running into the ocean – think white sands, green mountains and transparent water, warm all year round. There are wonderful small cities, such as São Sebastião, and traditional cuisine such as pescado a cambucu – a type of hake – as well as activities such as surfing, sailing, diving, trekking and bird-watching.• Stay: Juquehy Beach Hotel, from £115Thomas RaissThis is remote Brazil - in the far north-east of the country, where dazzling salt pans and sandbanks skirt the Atlantic coastline. Lençois Maranhenses translates as "the sheets of Maranhão" and refers to a billowing, dazzling-white desert dotted with silvery lakes which stretches 140km along the coast. It has a reputation as the most otherworldly of Brazil's many dramatic landscapes in a region often overlooked by tourists.• Stay: Barreirinhas - Pousada Rio Preguiças, £46. Excursions from Barreirinhas to the Lençois can be organised Vinicius NascimentoThis astonishing state park of waterfalls, caves and canyons is a four-hour drive by car north of Rio. There's a visitor centre with interactive media about the park, restaurant, camping area and guides giving assistance plus a parking area. Visitor numbers are limited to 300 a day during the week, and 800 a day at weekends. Gerson NassorThe fish market in Manaus is huge, as are the fish. Some of the 3,000 species of fish that live in the Amazon are sold from hundreds of stalls stretching almost as far as the eye can see. There are many towns on the Amazon, and each seems to have very a large fish market. It's hard to believe the Amazon can sustain this level of fishing daily.  Rua Juvenal Tavares 204TomMcMasterSao Paulo has the largest population of Japanese outside of Japan in the world, so it's no surprise that the city offers amazing Japanese restaurants. My favourite is Sushibol, where the culinary inventions of chef Danilo Miyabara are amazing.• Rua Doutor Homem de Melo 436, sushibol.com.br. The newest one - Sushibol Lounge - is located at Rua Doutor Mário Ferraz 402Tati SatoThe stunning Chapada dos Veadeiros national park, in the north-eastern state of Goias, three hours from Brasilia, is one of the best destinations for ecotourism in the country, yet is little known outside Brazil. Its hundreds of kilometres of wilderness comprise extraordinary geological formations, cave systems, waterfalls and hiking trails. Vale da Lua ("Moon Valley") is a particularly beautiful place to visit and is close to the park. São Jorge, a village close to the entrance of the park, is popular for its bed and breakfasts and peaceful atmosphere. • Stay: Baguá Pousada, doubles from £62Luís Bogliolo Piancastelli