What keeps you motivated? I am a retired executive now living in Brazil and originally from England by way of Canada. For me, not doing anything at all while retired would be intolerable, so I took up teaching 10 years ago and find it fully time consuming and very rewarding. Seeing ex- students get better jobs because of their English is a great reward. I feel I am contributing to the community of my adopted country.Best teaching moment? When a student recommends me to colleagues or friends. I do sometimes wonder if I am a good teacher and this validates what I do.And worst? Having to tell a class that my grammar knowledge is so bad that I don't know the answer to a question. I was drawn to teaching through a long love affair with words but I haven't had any formal training. I learnt a little grammar at school and the rest by osmosis. In the time that I have been teaching I have learned more of the technical side of my native language, but I still give thanks daily for Raymond Murphy and his English Grammar in Use books.What have you learned? Because I have my pension I can charge students well below the going rate. This attracts learners who need English to get a better job and improve their life prospects. They are very committed to learning. English is just one thing they are studying – they are also at university and doing part-time jobs. In wealthier countries young people can take education for granted but here they work hard for it.Biggest challenge? Teaching vocabulary. Unlike me, students don't seem to want to read dictionaries. I send out a weekly email to all my past and present students containing 20 new target words and a link to an online learner's dictionary. This gets a good response and it takes no time at all.What's next? At 71 I think that my life is filled and fulfilled. I just have to make sure that I give myself enough time away from teaching so that I can go to the beach and relax.Top tip? Never underestimate your students and never talk down to them.• Anthony Burson started teaching with a language school in Brazil. After nine years he left to teach privately