When the world's most ambitious policing operation was shaken last year by reports that officers tortured and killed a resident in Rio de Janeiro's biggest favela, the authorities knew exactly who to call.Major Pricilla de Oliveira Azevedo – a 35-year-old pioneer of Rio's "pacification" programme – was appointed to handle the political fall-out from the arrest of her predecessor and 12 other officers, who were charged with the murder of Amarildo de Souza, a bricklayer who was last seen at police headquarters being interrogated with electric shocks and asphyxiation.That case sparked mass protests and threatened to undermine Rio's five-year strategy to regain control of more than 40 favela complexes that had previously been run by armed gangs. But tension has been eased by the arrests and de Oliveira's appointment as chief of police in Rocinha, a community of mostly poor, non-white residents overlooking some of the wealthiest neighbourhoods in Brazil.Major Pricilla – as she is best known – is the friendly, positive face of the pacification programme that she has helped to spearhead. She is in charge of hundreds of officers in one of the most violent police forces on the planet and is playing a prominent role in trying to shift perceptions of their tole.Veja Magazine named her Defender of the City. The US State Department gave her an "outstanding leadership and courage" award.In her five months in Rocinha, she has had to deal with murders, drug trafficking, gun running and frequent nightly shoot-outs between residents and police, not to mention the day-to-day task of liaising with community representatives.We meet on a day of relative calm in Rocinha at the make-shift police headquarters – a Lego-like structure of shipping containers high up by the forest line. The major is delayed by a long discussion with a man with a mohican who wants to organise a festival. For the infectiously positive de Oliveira such interactions are a sign of progress."Places like Rocinha used to be isolated, but now they have merged with the wider community. That has brought in big changes," she says as we sit between two of the concrete benefits – a new public toilet and football pitch. "There is still crime as there is everywhere, but it has changed. The number of murders has gone down enormously."Although she was brought up in the middle-class Rio neighbourhood of Laranjeiras, de Oliveira has first-hand experience of the terror felt by victims of crime. In 2007 she was robbed, tied up and taken to a favela. "That was the most frightening moment of my life. I was completely alone," she recalls. But it also proved to be a turning point. De Oliveira escaped, then returned to arrest her captors, bursting in on them with a gun. "I guess that doesn't happen much in your country," she laughs.Her career has since followed a meteoric rise. In 2008, de Oliveira was put in charge of the first pacification operation in the Santa Marta favela, which proceeded peacefully and opened the path for social services and public investment.Rio de Janeiro's favelas, which are home to more than a fifth of the city's 6.3 million people, are a symbol of Brazil's acute inequality, murderous crime and stark social divisions. Although pacification targets only 40 of the city's 600 favelas, the operation is fraught with logistical, physical and political challenges."Without a doubt, this is the most ambitious policing project in the world," de Oliveira says. "We have moved into areas that were long abandoned by public institutions. Because the state didn't take care of these communities, crime took over. The point of our programme is to return responsibility to the authorities."As the Amarildo case showed, it is far from smooth sailing. As well as occasional killings by and of police, there have been complaints that the authorities have stopped backing the initial force with long-term funds. De Oliveira acknowledges room for improvement. "The politicians could be doing more to accelerate development. They should be bringing in social services as the same speed as UPP units as they did in Santa Marta."After impressive initial gains, there were signs last year that crime was once again starting to rise. Keeping on top of a fast-changing situation in a community of 67,000 residents takes its toll."There are lots of problems that require attention. Last night I finished at 10pm and was then called back in at 1am. I've been here since," says De Oliveira during our later afternoon interview. "I'm exhausted but I love it. I'm very happy with the part I've played."Fitting in a personal life is difficult. Her boyfriend calls and while they chat, I'm drawn for the first time by her bright pink nail polish rather than the three stars on her shoulder. "I can't tell him that I was called to come to work at 1am or he'll never want to marry me," she says with a smile after they hang up. "Police life is very complicated."Relentlessly upbeat about the future, however, she says the coming year will see new steps forward for the pacification programme. "My hope for 2014 is more peace," she says. "As for my fears, well, I am aware of the difficulties of the pacification programme, but I have a very positive view. I can't say I'm afraid of anything."Additional reporting by Anna Kaiser