It was always known that in the election on 3 October, Dilma Rousseff would have a big advantage in being the handpicked successor to Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, one of the most popular presidents in Brazilian history. During the two terms of the former leftwing labour organiser, Latin America's biggest country grew at a steady clip and millions of Brazilians rose out of poverty; Lula's approval ratings recently have rarely dropped below the 70s. But as the campaign got in full swing last week, and the candidates unveiled their television programming, we were given even more evidence that Dilma would take home the prize. Dilma's main challenger is José Serra, the centre-right former governor of São Paulo state. You don't have to speak Portuguese to see that her first TV slots, broadcast at lunchtime and in the evening, quite simply blow his clips out of the water. Her evening performance is especially impressive, as she and Lula speak to each other from various locations across the vast country. In comparison, Serra's clips look limp. The production is noticeably worse, and he struggles to establish an independent political project. It's politically risky to attack Lula's domestic record, and for the most part, Serra has avoided doing so. Commentators here await impatiently the official TV campaigns, since, by law, television advertising is prohibited until the candidates are allocated pre-arranged slots. In a country still with high levels of illiteracy, the TV spots are seen as extremely important.  Just a few months ago, though, Dilma was not so well-known and Serra led in the polls. As she gained recognition, she closed in on and surpassed him; she now looks likely to win by a healthy margin, perhaps by enough to avoid a second round. Dilma's TV campaign is dazzling viewers, but more importantly, establishing her clearly as Lula's chosen woman. Unlike Lula, who, before entering politics, was a poor metalworker, Dilma was born into the middle class. At university, she became involved in leftwing organisations opposed to the military dictatorship in power at the time, activity which led to her being imprisoned for three years. After the country's return to democracy, she made her name in politics and eventually became Lula's minister of energy, then chief of staff. She never held elected office. As with Lula, the practice of power tamed her earlier radical ideas, and she presents herself as a candidate of the centre-left. Serra portrays himself as a centrist. In reality, they are both close to the centre, made a comfortable political space by a Lula presidency that has pleased most and made few enemies. Before he took over in 2003, the prospect of a Lula presidency scared international investors and business interests in Brazil. As it turned out, he quickly moderated his previous positions and they had little to worry about. Demand from China and general economic stability propelled a boom that brought prosperity to most Brazilians. Lula instituted a very popular cash-transfer programme for the country's poor, while avoiding any major moves that would upset Brazil's powerful economic elites. As a consequence, despite economic advances, Brazil remains an extremely unequal society, with shocking levels of violence and social exclusion in some areas. In others, it is as developed as affluent parts of Europe. Internationally, Lula carved out an independent foreign policy, sometimes called "counterhegemonic", which has been more controversial in board rooms – and in Washington. He formed close ideological alliances with Hugo Chávez and Fidel Castro, and speaks highly of both. Lula came out strongly against a military coup in Honduras, giving sanctuary to the deposed president in the Brazilian embassy. Even more to the chagrin of the US, Brazil has refused to cooperate on Iran, preferring dialogue to sanctions on the nuclear issue and choosing not to isolate Iran (out of the many grave human rights offenders they – and all other western countries – do business with). Whether as a result or in spite of these actions, Brazil has played an increasingly influential role in international relations. As a rising economic power, its approval is now sought for more and more multilateral decisions. The Iran connection recently became an issue in the presidential campaign, as Serra criticised Lula for being indifferent to human rights. Meanwhile, Lula tried to use his influence in Iran to secure the release of a woman condemned to death by stoning. The appeal, perhaps predictably, failed. But this affair hasn't seemed to have any effect on Dilma's chances. What a Dilma presidency might actually look like is still a bit of a secret. She is not likely to stray too far from her predecessor. That is, we assume. Riding Lula's wave of popularity, Dilma seems to have decided she doesn't need to say much. Her campaign message is that things are going quite well at the moment, pointing to the fact that Lula was the first president to make any significant moves towards the inclusion of the poor. Although she has zero electoral experience, this simple message seems to be working for her with a broadly contented electorate. She doesn't need campaigning knowhow – she has Lula. And have you seen her videos?