Forget about the opponents. What about the venues? When the England team run out on 14 June in Manaus to play their first match in Brazil 2014 (at 1am UK time, you note), they may find it is not just 11 Italians they are up against.June is the dry season in Manaus, which is something to be thankful for, but temperatures persist above 30C and the humidity is sticky at best, steamy and sapping at worst. Roy Hodgson made it clear before the draw that this jungle city, one of the remotest on Earth, was a place he wanted to avoid. "The tropical nature of Manaus is the problem. I'm not an expert on the venue but I'm just mouthing what everybody has been saying to me. Manaus is the place ideally to avoid," Hodgson said.The feeling is mutual. The city's mayor, Arthur Virgílio Neto, responded curtly. "We Amazonians would also prefer it if England did not come here," he said in a statement. "We will be hoping for a better draw of a team with more sensitive, cultured and educated technicians." Alas, most teams in world football would disappoint him on that score.Matheus Augusto, a fan of the local Nacional team, said the England team would suffer because Manaus will be the hottest of all of Brazil's 12 host cities."It's really hot sometimes: 38–40C. Principally, the Europeans are going to suffer. It's going to be really hard for them. They're not used to heat like this," he predicted.But he played down the likelihood of England being a target of local hostility."I think the mayor misunderstood Hodgson's comments. He's being criticised a lot for this. When England come, it will be fine," he said. "Everyone wants to avoid Manaus, so it's OK, it's really hot here. I'm not offended, it's normal."Located in one of the planet's last great wildernesses, Manaus is doubly isolated: first by the confluence of the Rio Negro and Rio Solimões, then by a sea of green forest that stretches close to 600 miles on all sides. The electric storms that buffet Manaus sometimes overload the local grid and burn out computers, air conditioners and fridges. Rainy-season downpours can turn a building site into a swimming pool. The equatorial sunlight is so intense that it can bleach coloured plastic seating.Getting to the centre of the Amazon will also require a 1,700 mile journey, but once fans are there, Manaus will be one of the most exotic and locations that the England team and its fans have ever visited. For the more intrepid who need to while away the hours before kick-off, there are boat rides down the world's greatest river and the chance to swim with pink dolphins.Other attractions include the 19th century Manaus Opera House and the city's annual festival, Boi-Bumbá, a rumbustuous combination of indigenous and immigrant styles of music and dancing.But visitors will need to take mosquito repellent and ensure they are vaccinated against yellow fever.Indeed, Manaus is hardly a hotbed of football culture – Nacional are lucky to draw 3,000 supporters. The 43,000-seater stadium being built for Brazil 2014 is likely to sit empty once the World Cup carnival has moved on.The venue should be ready in time. Arena da Amazônia is due for completion shortly and the Brazilian authorities say it is back on schedule after delays earlier this year. The complex steel-lattice design, which is ostensibly modelled on a traditional hand-woven basket, looks remarkably similar to the "bird's nest" Olympic stadium in Beijing.All 6,700 tonnes of metal had to be smelted in Portugal, shipped across the Atlantic and then down through the Amazon to Manaus.Once the team is done with the Brazilian interior, another long five-hour flight awaits footballers and fans to get back to the cooler, more southerly region, and matches in São Paulo against Uruguay and in Brazil's third city, Belo Horizonte against Costa Rica.By the end of the first round, England will already have clocked up 4,300 miles and fans will already have spent several thousand pounds, depending on whether they have opted for the expensive or the fairly expensive accommodation option.If England progress further, the coastal cities of Rio de Janeiro or Recife await. The interior is left behind. A long way behind.