Brazil experienced one of its biggest nights of protest in decades on Monday as more than 100,000 people took to the streets nationwide to express their frustration at heavyhanded policing, poor public services and high costs for the World Cup.The major demonstrations in Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Brasilia, Belem, Belo Horizonte, Salvador and elsewhere started peacefully but several led to clashes with police and arson attacks on cars and buses. In Rio images and video posted online showed vast crowds.If you took part in Monday night's protests or can shed more light on what's happening in Brazil, you can help the Guardian's reporting team by sharing your view. Upload your eyewitness accounts or any information to will help us document the situation – images, video or text.Though we'd like to hear from you, your security is most important. We recognise it may not always be safe to record or share your experiences – so please think about this when sending your content to GuardianWitness.Here is a selection of some of the photos, videos and stories you've sent in so far. You can see more on the assignment homepage.The Brazilian people are able weary of taxes with the poor quality of public services, and overpricing in the works of the World Cup, Brazil's 11 major cities protest.Sent via Guardian Witness By TatianaTricia  18 June 2013, 13:49 Lara Ferreira writes that this photo shows the protest in Vitória, Espírito Santo where 20,000 young people were out to demand change.Fortaleza is one of the most violent cities in the world (13a by ONU) and will be a place for some matches of World Soccer Championship next year. People did a protest march of about 10.000 protesters and gave this warning to foreign people no to come here because their lives would be in danger. The murder rate in Fortaleza is about 60 / 10.000 inhabitants.Sent via Guardian Witness By Ricardo Lira  18 June 2013, 13:57 A man carries a poster saying " Only love shall leave us breathless", during protests last nightSent via Guardian Witness By Raquel Jorge  18 June 2013, 12:50 More than 60.000 participated of the protest yesterday in São Paulo. This picture was taken in Largo da Batata (Pinheiros), at 6pm, the beggining of the protestSent via Guardian Witness By Mari Zendron  18 June 2013, 12:57 82-year-old marches on Faria Lima avenue, to the applause of the young crowd around her.Sent via Guardian Witness By marciocaparica  18 June 2013, 13:31 The vast majority of demonstrators were peaceful and organised during the Brazilian protests, with an agitated minority engaging in minor conflicts with the shock policeSent via Guardian Witness By Roberto De Nigris  18 June 2013, 13:32 The feeling that took so many people to the streets is not only brazilian, it's not only turkish, it is global. It's bigger than a president, the government.It's about an order, a system, our global system.The fact is that we don't feel represented. We don't have voiceThe truth is that we lost our life thinking about the politics and it makes no difference because they don't have enough power to change what need to be changed and as we live in what we call as democracy, the fault is all oursbecause WE don't know how to choose good representativesand in the end we feel guilty.Those protests is our voice that was quiet for years and now is screaming " I DO CARE. I NEED TO TO SOMETHING TO CHANGE, BUT I DON'T BELIEVE IN THE POLITICS WE HAVE AND NOW I BELIEVE IN POWER OF PEOPLE."Sent via Guardian Witness By Carol Montenegro  18 June 2013, 14:01 The crowd is chanting "without any political party " - meaning there's no affiliation with one particular party. Everyone is just fed up with the government as a whole.Sent via Guardian Witness By claragaspari  18 June 2013, 11:18 Peaceful manifestation in Novo Hamburgo. About 2000 peoplesSent via Guardian Witness By Gabriel Amaral  18 June 2013, 14:13 Sent via Guardian Witness By Rafaela Mendes Fearnley  18 June 2013, 14:17 I represent myself!"Ô abre alas, que eu quero passar.." (piece of music "Abre Alas" from Chiquinha Gonzaga)And we passed by.We passed by open chest and lung full! We went (at least the group I was!) of Largo da Batata until Espraiada, where we crossed and close the Marginal Pinheiros (probably 9 km).Who knew that together we could get this kind of repercussion?Without the police, everything flowed without violence. It is hard to pick a word to define what happened yesterday. Unfortunately, some political parties were opportunistic and raised up his flags.But even this situation was dealed only with the attitude of the majority, amid cries as "lowers the party flag and raises up the flag of Brazil!" and even in the attitude of most get down on the floor to show that we wasnt represented by them.A completely peaceful protest, of respect, unity, activism, freedom and love.A love that was asleep in every person who was there! One thing that I thought was beautiful contrast of the population. Since the kids who barely knew why they was there until the lady of 82 years holding a giant poster saying "82 years. Did not come to play, but to express." No matter, they were all together.People in the windows, inside their offices shaking white flags. Drivers in bus flashing lights and waving as an incentive.And many ... so many applauses.Brazil woke up, indeed. For many things! There, each one was expressing his desire for change and your personal unsatisfaction. Whether for transportation, health, sexual orientation, education.In my opinion I much hope, for real, that´s only the beginning of a new Brazil.Who was there, like me, can not measure the beauty and emotion of seeing that the whole is stronger. And it have a voice.And a voice with owner. Yesterday I represent you that had to work late, you for some reason couldnt go.Yesterday, we replaced "I" to "we".Yesterday, we made the world listen that here beats a green and yellow heart.A green and yellow heart full of hope and idealism. But, before that... Love. Yes, thats what i saw yesterday.Tatyana cardoso Alves BragaSent via Guardian Witness By taty_cardoso  18 June 2013, 16:01 Protest in Rio de Janeiro against the increase in bus fares.Sent via Guardian Witness By Elisa Mendes  18 June 2013, 16:33 We are museolgy students and we want to not only preserve our monuments, we want to make history for change our future, the future of our country.Sent via Guardian Witness By Thais Assis  18 June 2013, 16:09 police at the back of the walkSent via Guardian Witness By Paulo Salgado  18 June 2013, 19:37 Solidarity protests across the world took place on Monday night.Sent via Guardian Witness By Rodrigo Siqueira Reis  18 June 2013, 14:17 Approximately 300 gathered in Copenhagen, Denmark to protest against corruption and social injustice in Brazil, showing support for the protests that are sweeping the South American country. Most participants were brazilians but a few danish joined the manifestation that gathered in front of the city hall and finished in front of the Brazilian Embassy in Denmark where the participants chantered the brazilain national anthem.Sent via Guardian Witness By mayra_marques  18 June 2013, 22:15 People living in Coimbra, Portugal, show their support for the Brazilian protests.Sent via Guardian Witness By __didio  18 June 2013, 23:23 Sent via Guardian Witness By Clau Vieira  18 June 2013, 23:58 Today, 18 june, a protest took placê at Liberdade square, in Porto city, Portugal. Many people, from diferent countries were there with us discussing about politics, social problems and economic crisis all over the world. It was fabulous!Sent via Guardian Witness By Mônica Lobo  19 June 2013, 00:06 Brazilians who live in New York show their support for the protests happening in Brazil. The video shows us singing our national anthem.Sent via Guardian Witness By Thiago Fico  18 June 2013, 17:38 