Millions of Brazilian WhatsApp users had their service disrupted for hours on Thursday as judges flipped back and forth on how to punish the company for failing to cooperate with a criminal investigation. Related: WhatsApp blocked in Brazil for 48 hours by court The messaging service, which is owned by Facebook, was initially blocked across the country at midnight under an injunction issued by the first criminal court of São Bernardo do Campo.In a statement, the court accused WhatsApp – which was the most popular download in Brazil last year – of twice failing to comply with its orders. It instructed telephone operators to block access to the service for 48 hours.The ban outraged users of the service, who account for almost half of the 200 million population and more than 10% of all WhatsApp users worldwide.“How many people are affected, be it for fun or for work? How many shops sell more via WhatsApp than in their physical shop. It interferes even in the economy,” noted one.Qts pessoas afetadas, seja por diversão ou trabalho. Qts lojas vendem mais pelo #WhatsApp do que na loja física... Interfere até na economiaOthers, however, responded with jokes. A Twitter meme with the hashtag #Nessas48HorasEuVou (#Inthese48hoursIwill) collected humorous alternative ways of passing the time, such as being stranded on a desert island.Facebook’ s chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, expressed his disappointment online.“This is a sad day for Brazil. Until today, Brazil has been an ally in creating an open internet,” WhatsApp’s chief executive, Jan Koum, said it was “sad to see Brazil isolate itself from the rest of the world”.In the afternoon, however, a different judge in São Paulo state lifted the restrictions on that grounds that “it does not seem reasonable that millions of users are affected” because of the company’s wrongdoing. Instead, the judge recommended a financial penalty.The origin of the dispute is unclear. Local media claimed that the judge in the first case requested records relating to alleged members of the First Capital Command, Brazil’s most powerful organised crime group. This has not been confirmed by the court.Adriano Mendes, a lawyer who specialises in digital law, said WhatsApp was put in a difficult position because the first judge ordered it to release information that it could have been condemned for in the US under privacy laws if shared.If Brazil had signed the Budapest Convention on information sharing instead of drawing up its own law, Mendes said the legal situation would have been clearer.“In other countries, WhatsApp would have cooperated with the judge without any issues. But it’s important to say that this is an extreme measure that should have never been used,” he said. “It is the same as if a judge ruled that the water be shut off in an entire town because of a leak in one house,” he said.Not everyone was unhappy with the disruption.Only one of the four big telephone operators, Oi, contested the ruling. This is unsurprising given the hostility that most feel towards WhatsApp, which offers free calls that eat into their market share and profits.Rival messaging services also appear to have benefited. Telegram is said to have attracted more than a million new users, though the company said on Twitter that it preferred natural growth to such spikes. It still has less than a tenth of the share of WhatsApp.Huimin Chu, a Rio-based student, said WhatsApp was his main way of communicating with friends, but its temporary loss made him consider alternatives. “The block made me realise how much I depend on the messaging service, but I’ve enjoyed not having it for a while. It means you have to try other stuff, like actually meeting and talking to people.” 