'This is a strange request," I write in an email to Oriana, a 23-year-old Brazilian student based in Edinburgh, "but I'd really like to meet your mum."I'd been looking through couchsurfing.com's database of members in Belém, the Brazilian city at the mouth of the Amazon. Out of 49 local members willing to let a traveller stay in their home for free, one newcomer to the site caught my eye: Lucinea, Oriana's mother. "My daughter is a very active member," says her profile. "She's the one who told me about it." I'm instantly drawn to the idea of an older-generation couchsurfer inspired by her daughter's experiences. However, with Lucinea not speaking English and my complete lack of Portuguese, making arrangements isn't straightforward and I find myself calling on Oriana, who is listed as one of her "couchsurfing friends", to act as an intermediary. "You're more than welcome to stay," Oriana replies almost immediately. Plus, as an added bonus, she'll be back from Edinburgh that week too, using her university holidays to "get some mama loving". It soon becomes apparent that mama loving is not in short supply. When I arrive at Lucinea's tiny one-bedroom apartment, she has already adopted a French couchsurfer called Nico, who's been staying for a week. "She adores him," whispers Oriana, whose time in Edinburgh has given her a distinct Scots lilt. "She's taking him to the airport later and I'm sure there'll be tears."If you needed proof that the couchsurfing phenomenon has spread beyond the low-income, early-20s bracket, this Belém apartment is it: Lucinea, the fiftysomething divorcee, looking to meet new people now her children have left home, and Nico, the mid-30s stock trader, who could easily afford a flash hotel yet prefers the friendliness of a homestay.While Lucinea is at the airport with Nico, Oriana takes me to the weekly artisan market in the city's attractive main square, Praça da República. Under a shady walkway of mango trees, we pass vendors touting Amazonian fruit juices, capoeira instruments, tiny crocheted bikinis, elaborate wooden necklaces, and all manner of snacks, from crab cakes to fresh coconuts. Oriana tells me Belém was at its peak during Brazil's 19th-century rubber boom and we tour some of its grandest sites, built on the back of the industry, including the imposing opera house, Teatro da Paz. "The problem was, just as the city was thriving, an Englishman came to the Amazon to look for rubber-tree seeds, smuggled them back to London and then established farms in Asia. Our industry collapsed." As tropical storm clouds gather above, we head back to the flat. We find Lucinea hard at work, in front of a huge pile of books. On top of her day job working for a bank, she's enrolled at night school to get the literature degree she never had time for as a young mother with five children. "My dream," she tells me, "is to do a masters in Spain."The following day, I want to give mother and daughter time to catch up with each other, so I set off to amuse myself around town, admiring the old Portuguese houses and the stylish new waterfront development, where pavement cafes overlook the Amazon. Then, come evening, I have a meeting with another Belém couchsurfer, Ricardo, a 28-year-old video editor.Ricardo takes me to a bar called Cosanostra (Travessa Benjamin Constant, 1499), with a cosy wooden interior and live band playing samba and bossa nova. Like many couchsurfers, Ricardo is open and easygoing, and there is no introductory awkwardness. "I have lived alone since I was 17 and have always had an open door," he says. But hasn't he ever worried about security? He looks baffled. "I think it's highly unlikely someone will come all the way from Europe to steal my VCR."Ricardo has hosted over 40 people and, inevitably, has racked up many stories. My favourite is the one about the couchsurfer who found out Ricardo was an amateur boxer and wanted to re-enact Fight Club. "Senhor Ricardo! Senhor Ricardo! Are you really going to hit him?" asked the wide-eyed doorman outside his apartment, as the guy continued to insist. "In the end, I hit him," recalls Ricardo, matter-of-factly, "but then he kicked me, hurt himself in the process, and he had to delay his boat trip up the Amazon."Ricardo's tales keep me so entertained that, before I know it, it's 3am. Fortunately, I forewarned Lucinea I would be back late. "No problem. Enjoy yourself," she said, giving me a key so I could quietly let myself into her place and flop on the spare mattress laid out in the living room. The next day, she and Oriana take me to the city zoo, where the thick Amazonian foliage makes you momentarily feel like you are in the heart of the jungle. We have a great day and they both seem happy to have me tag along. However, there comes a line that I'm always wary of crossing: overstaying my welcome. The time seems right to move on and, besides, I've got a lot of ground to cover to get down Brazil's 9,000km-plus coastline. Forget about Facebook, MySpace and Bebo - Brazilians swear by the social networking site Orkut. Developed by Google, and named after one of its engineers, Orkut.com is Brazil's most visited website, and almost every internet user in the country has an account. Travellers to Brazil may find Orkut membership useful as many hotels, bars and tour companies have pages on the site. It also hosts thousands of travel-related subcommunities, including groups for users of couchsurfing and hospitalityclub, and it is an easy way to keep in touch with the locals you meet along the way. You could also give Orkut a try in India, where it is the second most visited site. Just don't bother in the US, where it sank without a trace, and was dubbed the "David Hasselhoff of social networking", in reference to the American star's heroic status abroad (namely in Germany) that was never matched domestically.Café Imaginário (Quintino Bocaiúva, 1086) Where Belém's painters, poets and musicians hang out. Come for live music and famous jambu pizza, made with a local herb. Amazon Beer (Estação das Docas, Boulevard Castilho França) A micro-brewery that produces the best local beer. During happy hour (Mon-Wed, 6.30pm-9pm) you pay R$24 (around £7.45) for a big buffet and all you can drink. Or try feijoada, a bean and meat stew which is the national dish, on Saturdays. Boteco das Onze (Praça Frei Caetano Brandão) A beautiful bar that looks like an old European tavern in a 17th-century house with excellent food and a great view over Guajará Bay.vicky.baker@theguardian.com