The last time I saw Evandro da Silva, deputy head of the campaigning musical collective Afro-Reggae, he showed me a graphic video of police corruption and brutality in the city of Rio de Janeiro. The footage of his death last week was aired on national television and has shocked the whole of Brazil.Da Silva was killed during a street robbery in which two thieves stole his trainers and jacket. CCTV images show that the robbers were apprehended minutes later by two police officers, who must have also witnessed the shooting. Yet rather than arrest his killers, they took the trainers and jacket and then released them. The police made no attempt to save da Silva's life, and he died 50 minutes later.The everyday banality of the incident has brought home how out of control the city's police force has become. "For a jacket and a tennis shoe two irresponsible police officers have confirmed the chronic incompetence of the Brazilian state," wrote Denis Mizne, the co-ordinator of Sou da Paz in an angry polemic in Floha do Sao Paulo, the country's leading newspaper.Last week's killing comes after a wave of gun battles have again ripped through Rio's favelas. Scores of people have died in a series of shoot-outs between the police and rival groups of drug traffickers, who even managed to shoot down a police helicopter. The police kill more than 1,000 people in Rio every year and there are numerous credible reports that many of these are the results of extra-judicial executions. Although such actions have been glamorised by films such as Tropa de Elite, for most of Rio's residents, the police are just another criminal faction fighting for control of the city.Rio recently was recently awarded the honour of hosting the 2016 Olympic games, which will come two years after a Brazilian World Cup in 2014. Brazilians have been indulging themselves in a wave of optimism in recent months. Rising exports, a commodities price boom and the government's investment in social policies have stimulated the economy and helped millions out of poverty. The country shrugged off the worldwide economic crisis, with only a slight dip in growth rates, and is hoping to capitalise on a boom from tourism and its sporting triumphs. After years of neglect and urban violence, it seemed that Rio again was on the rise.AfroReggae and Sou da Paz have been running pioneering social programmes in the favelas of Rio and Sao Paulo that are credited with helping to reduce the chronic violence that has blighted the country's reputation. Violence peaked in Brazil in 2003 when almost 50,000 people were shot dead. The murder rate has been falling since then, but is still considerably higher than most of the violent conflicts taking place anywhere else in the world today.I am working on a project looking at the issue of pre-trial detention in Brazil. The number of people being held in custody awaiting trial has almost quadrupled over the last 10 years, which has massively overstretched the capacity of the already overcrowded Brazilian penal system. Tens of thousands of people are being held in police lock-ups or improvised detention centres crammed dozens per cell or stuffed into container crates, which lack even the most basic facilities of hygiene and ventilation.Some commentators have linked the rising numbers being held in prison with the falling death rate, but a more detailed analysis of the figures does not bear this out. However, it may reflect a widely felt frustration about the inability of the Brazilian criminal justice system to process cases efficiently. Brazil's constitution and laws provide a whole range of theoretical rights and privileges to those who can afford lawyers to assert them. Cases are subject to endless appeals, which clog up the courts. The guilty often go unpunished or receive treatment far more lenient than their crimes deserve. Remanding people into custody at the start of the process may partly be an attempt by over-burdened judges to ensure that those accused of crimes do spend some time in prison. The police's shoot-to-kill policy stems from the same frustration.This obviously fails to differentiate between the guilty and innocent. It also means that people accused of the most minor offences are being locked up with murderers and gang leaders. Most of Brazil's prisons are effectively under the control of the criminal gangs who also wreak such violence on the streets. Every new prisoner is a potential new recruit and this policy is even officially recognised by the authorities, who ask them to choose which gang they belong to when making prison allocations. Prisoners who insist that they don't belong to a gang are often assigned to one for administrative convenience.An alternative policy needs to tackle the causes of crime as well as thoroughly overhaul the institutions of the Brazilian criminal justice system. Raising the pay of prison warders and police should obviously be a part of this strategy and so should tackling corruption and criminality in both forces. The problems of pre-trial detention can also not be divorced from the wider need for justice sector reform and for the chronic backlog of cases to be dealt with."We have left behind being a second-rate country to become a first-rate one," said Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Brazil's popular president, on the day of the country's Olympic triumph. "Respect is good and we are happy to receive it." But respect has to be earned as well and there is no point having a first-world society and economy while the Brazilian state remains firmly stuck in the third one.