Brazil last night rebuffed a US plea to back sanctions against Iran, setting the stage for a bruising diplomatic battle in the UN security council.President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva told the US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, that he would not be bounced into a western-led effort to punish Tehran over its nuclear programme.Clinton, stopping in Brasilia during a Latin America tour, had hoped to build support for a UN resolution on sanctions against Iran. As a non-permanent member of the security council, Brazil does not have a veto, but its support is needed for a united front. Russia has signalled its support, but not China.Lula signalled the rebuff while briefing reporters shortly before meeting Clinton. "It is not prudent to push Iran against a wall," he said. "The prudent thing is to establish negotiations."He has irritated Washington by forging ties with Tehran and defending its stated aim of developing nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The US and Europe accuse Iran of plotting to build atomic bombs. It has defied UN demands that it stop enriching uranium.Brazil's foreign minister, Celso Amorim, said there was room for two or three months' more negotiation with Iran. "We still have some possibility of coming to an agreement … but that may require a lot of flexibility on both sides," he said at a news conference with Clinton after she met Lula. "We will not simply bow down to the evolving consensus if we do not agree.".Clinton expressed disappointment and said talks with Iran had got nowhere. "Personally speaking, I think it's only after we pass sanctions in the security council that Iran will negotiate in good faith. That is my belief, that is our administration's belief: that once the international community speaks in unison around a resolution then the Iranians will come and begin to negotiate."She urged countries to be cautious about Iranian assurances of peaceful intentions. "We have seen an Iran that runs to Brazil, an Iran that runs to Turkey and an Iran that runs to China, telling people different things to different people to avoid international sanctions," she said.Lula, a centre-leftist who has promoted Brazil as a diplomatic heavy-hitter, bearhugged President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad during his state visit to Brazil last November, and is due to visit Tehran in May. Supporters laud him for standing up to western pressure. Critics accuse him of naivety.Lula said Brazil did "not support any move by Iran to go beyond the peaceful use of nuclear energy" and that he planned to have a "frank discussion" with Ahmadinejad in May.Clinton's empty-handed departure from Brasilia came as the US and EU launched a fresh broadside against the Gulf state, accusing it of breaking nuclear transparency rules by escalating uranium enrichment without UN surveillance. They spoke at a tense International Atomic Energy Agency meeting in Vienna. China reportedly reiterated its opposition to sanctions, saying the time was not right.Clinton's visit was further clouded by a trade dispute. Brazil said it would retaliate against US cotton subsidies next month unless the long-standing row is resolved.South America's farming giant next week would publish a list of US products on which tariffs would be imposed, said Amorim. The sanctions would take effect 30 days later. "So there will be time to negotiate," he added.The World Trade Organisation granted Brazil permission to impose sanctions on US imports last November after ruling the US government spent too much on subsidies for cotton farmers and on an export credit guarantee programme.Clinton said Washington would unveil a proposed solution next week. "There is so much trade between our two countries that we hope we are able to work through this issue and get to a resolution."