President Dilma Rousseff has launched an ambitious plan, Brazil Without Misery, which aims to eradicate dire poverty by 2014.Just over 16 million Brazilians – almost a tenth of the population – live in extreme poverty, with less than $45 a month. Half of them are under 19, 40% under 14. Almost two-thirds live in the Nordeste region and about one in five is illiterate. Of the 30 million living in the countryside, one in four is "very poor".During the election campaign, Rousseff promised to end poverty. Announcing the plan, she said it would be her top priority in her term of office."We can't forget that the most permanent, challenging and harrowing crisis is having chronic poverty in this country," Rousseff said. The government plans to launch an offensive through welfare payments, education, jobs, healthcare, access to public services, improved infrastructure and rural development.First, the government will be giving slightly more money to the poorest people, broadening the scope of the bolsa familia (conditional cash transfer) initiated by Rousseff's predecessor, Lula da Silva, which benefits 12 million poor or very poor families. Now up to five children per family – formerly it was three – qualify for benefits, embracing a further 1.3 million children. Monthly payments to the mother of each family will range from $22 to $200.Above all, by the end of 2013 the government wants bolsa payments to reach 800,000 more families, who qualify for the welfare payments but do not receive it due to geographical isolation, poor information or administrative shortcomings. "We need to change the mindset that it is up to a poor person to come to the state, and ensure that the state reaches out to the poor person," social development minister Tereza Campello said. Officials had to change their approach, identify needy families, go to homes and take action.Since its launch in 2003 the bolsa familia scheme has enabled tens of millions of Brazilians to get enough to eat, live a little better, and even discover the joys of consumption and credit. But more needed to be done, she said. "A country that has grown like Brazil can't be content with just having a big social programme," Campello emphasised.In the second part of its plan, the government aims to improve access to public services, particularly education, the health service, running water, electricity and sewerage for those most in need. Almost half of very poor rural families have neither running water nor a well, and more than half of them have neither a sewer connection nor a septic tank."Productive inclusiveness", the third and last part of the scheme, aims to give the poor the economic means to lift themselves permanently out of poverty, through job opportunities, vocational training and micro-credit. Brazil lacks the necessary labour for low-qualification jobs, so between now and 2014 some 1.7 million urban workers will be offered training. Another goal is a fourfold increase in the number of poor farmers receiving state subsidies and guidance from farm engineers."We want to eradicate extreme poverty by 2014 and make Brazil the first developing country to achieve the first of the UN millennium development goals," Campello said.This story originally appeared in Le Monde