The Unicamp library system (SBU – Sistema de Bibliotecas da Unicamp) consists of the central library and 26 other libraries located on four campuses in three towns. The existing book collections in the libraries surpass 1.1 million, with more than 300,000 ebooks, 30,000 electronic journal titles and 100% of all digital theses produced at the university.The Unicamp academic community is composed of 30,000 students, 2,000 professors and 7,000 employees. Its bibliographical material circulation is above 1.2 million (in 2012), with 1.7 million of online circulation transactions, and more than 600,000 downloads of international scientific material.Decrease in print use by 35%There's no doubt that new technologies have changed and are still changing the way academic libraries run and plan for the future. At Unicamp, this effect can be seen in the decreased use of our printed collections by 35% over the past three years.Unicamp generates 15% of scientific production in Brazil, so it's no surprise that we've seen a rise in the search for electronic information (journals, database, ebooks), with the annual number of document downloads now above 600,000. Motivated by this change in the use of collections, the library started an action with the International Scientific Journal in 2011 to transfer 50% of our annual subscription of 5,000 titles from printed format to electronic version only. Besides conserving financial resources, this enabled more than 100,000 new acquisitions.Putting the user firstThese transformations imposed by technology will probably make the library change its activity in the community following three basic principles: preserving the existing collection, organising and easing the access to new sources of information in electronic/digital format, and creating new relationships and environments in our buildings.In 2002, SBU began to transform its services, first in the structure of Unicamp's digital library, by digitising 100% of theses in 2009 – this made Unicamp the only university in Latin America to offer free access to all its theses. The digital thesis collection (now comprising over 39,000) has already been accessed more than 30 million times with more than six million downloads. In 2003, the Program of Access to Electronic Information (PAIe) was created to systematise the access to electronic journals. It not only controls this new collection, but also offers support to the community by guiding the access to these new sources of information.Library 'with no walls'A new library facility is being built to help with the preservation of existing physical collections and store the special collections and rare books. A digitisation process of around 4,000 rare books is also under way to make them available with free access via Unicamp's digital library. Other technologies will soon be installed to make the central library a model library, offering more autonomy to the users in how they access electronic collections and circulate of printed materials.Rethinking the library's activities must prioritise the academic activity of our community. This will avoid information overload and fatigue, making the information provided by the library certified by the quality of its content. The academic library today should not be a library 'with no walls'; it must go where the user is: to the classroom, to the lab, into the home and even into the pocket, using mobile devices.Luiz Atilio Vicentini is the coordinator of Unicamp system of libraries, Brazil This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To get more articles like this direct to your inbox, become a member of the Higher Education Network.