Eduardo Gomes needs to find an imam who can certify halal meat fast.The 34-year old foreign and domestic sales manager of Frigo Estrela, a meat-packing company located in the countryside of São Paulo state, has just accepted a 1,000-tonne order from Iran.He’s bought the cattle, booked the container and even reserved a space on a cargo ship. But now the imam he normally uses to approve his meat is sick with a suspected case of dengue fever. Unless Gomes can find another imam, or a different buyer for his non-halal meat, Frigo Estela stands to suffer a big loss.“When one of our workers gets sick, I can’t just replace him with another,” he said. “Everyone here has a particular role.”The scarcity of imams is just the latest problem for the company, caused by the high incidence of dengue fever in the town of Estrela d’Oeste. Related: US harvest threatened by water-intensive oil and gas boom From the start of the year until 9 May, Brazil registered a total of 845,900 cases of the virus, equivalent to around 0.4% of the population; in Estrela d’Oeste (pop. 8,208), there have been over 1,500 suspected cases, according to the town’s health department. At least 536 of those cases have been confirmed.São Paulo is experiencing its most severe drought in decades, after three years of below-average rainfall. Rationing has led to many Brazilians stock-piling water. Unsecured containers provide ideal breeding grounds for the Aedes Aegypti mosquito, which carries the disease. On 14 May the health minister, Arthur Chioro, stated that Brazil was experiencing an “epidemic” of dengue fever.According to the World Health Organization, an epidemic is over 300 cases per 100,000; in Brazil’s south-east the figure is 648.1. The number of cases this year is over 200% more than the same period of 2014, but lower than in 2013, when over 1.2 million Brazilians were infected.At least 229 Brazilians have died in 2015 due to the disease, which is characterised by flu-like symptoms, fever and vomiting. As yet, there is no vaccine and no cure. Treatment involves relieving the symptoms through hydration and serum.For Frigo Estrela, which employs over 2,000, most of whom are from the town, the disease has taken its toll. Gomes said that 35% of his workforce has been off sick over the past five months, not including those who took time off to care for relatives.To minimise its impact, staff have been given lessons in how to proof both the workplace and their homes against the disease. A new six-strong inspection team, wearing protective overalls, gloves and eye-masks, patrols the grounds of the 92,000 square metre complex every day, armed with a check-list and a powerful insecticide.But the chemicals used by both private companies and public health authorities to fumigate are expensive, environmentally harmful and only provide a temporary solution.In all, Gomes estimates the preventative measures are costing him R$50,000 (US$17,000) a month, and he is critical of the local authorities for failing to do more to prevent the spread of the disease.“They have been far too passive,” he said. “It’s like they are waiting for some kind of divine intervention.”In the local hospital, Eliana Ralho, 34, the municipal health coordinator, strongly disagrees. According to Ralho, the town’s health department has done even more than the state guidelines recommend.“We are supposed to have one health worker for every 1,000 houses,” she said. “Here we have 3,000 houses and five health workers, going door to door, every weekday, looking for possible breeding sites, spraying when necessary and educating people on how to minimise the risk.”In early May, the town council passed a law allowing the local police to fine residents a minimum of R$75 (US$25) if they fail to clear their properties of possible breeding grounds after a warning from a health worker. Ms Ralho thinks the threat of fines is starting to have an effect.Inside the hospital, Arquimedes Pichazzi, 76, another of the town’s suspected cases of dengue, blames the carelessness of local residents for the outbreak. “I think the authorities are doing a good job,” he said. It’s the people here who are too relaxed about the disease.”Since January, Brazil’s health ministry has spent R$150m (US$50m) fighting dengue. Most of the money has gone to health authorities in towns like Estrela d’Oeste, to fund preventative measures, such as house visits and education programmes.But given the difficulty of halting the spread of dengue, public and private organisations based in Brazil are working on other solutions. Related: Genetically engineered mosquitoes could be vital weapon against malaria Instituto Butantan, a state-run biomedical facility in São Paulo, is in its third phase of vaccine testing, while Sanofi, the French pharmaceutical company, claims to have produced a vaccine that results in a 60% prevention rate for all strains of the disease.Oxitec, a British company, has created a genetically-modified variant of the Aedes Aegypti which mates with the native mosquito population to produce offspring which die before reaching maturity.While field trials are taking place in various Brazilian municipalities, environmentalists have expressed concern over the unintended consequences of releasing swarms of GM mosquitoes.Oxitech has not yet received clearance to market its technology to the private sector. But Mr Gomes said he was offering to fund the town health department’s purchase of the Oxitech mosquitos.On 26 May the health ministry said that the worst of the outbreak appears to be over. But until researchers develop a more permanent solution, recent history suggests the disease is likely to return soon.Additional reporting by Amanda Moreth