Early one crisp winter morning, I took a walk up to Gold Mine Lake, several kilometres inland from our friends' cottage on the Ottawa river.The frozen creek was only lightly covered with snow, making my snowshoes and ski poles superfluous. Still, it was comforting to have them, as I recalled going through a shallow patch here last winter, in the lee of a beaver dam where moving water thins the ice.I was glad I had decided not to have breakfast. The slight edge of hunger made a walk in the wild more acute, bringing home a greater awareness of the integrity of humans and nature that we rarely experience in the city. It was reassuring, though, to have a small package of trail mix and matches in my pocket in this frozen wonderland.The diversity of life in the boreal forest, even in the winter, never ceases to amaze. Despite their slower pace, the interdependencies of trees, grasses, water, soil and air are obvious to those lucky enough to recognise them. On the long abandoned horse-drawn rail bed leading to the mine, I ran across a poplar sapling severed in two and suspended from the crook of another tree. A beaver had dragged off the bottom and, unable to reach the top half, left it suspended. Hauling it down, I followed the beaver's waddling tracks in the snow to a hole in the ice. Leaving the rest of the poplar beside the hole, I felt satisfied after my first shift as the pizza delivery man for Wally Beaver.On the edge of Gold Mine Lake, looking up at an ancient and crumbling hunter's blind precariously perched in the crook of a large tree, I regretted not having more time to settle in for a bit to see if any photographic deer might wander by. Moving back down the frozen creek 30 minutes later, I marvelled at fresh deer tracks on top of my own footprints. They had followed me for about 100 metres and then left the creek, no doubt in search of better terrain for fodder.I spat on the ice and thought of how the spring thaw would mix my DNA with the rich life around me, leaving a tiny piece of myself in this reserve of nature for ever. I saw no wildlife, although they doubtlessly saw me, but returned refreshed by my brief solitary reintegration with mother earth, and a renewed awareness of the importance of saving her from the ravages of unsustainable industrial growth.