Five Britons have died after a whale-watching boat carrying 27 people sank off the coast of Vancouver Island in western Canada, the Foreign Office has confirmed.As darkness forced rescue helicopters, planes and boats to suspend their search until daylight, 21 people had been rescued from the seas off the coast of the popular resort town of Tofino where the 65ft-long (20m) Leviathan II went down on Sunday afternoon. One passenger remains missing.Philip Hammond, the British foreign secretary, said: “It is with deep sadness that I can confirm five British nationals have lost their lives when the whale-watching boat they were on sank off western Canada on Sunday.”“My thoughts are with the family and friends of all those affected by this terrible accident. Consular staff in British Columbia are supporting the family members of those who have died and we will remain in close contact with Canadian authorities as further information becomes available.”The mayor of Tofino described the mood in the town as tense but commended local people for their help in the rescue effort.“Everybody’s heart is just breaking for what’s going on here and wanting to be as helpful as possible,” said Josie Osborne in a telephone interview late on Sunday.The weather had been clear and sunny and it was not clear what had caused the Leviathan II to sink.Tofino fishing guide Lance Desilets said at least 12 rescue boats were already out on the water when he arrived on the scene.“I saw a lot of personal belongings, a long diesel slick and the top 10ft of the Leviathan II sticking out of the water,” Desilets said. “It’s a sad day for our community and the search and rescue people are doing the best that they can.”Jenn Hamilton, a spokeswoman for British Columbia emergency health services, said five ambulances were dispatched and many off-duty paramedics went to the dock at Tofino to help.Valerie Wilson, a spokeswoman for the Vancouver Island health authority, said 18 people were taken to Tofino hospital. All were in a stable condition. Three were later transferred to other hospitals while some others had been discharged.Acting sub-lieutenant Melissa Kai, of the Joint Rescue Coordination Centre in British Columbia, said the rescue operation had finished at 11.10pm local time (0810 GMT). She said: “Of the 27 individuals on the vessel when it sank, 21 were rescued. Five were located without vital signs and one remains missing.” A Royal Canadian Air Force Cormorant rescue helicopter had been at the accident site within 30 minutes of the emergency call, she added, and three coastguard ships had joined other local boats in a rescue attempt. The Leviathan II, which was operated by Jamie’s Whaling Station, had sent out a mayday signal at around 5pm local time, the JRCC said.Boats from the nearby Ahoushat First Nation joined the rescue effort, said aboriginal councillor Tom Campbell. He was on the waterfront and watched as rescue personnel brought several survivors ashore.“Their looks tell the whole story,” he said by phone from Tofino. “You can’t describe looks on people that are lost. They look totally lost, shocked and lost.”Campbell said his cousin pulled at least eight people from the water into a rescue boat.Tofino is a fishing village and popular holiday destination famous for its whale watching, surfing and fishing as well as its proximity to natural hot springs and old-growth rainforest.Jamie Bray, the owner of Jamie’s Whaling Station, which operated the sunken vessel, said in a statement posted on its website: “It has been a tragic day. Our entire team is heartbroken over this incident and our hearts go out to the families, friends and loved ones of everyone involved.“We are doing everything we can to assist our passengers and staff through this difficult time. We are cooperating with investigators to determine exactly what happened.“In the meantime, we want to extend our most sincere thank you to the first responders, rescue personnel, and everyone from Tofino and the local First Nations communities who assisted with the response efforts. We will provide further updates when information becomes available.”These are not the first deaths connected to Jamie’s Whaling Station tours. Two people died in March 1998 when the company’s boat Ocean Thunder was swamped by an unexpected wave in the same waters, Plover Reefs. The swell rolled the boat, throwing all the passengers into the water. One passenger and the operator of the boat drowned.A Transportation Safety Board (TSB) investigation found that the operator “did not fully appreciate the conditions the boat would meet at the time of the accident in the turbulent waters in the vicinity of reefs”, and also criticised the lack of effective communication equipment, which resulted in a delay in initiating a rescue attempt.An investigation was also launched in 1996, after the Jamie’s Whaling Station craft Sharp Point ran aground while running at full speed after the operator fell asleep at the controls. No one died in the incident, but the operator was treated for head injuries.Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister-designate, said in a statement: “I was shocked and saddened to hear of the sinking of a whale-watching boat near the [British Columbia] coast and the passengers aboard who have lost their lives in the incident. We thank all those, including our search and rescue officials, who responded swiftly with courage and professionalism.“I know firsthand of this coastal area’s natural beauty and the many people who visit here from all around the world. My thoughts and prayers are with the passengers, the crew, and their families at this most difficult time. We will continue to offer them support in the days ahead.”