Last month, the Toronto Star ran a "survival guide" for Barack Obama in advance of his upcoming visit to Canada on Thursday. It warned him of the Canadian "proclivity for substance over style," and that, thanks to Pierre Trudeau, "we're cool with cool, but we've already been there." In other words, thanks for coming, but we're totally over it already.The problem is that the opposite is true. We couldn't be happier that Barack Obama is not only choosing Canada for his first official visit, but that he knows we even exist at all. Since he does, he might also know that, generally speaking, we love him. What he probably doesn't know is why. All he would have to do to find out would be to watch the Simpsons.Almost everything anyone ever wanted to know about the Canadian identity is captured in episode 5F11 of the Simpsons. In the midst of a fracas that erupts between the delegates of the Springfield Elementary model UN, Ralph Wiggum, representing Canada and dressed as a Mountie, dutifully stands to attention and above the din begins to sing "O! Canada". It is difficult to find a more accurate depiction of the international Canadian persona.Ralph-as-Canada is many things all at once. He is the view looking north from the United States at the peaceful, cute, idiotic little neighbour, boasting proudly of nothing at all. He is also the mythical "Canadian" – the humble, internationalist, inclusive, sensible law-abider – that Canadians have convinced ourselves that we are. However, the most important persona is missing: that of the anti-American Canadian, which is now a bit of a problem. In Barack Obama, Canadians see those qualities that we love most, but our reasoning for this is flawed. Obama breaks stereotypes that we hold for our neighbours, and instead represents stereotypes that we have of ourselves. We like him because we feel he's as good as we are. This means that we like him because he is better than his countrymen. Nothing could be more self-righteous.Frustratingly, this attitude is often built on a misguided understanding of both American culture and our own. When Barack Obama spoke in Baltimore the Saturday prior to his inauguration, he described the survival of the American spirit after the White House was burned to the ground in 1814. Many here will tell you that Canadians set that fire. We didn't, the British did. This is the same assumption-driven thinking that allows us to feel that the American way of life is generally the wrong one, and ignore how much the Canadian alternative shares with it. Many Canadians can boast an extensive knowledge of the United States, and can explain their history or government. That's all fine and good. The problem comes when we're asked to explain ourselves, and the answers are often much shorter.Recently, the National Post asked: "Can Obama end our anti-Americanism?" Could this love we have for him finally destroy our dislike of Americans? The answer is: no. When Canada patriated its constitution, there was a feeling that finally the country had released itself from Mother Britain. The job then became one of self-definition. Unfortunately, the problem is that we never really got around to it, opting instead to continue to define our regional differences: West versus East, French versus English, Ontario versus everyone else, etc. We pretend that this is a national identity, but it's more of the same – a definition in the negative.In fact, our anti-Americanism is one of the only common threads of Canadian identity that runs, unbroken, from Confederation to the very second that I'm writing these words. Most other traits - the peacekeeping, the cultural mosaic, and so on - have developed along the way. The only other aspect to share this streak is bilingualism. Needless to say, it does not unite Canadians with quite the same degree of success.All along, our truest defining characteristic has sat at North America's waistline. The 49th parallel is a stronger Canadian symbol than anything else. It is the line between being something and being not-something. If our anti-Americanism did end, it would not be because of Barack Obama. Instead, its end would only come from it being replaced internally by something else. If that does not occur, then we have to face the scary fact that Canada is only Canada because it is not America.