Canada, from Katherine Stansfield’s lively first collection, Playing House, has some of the restless vocal complexity of a Baroque fugue. A more obvious literary relative would be the sestina. In fact, Canada seems to adapt a few sestina-like techniques, while firmly announcing that, no, it’s not a sestina, nor would wish to be. For a start, there are five rather than six-and-a-half stanzas, each with seven lines rather than six: the lines vary in length so, visually, the poem has an un-sestina-like rugged (mountainous?) outline. It sings more than most sestinas. But both fugue and sestina are forms constrained by fixed rules of repetition. Canada has multiple repetands, but no obvious symmetrical plot for their appearance (unless sharper ears than mine can discern one).The patterns flow and change. For example, some form of the verb, to run, appears in every stanza, in lines two, seven, five, one, six, whereas the forms of pine, which features both as noun (“pines” as in pine-trees) and verb (“pining”) appear in lines three, four, five, four, four. The first line of the first stanza comes back as the last, with a new grammatical twist – but that twist, involving a full-stop and a single word beginning a new sentence, stops short of becoming a repeated last-line device. The random element seems important, in keeping with the organic nature of the imagery. Words and meanings are at liberty to dissolve like snow, or maintain their shape for longer, like rock.One of the key-words, spool, and its derivations, perhaps best describes this fluid, cinematic process. Canada, the poem’s addressee and imagined place, is recreated from deliberately stereotypical characteristics – pines, lakes, snow, etc – but not locked into definition. It’s unmappable – a land both out there and inside the speaker. It spools away and is drawn back and around that consciousness. Although the observation “no one comes” is a major repeating motif, the speaker seems less an isolated figure than one whose being (head, hands, bones, heartbeats) is assimilated into and by the landscape: “The lakes are my hands/ running into the heart, into bone … ” The descriptive writing may border on the surreal, as here, or attain vivid metaphorical presence, as when “winter snows the lakes/ to rock” or rock becomes “the bone of land”. It’s always unexpected, potent, and sparked by compression and juxtaposition.There are many subtle and enjoyable word-shifts. I like the compounds, “Lake//forest”, “bone-beaten” and “snow-muddy” (a verb), and the use of “keep” as a noun in the seventh line, stanza four. Passive and active voices of the verb (“see”, “seen”, “beat”, “beaten”) help merge place and poet. “Spool” becomes “Pool” in the second line of the last stanza, where it might be the verb of a command, or a noun suggesting a pool reflecting heart, bones and hands. Dualism is a constant feature: blackness and snow, rock and muddiness, shadows and bones, land and lake, head and heart, stasis and flow.Canada is surely a love poem. The speaker declares strong emotions, and is concerned with charting them in a form that denotes obsession. As a troubadour-poet permits his mistress to set ice and fire at raging war inside him, Stansfield’s persona is permissive, willing to be subjugated to the linguistic icons that mean “Canada”. Petrarch spooled tireless love poems to Laura, a woman he’d apparently seen only once: the concept of inspiration by the unseen and unavailable is a deeply engrained tradition in western poetry. Here, “I’ve never seen you” is a statement unpicked and disproven: the poem conjures a suspicion that literal “not-seeing” may be crucial to imagination’s inner sight. Not unlike Petrarch’s Laura, Wordsworth’s daffodils, flashing “upon that inward eye”, were not only re-seen. They were seen as if they could see the poet.The power of the transitive use of “runs” reinforces that thought. Canada “runs” the speakers heart in the beginning, “but not bone”. At the end, Canada’s forest “runs” the speaker’s head, which is both bone and softer tissue. Perhaps the most important repeated motif, “No one comes”, ends the poem on a note of bleakness. In a projected movement away from sensation and emotion, the idealised “forest, shadowed muddy, black as winter” finally, perhaps, begins to disappear.CanadaI’ve never seen you.In my head you run from mein a spool: winter lakes pining for night,blackened snow, muddy as shadow.No one comes. In the heart of your forest I beatmy hands on rock, on the bone of landI’ve never seen. Yourun the heart, but not bone.No one comes. The forest is blackand muddies rock. Shadows never beatmy head but in winter. I’ve seen pines spoolingnight from your land like snow.The lakes are my handsrunning into the heart, into bonethough winter snows the lakesto rock. In the black forestheartbeats spool shadows. Do yousee? No one comes. Nightand the bones in the pines run muddy.My head is never a land insidethough winter snows. Lakeforest, keep runninginto the land shadowed by my head.You spool rock and bone-beaten hearts. I see pines snow-muddythe black of the lakes.No one comes. Never. Winteris the forest keep. Running,no one comes.Pool to see my heart, bones, hands,beaten by the land and the lakes and the rocksand the pines and the snow I’ve never seen.At night, shadowed muddy, black as winter,your forest runs my head.No one comes.