'Mummy, I've just uncovered a bone that's never been seen before.' My eight-year-old son, who had never handled anything more dangerous than kitchen scissors, was scraping away at the sandstone with awl and scalpel, brushing away loose dirt with a toothbrush. 'I think mine's the femur of a tyrannosaurus,' shouted his 11-year-old brother, working beside him. We were crouching in the sepia dust of Alberta's Red Deer River valley, with the late afternoon sun setting the sagebrush and goldenrod alight and deepening the shadows of the volcanic hills, hot on the trail of a 70-million-year-old death. Well, perhaps not quite 70 million. The excavation site was a mock-up by the Royal Tyrrell Museum, one of the world's leading showcases of dinosaur remains, to give the younger participants in its summer camps a taste of the excitement only a master's degree in palaeontology could otherwise afford.But the rest of our three-day sojourn at the family camp, sleeping in tipis under the prairie stars by night and hunting for dinosaur fossils by day, was the real thing. My boys were hooked as surely as an ornithopod in a tyrannosaurus's claws.The trip had started inauspiciously. The evening before, a freak storm had swept in from the Arctic, sending temperatures plunging and stirring up strong winds that felled the tipis at the campsite near the museum. Volcanic clay's soft, rapidly eroding properties have yielded some of the greatest concentrations of dinosaur remains in the world. But that night the rain ran straight off the hills, turning the valley floor into a sinkhole of mud and rushing brown water. It's not for nothing that this area is known as the 'badlands' - described as 'mauvais terroir à traverser' by the early French missionaries.The camp organisers were still trying to restore the ungainly canvas sleeping quarters ahead of our arrival that afternoon when the heavens opened again, and once more the clay turned into mud several inches thick. As we slid and squelched along the footpath to the camp, our trainers turned into three-inch platform shoes with an unshakeable mixture of mud and prairie grass. Dragging such wattle-and-daub weights around added to the feeling of being on another planet. But if the camp 'counsellors' were feeling the strain, you would never have known it from their antics around the campfire that night as we were inducted into the North American camp culture of aerobic singalongs. Even my normally self-conscious 11-year-old joined in, concentrating hard on remembering the tongue-twisting lyrics for reprisal in his London playground in September.That same concentration was in evidence the next day as we were handed tweezers and magnifying glasses and asked to sort through trayfuls of micro-fossils. What looked to be rubble turned out to contain the shells of pre-Cambrian clams, scales and vertebrae from 100-million-year-old fish, and teeth, bits of bone and cartilage from various prehistoric creatures. Craig, palaeontologist-cum-counsellor, walked around the room responding to the hands jabbing the air. 'You see this shiny, flat exterior and the Aero bar-like interior,' he said to one child. 'What you've got in your hand, my friend, is a piece of dinosaur bone.' The micro-fossils were the bounty from just a few shovelfuls of rubble skimmed from the surface at Dinosaur Provincial Park, a Unesco heritage site that claims to have yielded the world's highest number of large, mostly complete, dinosaur skeletons. The pickings here are so rich that scientists have left undisturbed bone beds that could contain the remains of thousands more dinosaurs. Specimens excavated in 1967 are still in their mummy-like 'jackets' awaiting examination. The Red Deer River valley has been a famous dinosaur graveyard since the turn of last century, when a curator at the American Museum of Natural History in New York heard a man in a cowboy hat laughing uproariously as he viewed the museum's celebrated dinosaur exhibits. Puzzled, the curator asked what was so funny. The man replied: 'You putting these in a museum! My cows are tripping over bones bigger than this all the time.'A $10 wager was laid, and the curator dispatched his champion fossil-hunter, one Barnum Brown, to the valley to investigate. Brown, known as Mr Bones, returned with news of untold fossil riches, and the $10 was well spent. Brown's reconnaissance mission set off an espionage-filled five years known as the Great Canadian Dinosaur Rush, as buccaneering bone-hunters raced to unearth the prehistoric bounty. At a single excavation site Brown unearthed nine complete skeletons of Albertosaurus, a smaller but more agile relative of T.Rex. Once the American and Canadian museums had had their fill, the British Museum and the Natural History Museum hired the bone-hunters, and some of their finest specimens date from this period. It requires a child's imagination to picture the Red Deer River Valley as the subtropical swampland it was 70 million years ago, before the Rocky Mountains erupted and the Ice Age descended, putting paid to the dinosaurs. It requires far less imagination to picture what this area was like when Blackfoot Indians roamed the plains. The Blackfoot called the dinosaur fossils 'grandfather buffalo bones', and as a burial ground the badlands were regarded as sacred territory. The bison that they hunted in their millions are long gone, but some of the other prairie creatures the Blackfoot once shared the plains with are still around. As I left the outhouse just after dawn on the first day, I saw a mother mule deer and her two fawns picking their way through the prairie grass 100m away. We watched each other for half a minute before they all took flight, their hind legs working in unison like an impala's. It was after we left the museum, heading out of the steep ravines of the badlands toward the rolling prairies, that we saw the biggest natural attraction - a stone forest of 10 towering sandstone pillars topped with mushroom-like slabs of harder rock. They are known as Hoodoos, and the Blackfoot thought they were homes of the spirits. As we clambered among the pillars in their glacier-like setting of crevasses and hidey-holes, it really felt as if we were in a landscape built for giants.Trained now to look for traces of prehistoric life among the rock formations, I bent to examine a faint imprint in the surface of one hill, wondering whether it was evidence of a Cretaceous-era relative of the stingray. But as I looked up to see my youngest poke her head out from one of the hidey-holes, I decided it was more likely the tread of an Adidas trainersaurus. It was reassuring to think we could leave some imprint of our passing on this timeless landscape, after all.A three-night stay at the Badlands Science Camp starts from $230 for adults and $195 for children (5-14 years) and includes activities, camping equipment and meals. More information at tyrrellmuseum.com. Canadian Affair (020 7616 9999; canadianaffair.com) has flights from Gatwick, Glasgow and Manchester to Edmonton from £198 return, with discounts for children up to 12. More details on the region at travelalberta.com.Isle of WightThe remains of more than 20 dinosaur species have been found here, and fossil-hunting trips are held regularly in the summer. A week self-catering at Gotten Manor (01983 551368; gottenmanor.co.uk) for a family of four starts at £550. South DakotaJoin an expedition this summer to excavate 26,000-year-old mammoth bones in South Dakota in the US. Run by Earthwatch (earthwatch.org), the trip lasts 15 days and the £895 price per person includes shared accommodation and most meals but not flights.ColoradoThe Dinosaur Highway contains impressive Jurassic remains, including footprints and bones, and is a 10-hour drive between Colorado and Utah. Trailfinders (0845 050 5871; trailfinders.com) can arrange fly-drive holidays from £489. SpainThe Austurian coast contains Spain's best collection of dinosaur remains, many of which remain visible in the cliffs around Quintueles and the surrounding area. Casas Cantabricas (01223 328721; casas.co.uk) charges from £490 a week for the two-bedroom Casa Belen in the heart of the region.