While Barack Obama tried his hardest to strike an upbeat note on today's bankruptcy filing by General Motors, there was an endearingly gloomy admission north of the border from Canada's prime minister, Stephen Harper.Canada's federal government, together with the province of Ontario, is throwing $9.5bn (£5.8bn) at GM, which is quickly becoming known as Government Motors. In return, the Canadians will get an 11.7% stake and a seat on GM's board, effectively serving as a minority partner to the Obama administration.Harper isn't expecting a sparkling return on his investment. He told a press conference in Toronto: "Clearly taxpayers will get some money back when the day comes that we begin to sell our equity share, but to be frank we are not counting on that."A conservative with free market instincts, Harper sounds far from thrilled at having to pony up cash: "Today's announcement is a regrettable but necessary step to protect the Canadian economy during the worst global recession in half a century."An estimated 400,000 Canadian jobs are tied, directly or indirectly, to the automotive industry and the operations of Detroit's motor manufacturers have traditionally spilled across the border.Canada's government, which has already shovelled funds at struggling Chrysler, doesn't have much of a choice. The Obama administration keeps injecting cash into Detroit's strugglers. If the Canadians refuse to participate, there is clearly a worry that factories north of the border will be first in line for the chop."Without Canadian money in the game, we would be out of the game," Ontario's premier, Dalton McGuinty, acknowledged.It's all a bit grim for Canada's balance sheet. Three months ago, finance minister Jim Flaherty predicted a budget deficit of C$33.7bn (£18.7bn) this year. Six weeks ago, he said the country was "on track" to meet that number. Then last week, he abruptly raised his projected deficit to C$50bn, which will be Canada's worst ever.Most of the increase is due to the billions being thrown at Chrysler and GM. The opposition leader, Michael Ignatieff, was unimpressed, sniping: "Canadians just cannot trust this government with their money. Will the prime minister fire this minister of finance?"