The scenic Canadian town of Halton Hills, home to 55,000 people, seems an unlikely epicentre for a trade war. Known for its hiking trails, tanneries and craft shows, the affluent community west of Toronto sits in rural land near the cliffs of the Niagara Escarpment.But Halton Hills, only 90 minutes from the US border, is taking on the might of Washington. The town's outspoken mayor, Rick Bonnette, has banned US companies from tendering for local public works in a tit-for-tat protest at controversial "buy American" provisions inserted in the Obama administration's $787bn (£478bn) economic stimulus package."We need good Canadian backbone, not Canadian back bacon," says Bonnette, who is locking US firms out of street lighting, railings, sewage facilities, parks and recreation expenditure. "It's like dealing with a big kid in a playground. They push you, you say OK. They push you again, you say OK. Eventually, you've got to kick them."Few nations are as interlinked as the US and Canada. The neighbours conduct $1m of business every minute and an estimated 10m North American jobs depend on cross-border trade. But a simmering quarrel is coming to the boil over Washington-inspired measures intended to protect American jobs.Buried in Obama's Economic Stimulus Act, section 1605 stipulates that none of the billions made available by Congress can be used for public infrastructure unless "all the iron, steel and manufactured goods used in the project are produced in the United States".Inserted by Democrats on Capitol Hill, the measure has angered the US's foreign trading partners and has been criticised as "mistaken" by the US-appointed head of the World Bank.Canada, which depends on the US for 70% of its exports, is disproportionately badly hit and is threatening retaliation. This month the Federation of Canadian Municipalities passed a resolution under which its 1,775 member towns will join Halton Hills in barring US contractors unless Washington reverses its stance. Canada's trade minister, Stockwell Day, said the US stance was "a textbook case of how when doors begin to close, and trade barriers go up, economies go down". There was outrage when it emerged that a section of plastic piping at a Californian marine base, Camp Pendleton, had been ripped out of the ground as an illegal import when a naval official noticed that it was stamped "made in Canada". In British Columbia, a Canadian businessman marketing equestrian products was barred from entry to the US by a border guard who accused him of "stealing jobs away from American citizens".Disquiet has also been voiced by Britain, albeit in a measured tone. The British ambassador to Washington, Sir Nigel Sheinwald, recently wrote an opinion article for the Baltimore Sun on "the peril of protectionism", in which he expressed "real concern" at measures such as the "buy American" rules.The Confederation of British Industry reports that a dozen British firms have expressed alarm. Rhian Chilcott, head of the CBI's Washington office, said: "Companies are just getting discouraged from even competing. They're saying 'we're not even going to bother'."The US is far from alone in instituting such measures. In Beijing this week, the Chinese government adopted a "buy China" policy for its 4tn yuan (£350bn) economic booster package, except in cases where Chinese goods are unavailable on "reasonable commercial terms". Australia's most populous state, New South Wales, declared on Tuesday that domestic firms would get an automatic 20% premium in bidding for public projects in order to "protect local jobs" in a period of economic hardship.Advocates say it is perfectly sensible for nations to ensure that stimulus money is spent locally. Thea Lea, policy director at the AFL-CIO trade union confederation in the US, has no patience for "whining" over the clause: "It is entirely reasonable, from an economic standpoint, especially since some other countries are not engaging in stimulus to the same degree, that we want to ensure this money is spent effectively."She denies that it is protectionism: "If a consumer walks into a store, checks the label on some T-shirts, and chooses to buy an American-made T-shirt, that's not protectionism."A spokesman for the White House said the administration was committed to implementing the provisions "in full accordance with the United States' international trade obligations". Though the World Trade Organisation bans discriminatory spending at national level, it does not cover expenditure at regional, city or local level.Critics say bans on foreign spending ignore the international nature of supply chains. John Hayward is president of Hayward Gordon, a Canadian supplier of waste water pumps. He does $8m of business a year with the US and is already concerned that two contracts - in Maryland and Indiana - could be jeopardised by the "buy America" rules. He says the US is shooting itself in the foot. "We use a lot of American components in our pumps," he says. Many contain a motor made in the US state of Georgia. "If we're hurting, so will the motor manufacturer in Georgia."Others cite the sheer cost to taxpayers of paying over the odds for domestic produce - and the long-term damage wreaked on a country's exporters by inevitable tit-for-tat action. "It's a beggar thy neighbour policy that ends up damaging the jurisdiction that imposes it," says Perrin Beatty, head of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce. He accuses the US of blatantly breaching promises at London's recent G20 summit, where leaders pledged: "We will not repeat the historic mistakes of protectionism of previous eras."In Halton Hills, the council's annual budget is only C$30m (£16m). A lock-out from such a sum is hardly enough to worry US economists. But Canadian economists say that the US will notice the pain if Toronto, Montreal or Vancouver end up following suit.The mayor of Halton Hills says his citizens are affronted by a US policy that goes against the grain of decades of warm cross-border relations. "What the US is doing is destroying well-planned economic co-operation, which has developed to the benefit of both countries." The principle, says Bonnette, is what counts: "Free trade is fair trade. We'll deal with companies from the European Union. We'll deal with Mexico, China, India - but we don't want to deal with any country right now that's discriminating against us."$787bn The amount provided in Barack Obama's economic stimulus plan$1m The amount of business conducted every minute between Canada and the US70% The proportion of Canada's exports that goes to the US¥4tn The economic booster package offered by the Chinese government, which includes a 'buy Chinese' policy