They've been dubbed the digilanti and they're the unsung heroes of the internet: unpaid techies who police the web in an extraordinarily altruistic way. And we can thank them this week for finding and blocking a new and weird form of spam spreading across the net.Last week I wrote about the bizarre question-asking spam my colleagues (and bloggers, columnists and companies all over the web) were receiving. The questions seemed innocent until we noticed they came from the same four or five email addresses – totally different to the sign-off in the email.But what was behind the spam? And how could they be making money from it? Now we have the answer, after volunteer-run the Spamhaus Project, based in Geneva, got on the case.It traced the spam to a number of Canadian-based domains."The purpose of the spam is to trick recipients into responding to answer the questions," says Spamhaus."The questions and their responses are a system of gathering data to compile a series of 'Answer your questions' websites which generate revenue from Google adverts placed alongside the answers. The purpose of the spam is to generate as much Google-indexed content as possible to reap profits from Google ads on the pages."Spamhaus answered a spam from "winstonfinancial@gmail.com", one of the email names Guardian Money highlighted last week. Spamhaus says: "Our answer, word for word, including intentional misspellings, appeared as if by magic a few minutes later on the website www.goftp.com."Spamhaus has contacted internet service providers to block the spam. But there's a curious twist to this tale. I contacted goftp.com in Canada, not expecting a reply.However its boss, Doug Collins, did reply: "The spam was an unfortunate mistake and was the result of a script we bought with an "email" module. All outbound emails have stopped. We would like to apologise to the internet community at large. We have no prior history of spamming and we certainly will not be in the future."Make of that what you will. It seems the internet is a very curious place.• Like millions of Brits, I hate Ryanair. And like millions of Brits, I fly on its planes regularly. It's a bit like smoking; you know it's wrong, you feel dirty, but you carry on doing it and hope that one day you'll kick the habit.The thing that most rankles about Ryanair the £5 card charge for each leg of a journey. So if you and a mate find a "free" flight to Dublin, you still have to fork out £20 in card charges.The only way round this is to pay by Visa Electron. A story we published last year on taking out an Electron card remains one of the most popular stories on Guardian Money's website.The chief drawback is that obtaining an Electron card has entailed opening another bank account. The good news is you can find cheap pre-pay cards with Electron capability. Until now I have not been a fan of pre-pay cards because of their high charges – set-up fees, cash-loading fees, ATM fees and so on.But this week Travelex cut ATM fees to zero on an Electron card with no set-up charges.You'll have to ask for a Cash Passport Sterling card and, rather annoyingly, you have to pick it up at a Travelex branch. But if you're a frequent Ryanair flyer, it's worth the effort.Just remember to change your holiday cash at Travelex's website, rather than at its expensive airport bureaux.p.collinson@theguardian.com