The travelling Kate Middleton catwalk has gone international. For her first such trip as the Duchess of Cambridge she has put together a flawless showing of chic minimalism.She has done so while also re-wearing the cream Reiss engagement dress she was photographed in by Mario Testino. But this time she had rather confidently added a flash of daring red in the form of a disk-style headpiece with maple leaf detail, a nod to her host country, while finishing the outfit with a wicker fan handbag by British designer and government advisor Anya Hindmarch.The bag sold out online in about half an hour after she appeared with it. Sticking to the theme of promoting British labels the Duchess stepped off the plane in Ottawa wearing Erdem. Not only was this beautiful lace dress a brilliantly on-trend choice – lace has been one of the runaway fashion trends for the past few seasons – but it was also a perfectly placed gesture as designer Erdem Moralioglu was born in Montreal and is based in London. His clothes are already popular with first ladies Michelle Obama and Samantha Cameron.This particular lace dress, taken from his resort 2012 collection is not yet on sale. This suggests that the Duchess has borrowed it directly from the designer as many celebrities do. It is reported that Middleton has packed 30 outfits for the trip. She wore three in one day on Thursday and despite making some fashion savvy choices there have been no statements released to suggest she is working with a stylist.Middleton now has the power to sell out clothes and make fashion websites crash - as was the case with the recent Shola Reiss dress, which she wore to greet the Obamas in May during their visit to the UK – in much the same way that people closely watched Princess Diana's wardrobe choices.Before she departed from London to wow Canada, Middleton wore a simple navy Roland Mouret shift dress with a gold button blazer by Canadian label Smythe and a smart Mulberry handbag. This look seemed to be channelling the current minimalism trend, and aside from the slightly air hostess shoes, was a triumph of modern sophistication.Perhaps the only look that felt as if it it belonged to her pre-McQueen blockbuster wedding gown was the swallow print Issa dress she wore with espadrilles to a dinner at the Governor-General's 175 room mansion, Rideau Hall. Something about this rather lacked the chic punch of the other looks but it's a small quibble in an otherwise successful sartorial showing.