Labour tribalists, who John Kampfner describes (Comment, 3 May) as preparing to gloat at the defeat of AV, should look at the result of Canada's election (Comment, 4 May) and reconsider their position even now. With just 39% of the vote, Stephen Harper's Conservatives scooped 54% of the seats in the Ottawa House of Commons, because the left-liberal vote split between the New Democratic Party winning 31% and the Liberals winning 19%. It's reasonable to believe AV would have denied Harper a majority. Turnout, though slightly improved, at 61% would still shame most mature democracies. It is probably no coincidence that it is equally low in the UK and the US, which continue to use first past the post. Canadians, like Britons in 1983, 1987 and 1992, are saddled with a Conservative government a clear-cut majority of the electorate voted against.Tom BrownLondon • Yesterday I received some leaflets from my MP (Conservative Claire Perry) asking me to vote No to AV: it is "complex, obscure and unfair", and "the government will have to spend millions of pounds explaining to voters" how it works. In a separate envelope from her, I am asked to rank each of two lists of national and local concerns "from 1-5 in order of importance". Judging whether schools are more important than jobs, or the NHS more than the police, may be matters beyond the mind of a humble voter such as me, but Ms Perry has apparently already decided I lack such comparative skills and would presumably ignore me if I was to reply. Parliamentarians who patronise the electorate undermine democracy. What better reason to vote Yes?Mike PittsMarlborough, Wiltshire • Nick Clegg has repeated the Yes campaign's claim that only the Conservatives and BNP oppose AV. Here in Northern Ireland, the Democratic Unionist party, the Greens, and Ulster Unionist party all back a No vote. AV would be a tremendous step backward for Westminster. It's not a fair election system and would rig the electoral system against smaller parties. AV is an obscure, expensive and unwanted system.Tom Elliott Leader, UUP, Brian Wilson MLA Leader, Northern Ireland Green party, Peter Robinson MLA First minister of Northern Ireland• I was one of those Labour members who was undecided. Then I got a leaflet urging me to "Vote Conservative and No to AV". Now I've made my decision.Allan BuckleyGreystoke, Cumbria• Support in your columns for a Yes vote is very impressive. However, I fear the only endorsements that would make a difference at this stage would be William and Kate's.Anthony GarrettFalkland, Fife 