I don’t remember the day this was taken, but I remember the next day. I was five years old and there was a lot of frantic running around, neighbours popping in and relatives calling when everyone realised my picture was on the front of the Vancouver Daily Province.Not long after, the authorities asked me to join the victory bond drives in nearby war plants. Everyone would be given half an hour off, a group would perform the songs of the day, and at the end they would wheel out a huge copy of this picture. I would come out in my blazer and short pants (that my mother insisted I wear) and make a speech along the lines of, “Buy a bond today and bring my daddy home”.The photograph was picked up by Associated Press and then Life magazine featured it a couple of months later. This was 1940, before the US joined the war, so it was quite something for the American public to see all these soldiers in Canada heading for England.My father returned to Canada in 1945 after the war, but he did come home once in 1943 on compassionate leave. My parents’ marriage did not survive the war and he was worried about me. He came back at Christmas; it wasn’t a happy time. He didn’t stay with us, and as a kid I thought that was because he was in the army but it was because the marriage was over. This is one of the last pictures of my family together.Dad then went back to England to find his unit had been sent to Sicily, which was upsetting to him. But eventually he landed at Juno Beach on D-day and proceeded through to Germany at the end of the war. As he said, “In the end I had my war.” The day my father came home, my grandfather took me to the train station, and there was Dad. That was probably the happiest day in my 10-year-old life.For a long time the photograph was forgotten. It started to resurface on Remembrance Day in the mid-60s, and is often mentioned in the context of Canada’s most popular pictures. The city of New Westminster picked up on the fact that it was taken there and last month unveiled a bronze statue of it as a memorial. There is also a stamp collection featuring it, as well as a $2 coin. Apparently, at 79, I am the only living person in Canada to be featured on a coin in circulation, alongside the Queen.At the unveiling of the statue, I was overwhelmed by the emotion this photograph evokes. As one of the veterans present said, “It’s not about war, and blood and guts, and guns. It’s about the families that get left behind.”• Interview: Abigail RadnorAre you in a famous photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com