Imagine being Canada. Imagine doing the international walk of shame from the Durban conference and later announcing, hungover with chunks in your hair, wearing whatever you picked off a stranger's floor, and a shoe missing, that you don't care, you are walking out of the Kyoto protocol and the rest of the world can go fry itself.Imagine making this announcement when you're safely home in the nation's capital – a strange little place called Ottawa, the epicentre of grim, a Canadian Luton on a rainy weekend – because you were too chicken to do it in Durban since you knew you would be a laughing stock worldwide.Imagine being a Canadian waking up to this news.Imagine being me, being asked by the Guardian to explain why my nice country, famously full of people who spend their days hewing wood and drawing water amid a stream of apologies, has gone all, well, crap. "Is Canada suddenly being run by the Daily Mail?" the editor asked, impeccably courteous as always. Oh you Brits, so charming as you insert the knife.And the answer is an honest Canadian yes.Canada is melting. The great joke of Harper sending a weasely "environment minister" scuttling home from Durban is that climate change is eating our forests (literally: you can hear a million pine beetles clicking as they chew), turning the icy north to sponge and killing our wildlife. Oil extracted from the Alberta tar sands – that's "tar", not "oil" – is poisoning air and water.Shooting it south via the Keystone pipeline is economic and environmental idiocy. We know this, he knows this but the great joke of everything Harper does is the clueless ideology behind it. Canada was a kindly liberal loser. Harper, an illustrative man, is always making a point when he punishes us.To wit: Muslim women, with full ID, having passed our weird loyalty test (you will be boring and gracefully will you endure boredom), must remove their face veil as they take the citizenship oath in a crowded courtroom. This was decreed on Monday by immigration minister Jason Kenney, a human woodchuck who can't resist a bit of pointless nasty.The Toronto Zoo's gay penguins, Buddy and Pedro, are being split up. Allegedly, the zoo is cleaving to its core mission, which is to breed, and a female penguin is being introduced. I do not suspect Harper of engineering this – global warming will fix penguins just as it will our grizzlies. But there could not be a better map for Harperland.The gun registry, basically a national logbook of rifle ownership set up after the massacre of 14 young women in Montreal in 1989, is being killed. This will take place close to the anniversary of the slaughter. The data will be erased, despite protests from statisticians, archivists, women, men, the Mounties, local police forces, oh everyone.Why? I don't know, why does the Daily Mail mock fat women for being fat? Because it's fun to do! Quebec, the only province with courage, is enraged. Why deliberately anger the French, so dignified and civilised? Because it's fun to do!Harper does indeed have a Daily Mail plan. He has just signed a border agreement that will let the US department of homeland security know about every Canadian who travels, when, where and with whom. He is "harmonising" our food inspection with the Americans, and if you've seen Food Inc, you'll know that means E coli isn't just for meat any more. It's in walnuts, it's in flour, it's in you.He is building a vast prison system to be populated by an American-style mandatory-sentencing plan that even the Americans are abandoning after decades of failure. Harper's social agenda is up next. Gay marriage? Check. Abortion rights? Check. Former prime minister Jean Chrétien is even predicting a return to the death penalty.Yes, my country has gone tabloid, full of resentments we didn't even know existed until they were stirred up by this peculiar man. He can't even get his Christmas card right. He sent out his family photo this year, with his wife (looking deeply unhappy as she always does) and children in almost the same clothes as last year but different poses. He won't say why.I suspect he made them pose twice in 2010 – c'mon, take one for the team, Laureen – fearing they might not be as obedient in 2011. I'm hoping Canada looks as sullen as a Harper family portrait when they show up to vote in the next election.