Is the mark of a good festival the feeling at the end that you wished you'd caught more bands? In the instance of North By Northeast, that meant Permanent Bastards, Whiteboy Slim, Calm Down It's Monday, Yukon Cigar and Shit La Merde, that last a nod to Canada's multilingualism. Not that there seemed to be a particular buzz about any of these at NXNE, but an intriguing name is as good as any come-on when faced with over 400 acts in the course of three nights.Could NXNE be the new South By Southwest? Every year what seems like the entire British music industry decamps to Austin, Texas, for SXSW and the search for the latest breakthrough bands. But given that Main Street on Saturday night could well be mistaken for Camden Town come chucking out time, what hope is there for anyone to discover something truly new? And for anyone wanting to demonstrate that they're ahead of the curve, what could be better than disappearing to NXNE in Toronto instead?In the end, it didn't prove quite as easy as that. In Austin, it's hard to escape the festival whereas in Toronto at the weekend, it was sometimes hard to find the action. Stumbling along Queen Street West on Friday night, there was a NXNE-participating bar or club every couple of hundred yards, but there weren't crowds spilling into the street or queues forming outside the hottest venues - and this despite the fact that a three-day wristband guaranteeing entry to every gig was a snip at $29. Plenty of Torontons to whom this correspondent spoke seemed unaware that there even was a music festival happening in the city. And that's partly, alas, because no-one could plausibly argue that the NXNE line-up represents the bleeding edge. Top-line speakers at the conference that complements the live action included Thomas Dolby, Hugh Cornwall from the Stranglers and Radio 2's Whispering Bob Harris. Perhaps the most famous act playing the festival was Evan Dando.It would help, if NXNE does want to emulate the pulling-power of its Texan inspiration, if a Canadian act like Arcade Fire could be roped in to feature.Set against that, there was the promise that the new Arcade Fire might be discovered. Certainly those happy clappy pop tarts (just joking) were the band most often cited as a reference point by others. The woman in the cinema queue who said that it was essential we see Hey Rosetta! on Saturday night told us that they were just like Win Butler and co. Well, they do come from St. John's, Newfoundland, they've got a fiddle and cello thing going on and the crowd packed into the Legendary Horseshoe Tavern on West Queen was keen. But of acts in that vein, I preferred David Martel and his band (the Friendships?) at the Hideout the night before; outside, the rain came down in sheets, while he captured something occasionally close to magical.Who else? At Reverb on the Friday, I was waiting to catch Southend's finest, These New Puritans, but caught a band called People In Planes first. Now, whether it was the Moosehead talking (beer, that is), or whether it's a second sign of a good festival... but while their brand of melodic rock wouldn't normally be my thing, they put on an euphoric show and left me wanting to track down their latest CD. And then of all places, it turns out they're from Wales.Nothing could, however top the over-the-top Semi-Precious Weapons. Friends in New York, where the band (could only) come from had warned me that they might have the new Darkness on their bands. Now that of course is a mixed blessing. But frontman Justin (see that comparison again?) finally had the crowd lapping him up, very almost literally. And then touchingly he stayed behind to sell some merchadise, claiming that one of the bands at NXNE get paid to play. Never mind, because plenty of Toronto's hot young things will now be showing off new 'I Can't Pay My Rent But I'm Fucking Gorgeous' bags.There was plenty more, too, some of it quickly forgotten, some of it lost to haphazard note-taking. Venues lured us in through the strength of their names, too. Bu alas, the Bovine Sex Club let us down. The Real McKenzies playing there on Friday night were billed as 'handsome, well-dressed young men who play Celti-punk with lots of bagpipes'. But it was worse than that because the first part of that tag could be investigated by the Trades Description bods.Otherwise, there was also a small film festival running by day. Do check out Tricia Todd's Agile, Mobile, Hostile if you get the chance - a documentary looking at a year in the life of rap forefather Andre Williams that is by turns harrowing and highly entertaining. Also, running concurrently with NXNE was the city's highbrow Luminato festival, staging gigs and art events, including an exhibition of recent paintings by Joni Mitchell called Green Flag Song. Now, she might be Canadian, and Canadians are the politest people on earth. So let's not say it sucked big time. Nitin Sawhney was also in town for Luminato, and played a live DJ set on Saturday night at Revival on College Street to a couple of thousand fans. By this stage, the Moosehead was really doing its thing, but I spoke to him after it, and I'm pretty sure he said he was only dimly aware of NXNE. So there's room for improvement, even if at the same time, Toronto proved a fine place to party.