Cheerful good manners, unwavering order and maple leaves as far as the eye can see. In the Great White North this can only add up to one of 365 things: Canada Day, or every other day of the year. To be sure, the country's decency and relentless good fortune are worth celebrating on this, its 147th birthday.Canada recently ranked fifth in the OECD's Better Life Index, and its cities routinely top lists from the most resilient to the most livable. But none of this justifies the year-round ubiquity of its national symbol. Admit it, Canada: you've got a maple leaf problem.As with the US's obesity crisis or Britain's functional alcoholism, Canada's maple leaf addiction is almost impossible to see from the inside. Only by moving abroad can one get a handle on the true scale of the thing.My epiphany came during a recent trip to Toronto, the city where I grew up. With mounting disbelief, then embarrassment, then resignation, I stopped counting maple leaves when I reached 40 – and that was before I'd cleared customs. There were maple leaves blushing on "welcome home" posters; maple leaf patches sewn on to rucksacks; maple leaves on replica shirts of Toronto's hockey team, the Maple Leafs; and special edition Toronto Blue Jays caps that replaced the team's logo, stubbornly resembling something other than a maple leaf, with a maple leaf; while outside, a be-leafed Air Canada plane bearing be-leafed airborne Canadians drifted leaf-like on to the runway.My partner, a Norwegian, was incredulous. In pride-averse Norway, she explained, the flag can be tastefully flown on only a few occasions each year – birthdays and national day – and edible Nordic crosses are unheard of. Granted, Canada isn't in Europe, where even the most benign expressions of nationalism should be treated as potentially apocalyptic. But maybe, just maybe, her compatriots are on to something.The rest of our trip brought more of the same: maple leaves winking in corporate logos, doubling as apostrophes, or floating gratuitously in the margins; maple leaf pavestones on the city's redeveloped waterfront; maple leaves tattooed on men's arms; and, of course, maple leaves hanging sheepishly in the background of Rob Ford apology news conferences. The country appeared to have finally done it: more Canadian things have leaves on them than don't.How did we get here? One easy answer is the leaf's versatility. The union jack renders brilliantly on a novelty hat – that's just a fact – but you wouldn't go squeezing it on to a pair of mittens. Conversely, stretch it any bigger than Geri Halliwell and it starts to overwhelm. Not so the leaf, which works at any size – on beer bottle caps to jumbo jet tail fins to, I assume, the leaf-shaped jacuzzi in Chad Kroeger and Avril Lavigne's marital en suite.A second, related answer is corporate red-washing. It's a known fact among US marketing departments that, all things being equal, the discerning Canadian consumer chooses the leaf-waving establishment every time. McDonald's knows this. So does Taco Bell. So do Sears, Target, General Motors and loads more with maple leaves added to their logos. But how to explain the leaves Canadians choose for ourselves? The biscuits, the sports paraphernalia, the tattoos? Cunning though they are, American fast food franchises can at worst be accused of simply exploiting, not creating, the demand. Here, I'm afraid, it's impossible to avoid the existential question that most Canadians would prefer not to acknowledge: if a tree falls in the forest and no one is around to carve a maple leaf in to it, is it basically just American?They may be unpleasant, but this question and others like it are the natural, even inevitable, consequence of a national identity forged on the edge of a global superpower. Over the course of its history Canada has traded one bit part for another, going from frozen colonial outpost to occasionally evident northern neighbour; source of beavers to source of Bieber. No wonder we assert our existence on every scrap of fabric, every sheet of paper, and every commemorative mug, coin and plaque in sight. We put maple leaves on everything, therefore we are.So by all means, Canada, go nuts with the leaves – today. As of tomorrow morning, admitting you have a problem is the first step to overcoming it.