Now is the morning after the night before. After all the election talk about "identifying efficiency savings" from Tories, Labour and Liberal Democrats alike, the politicians must come up with them. The outcome is to be announced next week by the new chancellor, George Osborne. It could set the tone of what may well be a short coalition parliament.Britain cannot pretend its heavy indebtedness can be ringfenced from the pressure building yet again across Europe. It must cut its deficit, or at least make a start, or at least show that it can make a start, on relieving a towering sum of some £163bn.There is no point in further name-calling and blaming. Labour claimed to have found £12bn in "efficiency savings" before the election. The Tories, and now the Liberal Democrats, are committed to finding £6bn more, allegedly "achievable without hitting frontline services". This means gouging cash out of Labour's much-abused bureaucratic overhead.But how much to cut, and how? The central Keynesian conundrum remains: how far should a government go in restoring market confidence – or rather in reducing the short-term cost of its debt – before it endangers a recovery that alone can relieve the debt in the longer term?This is the sort of question we were once told the economic modellers could solve with equations and computers. This has not proved the case. Economists have merely shown they can ask a better class of question.Every commentary that I have read on Osborne's predicament merely repeats the banality that he should be careful to avoid bankruptcy while not endangering recovery. It is like telling the helmsman to avoid both the rock and the hard place. Both the Liberal Democrats and the Bank of England governor profess to being converts to deeper cuts. But how deep?Osborne and his Treasury chief secretary, David Laws, must by now have some idea of the scale of cuts likely to calm the markets. They must have some idea of how much of the 2008/9 bank bailout can be repaid to the taxpayers, and how soon. They must have formed a view on how to phase spending cuts and tax rises over time, to encourage short-term demand while entrenching long-term discipline. These surely are tricks of their trade.Yet they have already made it harder for themselves by closing options and making mistakes. Osborne appears to have rejected the solution of fair pain for all, adopted by governments in Canada and Ireland. David Cameron cut ministerial salaries by 5% this year. It is hard to see why he has not done so across the entire public sector, perhaps reducing the cut progressively to 1% for the low paid.Such a "nuclear option", which could have realised £4bn-5bn of his target right away, required no further argument. Fairness is a great salve to pain. As it is, the Treasury must do battle across every mile of departmental territory, with rearguard actions fought by ministers in every corner.Another mistake was to ringfence some budgets – notably health, education and overseas aid – but not others. This was Margaret Thatcher's error in 1979, blessing special interests either because she promised at the election or because she just liked them, such as defence and the police. It doubled the agony of "Tory cuts" on the rest.Any observer of Whitehall's health and education quangocracy will be astonished if it is let off lightly. Labour at one point declared that £11bn could be found from health and £5bn from education overheads "without harming frontline services". Let's see those savings now.Osborne has named a few fat pigs for slaughter, such as the ID-cards computer and Labour's lavish consultancy budget, but his meadow is still packed with sacred cows. Retaining Trident and the aircraft carrier fleet is mere great-power posturing. Pretending that glamorous computer projects would yield "£2bn" more in savings is nonsense. If Osborne thinks a Whitehall computer ever saves money rather than spends it, he should name one. Computer projects to Labour ministers were like yachts to an oligarch, ostentatious eye candy.Other existing errors wait to be corrected. The government should liberate public institutions to manage their own business through recession. A deluge of abuse is about to erupt from the middle-class lobbies of higher education and the arts, which Labour turned into budgetary arms of central government. Not only are their pay and rations fixed centrally but their revenue is shackled. Universities should be freed to fix whatever fees they choose and museums to deal with their own entry arrangements. Osborne does not have to tell them what to do, merely stop telling them what not to do.Equally he should leave local government to take up some of the slack of the cuts – and thus some of the blame for them. Councils can be far more flexible than government in reordering priorities for spending on schools, clinics, roads and leisure. They can plug holes in the welfare state. They can absorb pain. But they cannot do so if their budgets are riddled with Treasury targets and controls, and their money-raising powers are curtailed. Cameron has cleverly built a coalition for cuts with others in parliament. He should build one with local government as well.The government has carefully rolled the political pitch for next week's cuts announcement, assisted by Liam Byrne's bizarre "no money left" epilogue on his own time at the Treasury. It can rightly blame Labour for the mess, but as of next week it must accept the mandate it was given by the electorate – to clear up the mess.This is not a matter of ideology. Nobody at the recent election wanted to see public services reduced or the recovery damaged. Britain has no need of Athenian riots in the streets to teach us budgetary management. The jobs of thousands and the welfare of millions depend on it.Osborne and Cameron need to seek a wider deal than any yet seen – intellectual as much as political – on how best to fix the deficit while causing least harm to the recovery. It should be a matter of economic science rather than political argument. But if argument there must be, it should be for political grown-ups – a coalition of the willing and the unwilling alike.