It came as a surprise to many when New Democrat leader Jack Layton announced in July that he would be stepping down from his post to recover from cancer. It was only weeks since his NDP had galvanised Quebec – and much of Canada – to leap from fourth party status to the official opposition, providing a fascinating finish to what had, at first, appeared as merely an election of process. Layton promised he would return to the House in September, but as Canadians woke to learn Monday, that won't happen; Layton passed away, leaving behind a grieving nation and a rattled party.The spring election in Canada will forever be the story of the rise of the NDP, (the "orange crush", as it was termed, with reference to the party colours) and the party's fulfilment of its promise of a commitment to proposing a "new vision of federalism, with progressive and social-democratic values" shared with Quebecers. Out of the 103 seats, it grabbed on 2 May, 59 of them came from Quebec. This, despite selecting many unknown, inexperienced candidates – one of whom famously took a vacation to Las Vegas during the campaign, and four of whom were still university students.That success was due entirely to Layton. The NDP's failure to achieve a breakthrough despite consistently gaining seats in each of the last decade's frequent elections, finally changed this spring. Against a backdrop of increasingly cynical Conservative and Liberal narratives, the NDP, by and large, refused to go negative. Layton's positive populism was further punctuated by his own personal triumph over an earlier bout of prostate cancer and his recovery from a recent hip operation.His damn-the-torpedoes approach had many wondering early on whether the campaign trail would take its toll. It appeared to do the opposite. The cane he carried to ease his sore hip soon became a symbol for the party itself: consistently battered, but gradually overcoming its failings.And after an early summer filibuster over the government's back-to-work legislation for locked-out Canada Post employees, the NDP were looking to regroup, hire the necessary staffers for such a rapidly expanding party, and settle in for four years' work. Which meant that it came as a shock when Layton appeared before cameras in July, gaunt and hoarse, to announce that he was yet again suffering from cancer.It was a different sort of shock when he simultaneously recommended that rookie MP and former public service union head Nycole Turmel as his interim replacement. It didn't help that only days after Turmel was approved by the party's national council as the interim leader, it emerged that she had been a card-carrying member of the separatist Bloc Quebecois up until January of this year – only months before she ran as a star NDP candidate in Quebec.Turmel is an unknown. A poll released last week showed that 42% of Canadians have no opinion of her. Those ambiguous feelings highlight a problem inherent in the NDP's characterisation of itself as Layton's party – one that may only be exacerbated with his passing.The NDP faces a tough fall. When the House sits again in September, Turmel will inevitably lead off "question period", and serve as the primary spokeswoman for a party that will no longer be sitting in a bizarre, expectant stasis resting on the assumption that Layton will return, but instead, rollicking toward a leadership race and a by-election in Layton's Toronto-Danforth riding.There are a number of high-profile possible alternatives for party leader. It was for that reason Layton appointed an MP with no long-term leadership goals – the party will need a figurehead, not a babysitter. No doubt, out of solidarity, the party will move forward cohesively in the short term, but eventually, the questions will come. Who will – who can – take Layton's place? What will new voters, driven to the polls by Layton's dogged determination, make of the new alternative? And how well will Turmel perform against an experienced and often fierce government message machine?Before he passed away, Layton penned a letter to Canadians (pdf). In it, he recommended that the NDP hold a leadership race sooner rather than later, perhaps in the New Year. As it did when Layton recommended Turmel, the party will no doubt heed his advice. However, in getting to that point, the NDP will be tested yet again.The fall was always shaping up to be an interesting one for the NDP, but even after Layton's announcement, there was the hope that it would not be such a sad one. The reaction to Layton's death Monday was universally one of grief. It is hard to argue that Canada is not a poorer place without his booming voice of righteousness echoing in through the halls of Parliament.To his last day, Layton encompassed in his personal style everything he wished his party to be: principled; unfailing in character; consistent in the dedication to progressive values; and forever a fighter. In his letter, he again reminded Canadians that a bright future is possible."Canada is a great country, one of the hopes of the world. We can be a better one – a country of greater equality, justice, and opportunity … Don't let them tell you it can't be done."And after thanking and encouraging his caucus, party members, Quebecers and Canada's youth, he signed off:"My friends, love is better than anger. Hope is better than fear. Optimism is better than despair. So let us be loving, hopeful and optimistic. And we'll change the world."