The Harris Learning Library is somewhat unique in that it serves the needs of a university and a college. Technology continues to bring rapid change to libraries in general and this library in particular: thousands of digitised resources are conveniently and instantly accessible to users regardless of their physical location, traditional library approaches are questioned, services evolve, and budget priorities shift. The need for information may not have changed significantly for users, but technology influences user preferences for how, when, what, where, and why they access information and library services.Reaction to every actionAccessibility to academic sources has improved but there are some challenges which I prefer to view as opportunities. Many of us have observed the double-edged sword effect: for every action there is a reaction. The library profession grapples with this in discussions that strive to balance the traditional with the new territory confronting us. These discussions are not specific to this library and we share many experiences in common with our colleagues. We too have noted declining circulation statistics and changes in face-to-face interactions at the reference desk, which we believe are related to technological advances and the increased accessibility of resources.Yet, as usage in one area falls, usage in other areas remains stable or has increased. Our library is filled to capacity and hums with activity – giving lie to the assumption that the physical entity of a library is no long necessary; libraries in their physical form provide a much appreciated haven and various amenities: access to equipment, study rooms, learning spaces, and in some instances cafes that offer another kind of sustenance for creativity.Demand for traditional approachesAlthough users are embracing digitised resources, they can be overwhelmed by the options, amount of content, and the multitude of resources. Navigating libraries' electronic resources for information is not necessarily as intuitive or attractive as using Google. Some users find ebook platforms off–putting and avoid them. Electronic articles are favoured, but many users dislike reading articles online and prefer to print articles to highlight and add their reactions to the content. Such preferences suggest that reading academic content online is not as easy or relaxing as reading recreational content online. Contemplating how much of the traditional could or might be left behind is more daunting to some than to others.Moving academic libraries forward into new territory should be multi-faceted. We know that librarians and library staff are essential to seeking information and experiences', instrumental to academic success; provide instructional support, and actively collaborate with faculty. However, we must communicate a message that clearly defines that essential role.Connecting with our users – in the virtual and physical sense – requires us to assess traditional approaches and find new ways to provide the service, while improving accessibility to research. Creating alternatives and enhancing access must meet the needs of the wide diversity of our users: international users, and those with physical and/or cognitive challenges. Many such adjustments are already well established, but recognising and anticipating opportunities for improvement continues to be a priority.Future depends on library staffAnecdotally we have observed the impact of the double-edged sword of change and identified areas of need; however, basing decisions on the anecdotal highlights the need to support librarians in their own research. Through more research, we can clearly articulate the user experience and effect change with confidence and knowledge. Building our research base will also strengthen our credibility with our academic colleagues. As we introduce change, certain principles must remain constant such as intellectual freedom, confidentiality of patron records, fair dealing, open access, resource sharing through consortia partnerships, and the contribution to society. These are traditional perspectives, but they are not antiquated ideas to be left behind.Library administrators are facilitators in shaping the future of the academic library, bringing the needs of library users together with the concerns of librarians, library staff and colleagues. The future of the academic library lies with many, but ultimately depends on our ability to harmonise the seemingly contradictory and competing principles of technology, budgets, library space, services, copyright, and open access. We cannot lose sight (or heart) of the many benefits academic libraries provide.It will seem clichéd to say this, but we are not seeing the demise of the academic library any time soon. These are exciting times and the library is vibrant and ever-evolving.Nancy Black is the executive director of library services at Nipissing University, Ontario, Canada. This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To get more articles like this direct to your inbox, become a member of the Higher Education Network.