A report by Transparency International (TI) criticised the UK for "lagging" behind other countries in enforcing the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development's 2007 Anti-Bribery Convention. But the UK was not the only country to come under fire.The report found that there was "little or no enforcement" of the convention by more than half of OECD governments (18 out of 34).While the UK was singled out for its decision to halt the investigation into BAE Systems, another of the largest exporters in the OECD, Japan, was also described as "lagging" in enforcement. The report said: "There is no centralised national office or unit for foreign bribery enforcement in Japan."TI recommended that Japan "enact an independent law specifically regulating the offence of foreign bribery". It said the country should "send a strong signal that they are seriously pursuing prosecutions".The UK and Japan were two of three G7 countries "showing a lack of sufficient commitment". The third was Canada.TI said Canada had an "inadequate definition of foreign bribery". It recommended "greater efforts within government agencies involved in foreign countries or with foreign trade initiatives to report up the line and ultimately to enforcement agencies about allegations of bribery".Although Italy was included in the countries showing "significant enforcement" TI said "the current situation [in Italy] is uncertain".The full list of countries showing little or no enforcement was: Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey and the United Kingdom.TI said the strongest performers in enforcement were the same as last year, namely France, Germany and the US, which are all among the largest exporters. The US was praised for allowing the greatest access to information and for the number of prosecutions and investigations it had pursued. "In 2007, the US Department of Justice and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) launched a record number of investigations, continuing a six-year trend. At the same time, penalties and fines have also grown dramatically," the report said. In Germany there were more than 43 prosecutions and over 88 pending investigations, including more than 200 since 2001, according to TI. The report highlighted a fine of €201m (£159m) imposed on Siemens in October 2007 in connection with charges involving bribery in Nigeria, Russia and Libya. In France, companies reportedly under investigation include Halliburton, Total SA and Alstom.Argentina and Australia were the only two newcomers to the "significant enforcement" category.The full list of countries showing "significant enforcement" is: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States.