Foreigners talking loudly about moving to Canada should "President McCain-Palin" or "Prime Minister Cameron" come to pass, take heed. My beloved country has just held a pointless election, a real doughnut, and made a fool of itself, courtesy of its prime minister.Oh God, I am so embarrassed.I'm taking the Canadian flag off my luggage tag and telling everyone I'm from Iceland. Now there's a shy puss of a country that screws up with elan.Is there some way I can blame George W Bush for Canada's humiliation? You betcha, as Sarah Palin would say. Our prime minister, Stephen Harper, a strange man with an awkward gait, an absence of social skills, and the dress sense of that guy at the back of the hardware store who sorts nails for a living, is alone in this world in that he still adores Bush. Just as the US is about to turf the man who brought them a disastrous war, Alp-sized deficits and an economic collapse that would give Herbert Hoover pause, Harper this week tried to turn his minority government into a majority one that would transform Canada into Bushworld, eight years after it was fashionable.He failed. And he failed with stasis, which is worse. There are three wings to Canadian political life. Harper, the Conservative PM, is a rightwing extremist, although he doesn't suck up like Cameron. He is an anti-choice, pro-prison, poverty-ignoring, food-safety-privatising, arts-ridiculing, Afghanistan war-loving, cowboy hat-wearing guy. The Liberals, the nation's natural rulers, are in the middle of the road like an expiring woodchuck. They are sensible people without passion; they own just the one house; they're New Labour without the ratlike cunning, without the Cherie, shall we say. The New Democratic party is old Labour.Harper began passing laws making Canada more like the States. His most complimentary adjective was "CEO-like". He wants life sentences for 14-year-old murderers, of whom we have maybe three in a nation of 33 million citizens. He wants to build more prisons, ban safe-injection sites for heroin addicts, privatise universal healthcare, make the foetus not just a person, but someone who can dress for success – you know the drill.And then he passed a law saying election dates had to be fixed, just like in the States. Weird, Canadians thought, but the governor-general can handle that.Suddenly last month, he thought he was sufficiently buff to win an election big-time, so he broke his own new law to call one. A week later, the world economic system collapsed. Canadians worry. We are still hewers of wood and drawers of water, but the spruce pine beetle is destroying our forests. And the Americans want our water to fill the fountains of Las Vegas. They have drones, we don't: they'll have our water.So if we're going down, if we're going to lose our jobs and move back in with our parents and spend a slate-grey winter watching Canadian Idol, we'd really rather not have a prime minister who, when confronted with his own small child at his school, reaches down and shakes the child's hand. We'd like a human being in charge. Hey, maybe someone who gets all emotional about mothers fretting at kitchen tables and such, like the Democrats have. Where's our Obama? Oh quit dreaming, Canadians. So we voted. As in the movie Groundhog Day, where the post-election morning was the same as the last one, with the result being another minority government born of a quiet desperation that won't be soothed until the Liberals get a new leader, not a sweet smart guy like Stéphane Dion, but someone with claws like Michael Ignatieff, a Canadian you Brits took to your bosom some years ago.Thanks for sending him back. It's getting hot here, our trees are sawdust and our ice is melting. Canada needs a smart decisive cynic. Anything to haul that crushed woodchuck off the road.