Most Canadians want to dump the British monarchy and change the constitutional system that may otherwise saddle them with a bewildered King Charles as head of state. We are emphatic about it, and have gone into the intensity of our dislike in two new polls in some detail. The courtiers fret.So what do you do, Britain, old sock old bean old pal? You send him here, at our expense, and he brings his second wife with him, she with the weird Prince Valiant haircut, to a country that still remembers Diana, Princess of Wales and how pretty and polite she was, even as a newlywed forced to watch 40 Newfoundland schoolchildren play the ukulele, badly.And what does he then do? He salts the insult by arriving in the same province of Newfoundland with her replacement and making a speech praising "the strength of the Canadian character". This, from an egotist who did his public duty by marrying Diana, but failed to keep his side of the bargain, thus destroying public fondness for the monarchy for generations. No wonder only 57 people showed up to meet the couple on Tuesday.Fling us a Diana, by all means – in 1983, 1986 and 1991, she delighted us – but we shall toss Camilla over the parapet the way the French threw cows at the Monty Pythonists.If Charles likes our character, I am minded to question it. If the Canadian character is stalwart, as Charles seems to define it militarily, we are about as enthused about our pointless mission in Afghanistan as the Americans are, or indeed the Brits. We flatly refused to go to Iraq in the first place. Therefore we are not stalwart.Are we dour? Yes, undoubtedly so. On Sunday I bought a bouquet of flowers for my neighbour's 90th birthday and walked into the ice-cream shop next door – it has a wonderful fug of fudge and chocolate – for two tubs of the macaroon variety. "Aaaargh!" a woman screamed. "It's either your perfume or the flowers but you're making me sick!" She rushed out of the store in hysterics. Ah, allergy politics.I was flummoxed. In Paris, you get blanked if you're not fragrant and bearing blossoms, but in Toronto if you're not wrinkle-enhanced, makeup-free, armpit-oozing and wearing that hideous Canadian classic, brown Lululemon yoga pants, you are not a woman.Was Charles praising this dourness, perhaps in hope that we'd haul Camilla to our breasts? If so, he got us wrong again.Are we polite? I used to think so, but the online comments of Canadians about the royal family place us only slightly below the level of vitriol of US Fox News viewers.Later in the tour he visits Montreal. French Quebecers, with justice, despise the British royals as much as they despise Ottawa and its current Conservative minority government. Inviting him was a calculated slap in the face to Canada's French population. What is the French character? Forthright if not sizzling. I look forward to its flowering in Montreal this week.Weirdly, the thing that most upsets Canadians about Charles is the notion of this jug-eared fool ending up on our currency. We can take the Queen's face (although schoolchildren do that folding trick with the $20 bill that turns her face into a bum) but we draw the line at Chuck.Money is somehow personal. The EU went bland with the euro to keep Europe happy. "Gates!" they said. "Everyone loves gates!" As I riffle though my wallet, I see Canada went for cosy. There are children playing hockey, an Inuit sculpture, oh look – a gate, and a menagerie on the coins: a beaver, a caribou and a polar bear.My editor asks, somewhat acidly, how any country that puts a bird called a loon on its dollar coin can object to Charles.And here we have found ourselves. The loon is the essence of the Canadian character. Only those who have never heard a loon call out across a vast lake on a still night can doubt its poetry. It is a wild call and a clear call, like John Masefield's, but unlike his, it's alive. It is a call of solitude and yearning, of the stops along the way to death. It speaks of a vast heartless cold landscape and the greatest aim of Canadians which is, as Margaret Atwood once pointed out, survival.We don't aim higher than that. It's a work of cunning if not genius to survive a Canadian winter. Hey, we do have a character after all!A loon is its blessed symbol and it has nothing to do with a silly man coddled like a buttered egg from birth who throws objects at his servants and screams: "I will be your king!"No, you won't, Charles, not if Canadians have anything to say about it.