After prime minister Stephen Harper's prorogation of parliament in late December, many Canadians spent much of January expressing their displeasure about the decision. An Ekos poll released mid-month revealed the Conservative party's dip in popularity since Harper's decision to prorogue, and a Facebook group called Canadians Against Proroguing Parliament (Capp) grew exponentially to over 200,000 members. The group encouraged those online to bring their opinions to the street in rallies held nation-wide this past Saturday, and for the most part, they were well attended.As it turned out, in Vancouver (and, it seems, the rest of the country) the rally, while populated by members of the online community, was still dominated by the usual groups. There were the unions, members of the Green party, the Communists – the same type of people who might be present at the inevitable anti-Olympic rallies next month, and who are regular victims to the derision of anti-protesters. But the key bulk of Canadian voters were still missing, happier to shop on Robson Street than shout slogans.In the Globe and Mail last week, Jeffery Simpson opined: There was a time when the Liberal party stood for three things: a strong central government, an activist state that tried to redistribute income and opportunity, and an internationalist foreign policy.It wasn't just the way the Liberals used to think of themselves. For the most part, a lot of Canadians still feel that way – that we are an altruistic bunch of globally concerned, socially responsible citizens. It's an image that the Harper Conservatives still promote, and it's one based on humanist principles. The problem with it is that it's not really accurate. This was the inherent problem with the anti-prorogation rallies; they weren't speaking to what Canadians really care about, which is their pockets.When Jean Chretien (a Liberal) won a resounding victory over the Progressive Conservatives in 1993, it was partly due to his promise to rid Canada of the new Goods and Services Tax (GST) that Brian Mulroney had introduced two years prior. For the next 10 years, Chretien repeated his promise again and again, until he finally stepped down amid the sponsorship scandal. When Harper had the chance to run for prime minister, he picked up where Chretien left off, and committed to a 2% decrease of the GST. He won.In the 2008 election, before the global recession had taken hold, Harper won his current minority government by effectively tarring then-Liberal leader Stephane Dion's Green Shift environment plan as a carbon tax, and pounced upon the suggestion that he might raise the GST. The Liberals thought they could appeal to the kind of voter that Jeffery Simpson accidentally describes, but the Tories knew that they could appeal to the kind of voter that actually exists – the one who would rather have a glorified retail manager at the helm of their government than a leader.In Ottawa on Saturday, current Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff, fresh from a national university speaking tour, addressed the rally on Parliament Hill. His continued failure to inspire Canadians speaks exactly to the true source of our current apathy. In a rousing speech to his party in September, Ignatieff cited the government's failure to "protect the most vulnerable," "defend healthcare" and "create jobs" as reasons that it should no longer continue. But as it turned out, nobody cared, and the Tories survived by trumpeting the success of their Economic Action Plan.As the Vancouver rally wound its way through the downtown core, it received some response from drivers and on-lookers, mostly by way of a muted car horn or a small cheer. For the most part, though, spectators stared at the signs, trying to make heed of what exactly all the fuss was about. It all looked good: Canadians out on the streets, speaking their minds put forth the image that change is coming. But change only comes in Canada when our wallets are involved.In theory, this weekend's rallies were a success in the same way any political rally is: they received media attention and were well attended. But Canadians are confused. Our national pride – the same that will be on display during the Winter Games – is based on socially progressive principles that we no longer really care about; what we really want addressed is our tax dollars. Canada is not unique in this respect, but perhaps it's time we started to accept that.