An investigation has revealed 3,000 fake civil servants who receive monthly salaries from the government despite holding no official positions. Some suspects have been arrested, including fraudulent state employees with counterfeit diplomas and fake assignments, officials said. Gabon's civil service employs 70,000 workers serving a population of 1.5 million. The government launched an overhaul of its civil service in 2009 after estimating that there were up to 10,000 fake employees, costing the central African nation 24 billion CFA francs ($50.3m) in salaries a year.Women consistently outperform men at securing top jobs in the Irish civil service, according to a report published by the top level appointments committee this week. While women only represent 24% of applicants, they succeed in higher proportions at all stages of the civil service application process. Five years ago 12.5% of appointments were female, but since 2010 women have accounted for 41% of appointments. The report also highlights an increase in the number of private sector candidates for civil service positions.The union representing Quebec's civil servants has backed a controversial charter of values which would ban public employees in the province from wearing religious symbols, including hijabs, turbans and large crucifixes. Union president Lucie Martineau said that civil servants are obliged to keep their personal opinions to themselves, and that should be extended to include religious opinions. Critics of the charter say it is a bureaucratic mess and unconstitutional.The vice president of China, Li Yuanchao, praised Hong Kong's civil servants for their contribution to the city, at a meeting with a delegation of 11 permanent secretaries in Beijing on 12 September. Li said the civil service played an important role in maintaining Hong Kong's stability, prosperity and autonomy. He also said the Chinese central government fully supports Hong Kong chief executive Leung Chun-ying's administration.It will take 120 years for women to make up half of world leaders and more than 50 years before they are equally represented in parliaments worldwide, warned a report by international development charity Voluntary Service Overseas (VSO), released on Tuesday 10 September. The report, Women in Power: Beyond access to influence in a post-2015 world, found that just 13 out of 193 heads of government are women, one in five of the world's parliamentarians is female, and women hold 17% of ministerial positions worldwide and just 10 of the 195 mayorial positions in capital cities.More than 150 VSO volunteers met MPs in Westminster to ask the UK government to lead the way in tackling this injustice. VSO UK Director, Angela Salt, said: "Every day, VSO's volunteers see first-hand the barriers women face in political and public life. Women's voices must be a part of the solution to poverty. It is about making sure women everywhere have an equal say in public decisions affecting them, their family, community and country. With the UN working towards a new global development agenda, it's time for the UK to demonstrate its commitment to women's rights across the globe."VSO works in countries such as Tanzania, Nepal and Cameroon to boost women's influence over public life.