A fellow traveller once told me that there are only two possible emotions in an aeroplane: boredom and terror. I'm more inclined towards tedium, give or take the occasional in-flight movie, but I experienced both in the course of a day spent travelling between Santiago and La Serena in Chile 10 years ago. On paper, the flight looked simple, but thanks to the coastal fog that's a feature of La Serena, it was anything but. The pilot eventually decided it was too dangerous to land, although, scarily, he tried twice. We headed back to Santiago, where we spent an hour on the ground, before flying north again. The fog was still there and we duly failed to touch down for the third time that day. All this to explain why the prospect of returning to La Serena recently brought back clammy-palmed memories. But I was willing to make the flight in a small plane for the sake of a grape. The nearby Elqui Valley makes some of Chile's best Syrahs and, as a self-confessed lover of the variety, I wanted to learn what makes it so good. Is it the, er, convergence of cosmic and tellurgic energies, which draws New Age travellers to the area, or is this just a brilliant place in which to grow northern Rhône-style reds? I think it's the latter: a combination of altitude, wind, soil types, diurnal temperature variation and that thick morning fog gathering over the Pacific.There are only 38 hectares planted here, but they are leading a Syrah revolution in Chile. When Viña Falernia's 2002 Syrah won a trophy at the Wines of Chile Awards in 2005, even Chileans were amazed. "Que?" they said. The Elqui Valley had always been considered a pisco area, but thanks to Falernia and its winemaker, Giorgio Flessati, it has become one of the country's most talked about regions.Syrah's profile is on the up, generally. The country's winemakers may traditionally have been obsessed with Bordeaux varieties - the first Chilean plantings weren't made until 1994, by Viña Errázuriz in Aconcagua - but Syrah is starting to emerge as a serious rival to Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot, with distinctive regional styles in Aconcagua, Limarí, San Antonio, Colchagua and Elqui.If you want to taste the differences between them, which are differences of winemaking approach as well as origin, start with The Wine Society's spicy, well-priced Chilean Syrah Elqui Valley (£5.75, 14.5%, The Wine Society, 01438 740 222), made by Viña Falernia. Next, try the elegant, pepper-spicy 2006 Maycas del Limarí Reserva Especial Syrah, Concha y Toro (£12.99, or £9.99 each for two, 14.5%, Majestic). And then finish off with two bolder reds: the rich, minty, blackberry fruity 2007 Errázuriz Max Reserva Syrah, Aconcagua (£9.99, or £7.99 each for two, 14.5%, Majestic) and the powerful, fruit-packed 2006 Montes Alpha Syrah, Colchagua (£10.99, 14.5%, Waitrose), which also contains a little Cabernet and Viognier.You'll have to spend a little more, but if you want to get your hands on something really special, buy a bottle of the 2007 Matetic EQ Syrah, San Antonio (£18.49, or £14.79 each for two, 14%, Majestic; The Wine Society has the 2005 at £14.95). This is fast becoming one of the great reds of the southern hemisphere: a wine with spice, structure, cellaring potential, seamless oak and a finish that goes on and on. Matetic planted its first Syrah vines as recently as 1999, the same year that Viña Falernia got started in Elqui. San Antonio is another recently developed wine region, which has only emerged since essential irrigation water was pumped there from the Maipo River in the late 1990s. We should be thankful it was. There are several good producers of Pinot Noir and Sauvignon Blanc in the area, but only one that makes world-class Syrah. Buy some now, before the price goes up.2007 Chartreuse de Bonpas Réserve Côtes du Rhône£8.99, 14%, Sainsbury'sYet another example of the wonderful 2007 vintage in the southern Rhône: an opulent, unoaked, Grenache-based red with aromatic berry fruit.tim.atkin@observer.co.uk, timatkin.com