Hortensia Bussi de Allende, who has died aged 94 in Valparaíso, was the widow of Salvador Allende, the socialist president of Chile from 1970 to 1973. Known by everyone in Chile as "La Tencha" (from Hortensia), she became the symbolic rallying figure of the Chilean opposition to the dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet in the years after the 1973 coup in which her husband died. She lived for most of those years in Mexico but travelled the world to campaign against the Pinochet regime, finally returning to Chile in 1988.Hortensia Bussi was born in Valparaíso, a Chilean naval port, to a well-off family. She was the daughter of an officer in Chile's prestigious merchant marine, and studied in Santiago to be a teacher.She met Allende, the socialist senator for Valparaíso, in the aftermath of the Chillán earthquake of January 1939 which destroyed the cities of Chillán and Concepción and killed more than 30,000 people. The pair were involved in the campaign for those made homeless by the earthquake and married a year later. He was then, as minister of health in the Popular Front government of Pedro Aguirre Cerda, at the start of his political career.A proud, attractive and aristocratic figure, Hortensia Bussi was a non-political wife, but she accompanied him in his unsuccessful campaigns for the presidency in 1958 and 1964. She was a delightful and entertaining woman, as I discovered when I took her shopping in the King's Road, Chelsea, in the 1960s. With Allende's eventual triumph in 1970, Hortensia became the first lady of Chile, a task that she performed with elegance and grace amid the turbulent politics of the time.The determination of the US government of Richard Nixon to overthrow the Allende government, coupled with the fierce opposition of conservative forces in Chile that held a majority of seats in Congress, created an atmosphere of permanent political crisis that was not resolved until Pinochet's coup in September 1973.Although "La Tencha" was the first lady, it was no secret in Chile that Allende spent half the week with his diary secretary and longtime lover Míriam Contreras, who had a home on the slopes of the Andes at El Cañaveral. Known as "La Payita", she had been a neighbour in the 1950s and became Allende's close political friend and adviser, with an office in La Moneda, the presidential palace. Her son Enrique was killed in the coup, and she went into exile in Havana, Cuba, where she kept in close touch with those members of the Allende family who were also exiled there. She died in Chile in 2002.The coup brought bombing raids on the palace and on the Allende home at Tomás Moro by Hawker Hunter jets bought from Britain, then the pride of the Chilean air force. Hortensia Bussi survived these attacks at her home, but her husband committed suicide in the palace while under siege, a historical echo of the death in 1891 of José Manuel Balmaceda, a president who ruled in a comparable period of conflict. She was flown by the military to a secret burial for her husband in Valparaíso, but the coffin was sealed and she was unable to verify the cause of death. She left immediately for Mexico, where she was greeted by the entire cabinet of President Luís Echevarría.The coup that overthrew Allende was in many ways the making of Hortensia Bussi. She had lived for a long time in the shadow of her unfaithful husband, and, uninterested in the perennial squabbles of the Chilean left, the coup turned her into a significant political figure in her own right. As Allende's widow, she became a famous campaigner for human rights as well as a symbol that helped to unify Chile's fractious exiles, an immense diaspora spread all over the world. She travelled to east and western Europe, to the Soviet Union and China, and to the countries of Latin America that broke free from military embrace. Everywhere she addressed meetings and conferences to keep alive the spirit of the Chilean democratic tradition. She unveiled road signs and streets named after her husband, and was even a candidate in 1977 to be rector of Glasgow University.The US was less welcoming, frequently denying her a visa and then being forced to give way after legal challenges. She remained an indefatigable campaigner, returning to Chile in 1988 as the country prepared to reject Pinochet's rule in a referendum. Elections in 1990 brought a new coalition government of which her husband's Socialist party was a member.She settled back in Chile but played no further part in public life. She was rarely seen outside her home in the subsequent two decades. Yet thousands attended her funeral last week, including President Michelle Bachelet and former presidents Ricardo Lagos and Eduardo Frei.Hortensia Bussi had three daughters with Allende: Isabel, Beatriz and Carmen Paz (the novelist Isabel Allende is a distant cousin). Prolonged exile took its toll on the family. Beatriz, known as "Tati", married a Cuban and lived in exile in Havana, committing suicide there in 1977, while Allende's younger sister Laura, once a Socialist party deputy for Santiago, also committed suicide there in 1981 after being diagnosed with terminal cancer.Carmen Paz and Isabel, a Socialist party deputy in Congress, survive their mother.• Mercedes Hortensia Bussi Soto de Allende, teacher and campaigner, born 22 July 1914; died 18 June 2009