Patricio Guzmán, the director responsible for The Battle of Chile (1975-1979), widely regarded as one of the towering achievements in the history of documentary film, is talking about its invisibility in the country where he was born. "It has never been transmitted on Chilean television. It provokes fear among executives. They do not dare. When all of us are dead then someone will dare to put it on screen. Meanwhile, every time someone on television is talking about Allende, they steal images from my film but use them in a context different from the original."The Battle of Chile emerged during a period of revolutionary turmoil across Latin America. Mass movements against authoritarianism and for socialist emancipation were on the rise. A generation of insurgent artists – among them Glauber Rocha in Brazil, Santiago Alvarez in Cuba, Mario Handler in Uruguay, Fernando Solanas and Octavia Getino in Argentina – developed a militant cinema that used documentary as a tool for countering state lies, showcasing subaltern testimonies and fashioning brave new aesthetics.Guzmán, who was born in 1941, returned to Chile in 1971 after studying feature film-making in Madrid. There he found Salvador Allende, the first elected Marxist national leader in the west, in the early stages of his nationalisation and land redistribution programmes. He detected – and exulted in – a mood he has called "communal infatuation". But powerful reactionary forces soon mobilised. The Battle of Chile, split into three parts and lasting 260 minutes, chronicles the mounting tension that led to a coup d'état and the establishment of Augusto Pinochet's military junta.Made by a young team, it's an outstandingly photographed example of a newsreel film that captures the drama and volatility of the period. It features some indelible shots, most notably those of Argentinian cameraman Leonard Hendrickson, targeted by a right-wing soldier, capturing his own death on camera. Not only does it ignore "expert" commentary to focus on giving voice to the radical questioning and utopian strivings of Chilean working people, it offers an indictment of the CIA that bankrolled the reactionary putsch.The Battle of Chile nearly didn't happen. A blockade on film imports meant that Guzmán relied on the generosity of Chris Marker, director of La Jetée (1962), to send him 25,000 feet of stock. The violent clampdown on dissent that followed Pinochet's takeover meant the film had to be smuggled out of the country on a boat with the help of the Swedish embassy, only arriving in Stockholm three months later. The crew were all detained and, in late 1974, cameraman Jorge Müller was "disappeared". Guzmán himself, by now exiled in Europe, sank into depression."I'm a film-maker who was very marked by the ways of the dictator," he says today. "It has remained with me forever. I cannot leave it behind." Many of his subsequent documentaries – Chile, Obstinate Memory (1997), The Pinochet Case (2001), Salvador Allende (2004) – are devoted to honouring those men and women who, in spite of Pinochet's secret police and death squads, fought for social justice."Nobody knows what Pinochet did and nobody likes to talk about it," Guzmán says. "The school texts make no reference to it. When professors try to give their own opinion the next day parents come and say, 'I don't want you politicising my children.' It's impossible to talk about these things. Neither the teachers nor the fathers: they don't talk to their children, and of course the political system doesn't do it. They have tried to erase a whole section of history, and so obviously most young people are amazingly uninformed."His latest film, Nostalgia for the Light, is perhaps his most remarkable to date. It's a meditative, moving cine-essay ("For me the camera is like having a pen to write," he says) in which Guzmán visits Chile's Atacama Desert, one of the driest places on the planet and home to the world's largest telescopes. There he listens to astronomers talking about light, matter, and the secrets of the cosmos. He also accompanies septuagenarian women who trek across the desert, spades in hand, scouring its petrified expanses for fragments of their disappeared sons' bodies.Far from being a barren wilderness, the desert is what Guzmán calls a "vast open book of memory". Fish, molluscs, mummified objects, Indian fortresses, pre-Columbian rock carvings – the Atacama preserves traces of the past. The women uncover fingers, teeth, parts of skulls – important remnants of individuals Pinochet's regime intended never to be found. And up above them all are the stars at which concentration-camp detainees in the 1970s and 1980s used to look up, a sky imbued not only with ineffable beauty but the yearning and melancholy of those incarcerated below it.Post-Allende Chile was a laboratory for Chicago-school monetarism; political repression and an aggressive embracing of the free market were inextricably linked. Nostalgia for the Light, as if in response to Pinochet's 1974 speech about how the new Chilean economy would involve "scrubbing our minds clean", talks about the violent exploitation in 19th-century mines and links political disappearances to the erasing of entire places inflicted by capitalism. "First there were the Spanish Conquests," Guzmán explains. "They came and massacred the Indians. Later the Chileans also killed the Indians – from the north and from the south. Chile has a similar history to the United States in that way. It was a South American Far West. Afterwards, Pinochet represented the same kind of path – which was terrible." Today, among younger Chileans, he sees signs of an awakening. "The student movement is demanding not just better education but better health, salaries – and a better memory. It's a social movement in its own right."However, Guzmán is keen to downplay the widespread belief that he is first and foremost an ideological filmmaker. "I'm not a sociologist. Neither am I a politician. I make films that are metaphorical and poetic; I interpret reality through my own personal way of looking." Many of his essay films, rarely seen in this country – Robinson Crusoe Island (1999), Madrid (2002), My Jules Verne (2005) – are deft, associative driftworks that support this assertion.When he was young, Guzmán wanted to be an astronomer. He sees the astronomers in Nostalgia for the Light – especially the startlingly eloquent Gaspar Galaz – as artists. "They work, not only with mathematics, but with their intuition. They have to be instinctive about where to look to find something interesting. They are searching without any security about what they will find. As for making films: when you look through a camera it's not very different from looking through a telescope."Guzmán himself could be said to be looking at Chile through a telescope. For many years he has lived in Paris, part of the huge artistic diaspora after Pinochet took power. I ask him if he now feels he's a French director. "Each of us carries a backpack on our shoulders; this bag cannot be removed. One carries it one's whole life. In this bag one carries a lot of important things. For example: the memory of your mother, your birthplace, the first day at high school, your first love, your first lovesickness. All this is never forgotten."That is the true homeland – somewhere you live during the first 20 years of your life – and that accompanies you until death. It is not necessary to be in a particular country to feel Chilean, Peruvian and Argentinian. One's homeland is carried in the depths of one's heart."• Patricio Guzmán: The Power of Memory is at the BFI until 26 July.