Chile has been shaken by dozens of aftershocks after a powerful earthquake toppled buildings, killed at least 11 people and forced the evacuation of more than 1 million people.The magnitude 8.3 tremor on Wednesday night lasted for three minutes, and caused a series of tsunami surges – some as high as 4.5 metres (15ft) – which swamped towns along the Chilean coast. Tsunami warnings were triggered in Japan, New Zealand and Russia, as well as the US states of California and Hawaii. After a night in which at least 40 aftershocks hit the region – including one at magnitude 7 and seven at magnitude 6 or above – daylight revealed scenes of wreckage and ruin for hundreds of miles along the Chilean coastline.In the port city of Coquimbo fishing boats were tossed across streets, roads were blocked by rockslides and streets were filled with piles of devastated adobe houses.In Illapel, near the epicentre, residents appeared dazed at daybreak as they wandered the streets, searching for loved ones and awaiting the restoration of electricity and other basic services. Army troops were being rushed to the scene.Many of the townspeople had been forced to sleep on the ground outside their destroyed homes. “I thought it was the end of the world and we were going to die,” Manuel Moya told the Associated Press, as he stood next to the ruins of his home. “Everything is a mess. It was a disaster, a total loss. Bottles and glasses shattered and the pipes in the bathroom and kitchen burst,” restaurant owner Melisa Piñones told Reuters.Tongoy, a fishing village popular with tourists, was also hit hard by the first tsunami waves, which made landfall just 25 minutes after the initial earthquake. Several seaside shops and restaurants were completely destroyed.In the popular tourist town of Concón, dozens of coastal restaurants were flooded and nearby surf schools destroyed by the series of waves that flooded distinct areas of the coast. Makeshift altars and lit candles marked the spots where residents had died.The Chilean president, Michelle Bachelet, began a tour of damaged areas in the town of La Serena, near Coquimbo. She had previously cancelled her participation in many of the nation’s independence day celebrations scheduled for Friday.“We’re going to have go on the ground to see what the damages are and see where help is needed,” Bachelet said.The earthquake came at the beginning of a four-day national holiday and hundreds of thousands of Chileans had already travelled to the coast. But mass evacuations were largely orderly, as Chile’s national emergency office has run repeated practice evacuations following the massive 8.8 earthquake in February 2010. That quake and the ensuing tsunami killed more than 500 people, destroyed 220,000 homes and washed away docks, riverfronts and seaside resorts.On Wednesday night, panic erupted in Coquimbo where an estimated 40,000 revelers were gathered to inaugurate the nation’s largest independence day celebration late on Wednesday evening. The quake hit just as mayor Cornelio Andrade was on the podium and set to cut the ribbon. “It felt like the earth was splitting open,” Andrade told reporters. “The women began to scream the names of their children who were playing. It was a stampede, everyone was trying to get out.”Chile’s ministry of the interior and public security said 20 people have been injured, but phone networks remain down in parts of the country so the full extent of damage and injury is not yet known.Schools have been closed in several regions. The interior ministry’s national office of emergency has urged people not to return to their homes until they are told it is safe to do so.The quake also sparked fears tsunamis could surge across the Pacific Ocean, with countries as far away Japan, New Zealand, Russia and the US states of California and Hawaii issuing warnings.A watch was issued for the California coast: “A tsunami capable of producing strong currents or waves dangerous to persons in or very near the water is expected. The first wave may not be the largest.”A tsunami advisory for Hawaii said a “major tsunami” was not expected but it warned of sea-level changes and strong currents.The New Zealand minister for civil defence, Nikki Kaye, urged east coast residents in the path of any potential tsunami to stay out of the the ocean, out of boats and off beaches.The Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre said waves reaching one to three metres above the tide level were possible in French Polynesia, and that waves reaching 0.3 to one metre above tide level were possible for some coasts of New Zealand, Fiji, Hawaii, Mexico, Ecuador, Peru, Japan, New Caledonia, Samoa, Russia and other Pacific territories.The PTWC later downgraded its warnings for some areas, including Hawaii. “However, sea-level changes and strong currents may occur along all coasts,” it said, warning that larges swells arriving between five minutes and one hour could be ongoing.The power of the initial earthquake was such that it could be felt across swaths of South America.In the Chilean capital, Santiago, more than 230km (140 miles) from the epicentre of the quake, buildings swayed and thousands fled their homes to take refuge in the streets.Car alarms were set off in Buenos Aires – more than 1,100km (680 miles) away on the Atlantic side of the continent.Public buildings, including the campus of the University of Buenos Aires, were evacuated. High-rises in the neighbourhoods of Belgrano and Palermo swayed so much that many ran out into the streets. Other Argentinian cities including Rosario and Mendoza reported mass evacuations.Chile is one of the world’s most earthquake-prone countries. Just off the coast, the Nazca tectonic plate plunges beneath the South American plate, pushing the towering Andes cordillera to ever-higher altitudes.