On another volatile day for the markets as France became the latest cause for concern, there were contrasting fortunes for two of the major mining companies.Anglo American added 30.5p to 2383.5p after it confirmed the sale of a 24.5% stake in its southern Chilean business to Japan's Mitsubishi for $5.39bn. However there could be problems with Chile's Codelco, which wanted to exercise an option to buy a 49% shareholding in Anglo's assets in the country. Codelco said it still wanted to buy the stake and Anglo must respect its option. It also hinted at possible legal action. But Dominic O'Kane at Liberum Capital said the deal - which valued Anglo's Chilean assets at around $22bn - was a clever one:Almost a week ago Anglo agreed to pay $5.1bn to buy South Africa's Oppenheimer family out of De Beers and take control of the diamond company. At the time there was speculation it could use the Chilean money to help fund the deal. But Kieran Daly at Macquarie suggested another possible use for the funds:Meanwhile Vedanta Resources fell 119p to £11.31 - a 9.5% decline - after disappointing half year figures. Headline earnings at the Indian mining group rose by 27% but underlying profits dropped 34% to $186.3m, partly due to aluminium losses, rising costs and the depreciation of the rupee.Overall the FTSE 100 finished 15.56 points lower at 5444.82 having traded in a near 140 point range. As Greece finally chose a new prime minister and Italy moved closer to doing the same, there was a calmer air for much of the day, with Italian bond yields edging below the key 7% level. But the mood turned slightly sour later, on talk that one of the credit rating agencies could place France on negative watch, given its banks' exposure to Greek and Italian debt. Standard & Poor's later said a message had been issued by mistake suggesting the country's credit rating had been changed, but this was not the case.Back with the FTSE 100, Experian was the leading riser, up 42p to 826p as the credit information specialist unveiled a better than expected 20% rise in first half profits.A positive reaction to Morrisons results saw the supermarket group's shares add 11.3p to 317.8pBut Admiral fell another 67.5p to 820p in the wake of the car insurer's profit warning on Wednesday, which it blamed on increased personal injury claims. UBS cut its recommendation from buy to neutral saying:But Credit Suisse moved from underperform to neutral, saying:Among the mid-caps Homeserve recovered some ground after its recent plunge following misselling worries and fears of compensation claims. Its shares rose 37.5p to 256p as it said its priority was to tackle the problems it had encountered and was in "constructive and regular" dialogue with the Financial Services Authority. It said it had seen very few customers cancelling their policies. Panmure Gordon analyst Andy Brown repeated his sell recommendation. He said:But Joe Brent at Liberum kept his buy rating, saying:Rank rose 13p to 150p after it received the backing of the European Court of Justice in its battle with the UK tax authorities over alleged overpayment of VAT on bingo and amusement machines.Lower down the market social housing specialist Mears slumped 33p to 218.75p following a profits warning. The company said that in the wake of the government's decision to halve the photovoltaic feed-in tariff subsidy, it had decided to abandon its activities in this area immediately. As a result operating profit for the year would be £2.8m lower than expected, and it would also write-off £2m of costs associated with setting up the PV division. Chief executive David Miles said:Analyst David Brockton at Espirito Santo said:Joint broker Investec said: