Owners of the Chilean mine where 33 workers face months awaiting rescue have appealed to the trapped men for forgiveness.Alejandro Bohn, a co-owner of the San Esteban mining company, which owns the San Jose mine, faced questioning from a government committee investigating safety failures that led to the accident.Speaking about those presently underground, Bohn said: "The pain caused by this unwanted, unforeseen situation warrants we ask they forgive us for the anxiety they have suffered these days. It has been a terrible situation and we hope it ends very soon."His remarks came as Nasa medical advisers told the miners they should not be given any alcohol, for now, to help make their plight less uncomfortable. Cigarettes seem likely to be banned for the duration of the rescue.The Nasa team, who recently arrived in Chile and have studied videos of the men, said celebrities and even astronauts might be called in to help boost their spirits. Food, dry clothes, sleeping mats, medical supplies, projectors, videos and games have all been sent down narrow boreholes since the men were found alive 10 days ago.The priority is to nourish the miners, who have lost an estimated 10kg (22lbs) each during the 17 days they lay undiscovered after a tunnel collapse. High-calorie, high-protein nourishment is needed, as the men will have to move thousands of tonnes of rock to help their own rescue before they can be lifted back to the surface."From the alcohol standpoint, we need to first get their nutrition up before we make any considerations there," said James Michael Duncan, Nasa's deputy chief doctor, according to Reuters news agency.Some of the men have also asked for cigarettes, and health officials have sent them nicotine patches and gum as substitutes. "It's an environment that's pretty enclosed and we don't want to contribute to any of the problems within the atmosphere of the mine," he said at a press conference in Santiago.There was a need to increase the miners' calorific intake, get them on a regular sleep schedule and ensure they remained optimistic. Duncan said: "These miners showed us tremendous strength in surviving as long as they did without any contact with the surface. What we want to try to avoid is any kind of situation of hopelessness on the part of the miners."The men have moved to a drier spot 200 metres down a tunnel from their previous camp. Constant humidity has made sleeping difficult and led to severe skin infections. With signs that they are susceptible to ailments ranging from depression to extreme weight loss, the ministry of health has established a strict daily routine."We provide medication, we do tests – measure their blood pressure, temperature and waistline every day," said the health minister, Jaime Mañalich. "We vaccinated them, and established an adequate daily supply of water and food so they can begin to recover."In what he called an end to a period of "stabilisation", Mañalich announced the priority was now to keep the men under constant medical supervision during their estimated three-month wait for rescue.The machine used for drilling the escape tunnel is expected to advance six metres a day. The Chilean president, Sebastian Piñera, has named the rescue mission Operation San Lorenzo, in honour of the patron saint of miners.