The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and clarifications column, Thursday June 19 2008In the article below we wrongly described the town of La Junta as being in Argentina. The town is in southern Chile, near the Chaitén volcano. This has been corrected. Survivors of a plane crash in southern Chile who spent five days huddled in a broken fuselage in sub-zero temperatures said yesterday they considered cannibalism during their ordeal, in an echo of an Andean plane crash 36 years ago.The Cessna 208 with nine passengers crashed into a mountainside in Patagonia, near La Junta, on Saturday. Recent volcanic explosions in the region have forced air routes out to sea, taking experienced pilots off their normal course. "We were flying in very bad conditons. There was rain and sleet. We were only 10 minutes from arriving," said Jose Miguel Almonacid, one of the survivors."Suddenly, we went into a cloud and when we came out, we were in front of the mountain. I managed to scream 'watch out' when I heard the explosion."On Wednesday afternoon a Blackhawk helicopter from the Chilean air force spotted the Cessna half buried in the forest, but due to wind, snow and the inaccessability of the site the rescue operation continued throughout Thursday, with the nine passengers and the body of the pilot still unable to be removed."There was snow, cold, too much snow and storms," said Almonacid. "We bunched up, that's it. We prayed a lot, because I am a believer in God and another companion as well. I was thinking about how badly they must be suffering because I imagined my funeral and all."The survivors and pilot huddled inside the felage, eating crackers and trying to maintain a fire in sub zero temperatures. Pilot Nelson Bahamondes survived the initial impact but slowly bled to death inside the cockpit, finally dying two days after the crash.Bahamondes, an experienced pilot with an estimated 16,000 hours of flying time, provided leadership and guidance throughout the first two days of the ordeal, explaining to the passengers that a radio transmitter would help rescuers locate the craft. As the food ran out, Bahmondes died. "He had a cut on his head, a big wound and he lost lots of blood," said Victor Suazo, a Chilean police officer who was aboard the flight. "We couldn't do anything for him and he died around noon on Monday." Soon after, the survivors' hunger began to deplete their strength and they debated whether to eat the pilot. "We thought about the pilot, I don't know how to say it ... to feed ourselves from him. We thought about this, but some people were not in agreement because the situation was already so extreme."The accident recalled the 1972 plane crash in which a Uruguayan rugby team crashed into Andean snowfields, then ate dead teammates to survive. The book and film Alive were based on their 72-day struggle to survive.