Former conscripts in Chile have offered to reveal details of murders and other crimes sanctioned under Augusto Pinochet's dictatorship in a move that could lead to some of the men receiving pensions and immunity from prosecution in return.The ex-soldiers say they want to end almost four decades of silence and share harrowing secrets about abuses they committed and witnessed. Some want to unburden their conscience, others to obtain immunity from possible prosecution or gain pensions and healthcare.Hundreds gathered in front of the presidential palace in the capital, Santiago, at the weekend to seek official recognition that they too were victims of the regime."Perhaps today is the day when the moment has come for us to describe what we saw and how we suffered inside the military bases, the things that we witnessed and that we did," Fernando Mellado, who leads the Santiago chapter of the veterans' group the Former Soldiers of 1973, told Associated Press.Mellado said Chile needed to understand what it was like for teenagers drafted into a feared security force which, according to an official count, killed 3,186 people after a US-backed military coup toppled the leftist president Salvador Allende in 1973.The dead included 1,197 "disappeared", some of whom were dumped from helicopters into the sea or buried at clandestine locations. Less than 8% have been recovered and identified."The moment has come for former military draftees to tell our wives, our families, the politicians, the society, the country and the whole world about the brutalities they subjected us to. I believe the moment has come for us to speak, for our personal redemption," said Mellado.He said about a quarter of the 8,000 recruits of 1973 from Santiago were willing to talk, but so far authorities had not grasped the opportunity.Since Pinochet's death in 2006, Chile has cautiously addressed his dictatorship's painful and politically awkward legacy. Other South American countries, notably Argentina, have been relatively bolder in tackling the crimes of their own military juntas.Some of the former Chilean conscripts who gathered in front of the presidential palace gave grisly testimonies. One confessed to shooting an entire family. Another, now homeless and an alcoholic, said he was forced to drown a seven-year-old boy in a barrel of hardening plaster.Jose Paredes, who served at the Tejas Verdes torture centre, tearfully recounted that his mission was to stand guard and listen to the screams. "They would end up destroyed, torn apart, their teeth and faces broken. There are things that I've always said I will take to the grave," he told Associated Press, before naming six officers who he said gave the orders.Hiram Villagra, a lawyer for families of the dead and disappeared, welcomed the offer of testimony. "Clearly there is no desire from our part for these soldiers to carry the burden of guilt of the officers, who were the ones who made the decisions," he said.