Propagating is probably the last thing on most gardeners' minds right now; many of us are preparing a firework display on our plots with dahlias, cannas and other exotica. Instead of impulse-buying at the garden centre, you can personalise your choice by filling trays and plant pots with seeds and divisions of a multitude of dramatic plants. Being tropical or subtropical, many will put on weight rapidly. Even if they don't make it into this year's chorus line, they can wait in the wings for next year's performance - and by then they may even make top billing.From Chile, Lobelia tupa is a million miles away from our normal tiny blue lobelia experience. It makes a bold, shrub-like plant with thick, grey leaves, red stems and strange, brick-red blooms that look more like Mayan bird masks than flowers.Sticking to the flaming theme, Agastache cana from Mexico (try a selection called 'Firebird') has vivid flowers in lipstick colours and tiny grey leaves that throng its twiggy, 60cm tall bushes and smell like aniseed. Sow the big, striated beans of the castor oil plant, Ricinus communis, now and they should germinate within a fortnight and make chunky little plants to put out in a month's time. With plenty of water and loads of sun, their big, crimson, palmate leaves could be a feature of the autumn border. But beware - this plant is poisonous in all its parts, especially the seeds. Kniphofia is pretty easy to grow from seed, too, and though the results may be unpredictable, that is half the fun.Coloured-leaved lobelia such as 'Tania' and 'Russian Princess' are descended from Lobelia cardinalis and L. x vedrariensis. They have fine seed, but once they have germinated and grown on they can be divided easily into separate rosettes and potted. Once established, they can then be transplanted into beds and borders; keep them to the fore, where their dense, dark foliage makes an arresting feature. You might even get blooms this season - in shades of shocking pink, vibrant vermilion and royal purple, their spires are scintillating but slender, easy to see through and as exciting an introduction to the hot bed as anything you could buy.