In Chile, we understand how the people of Christchurch are feeling. Sunday was the first anniversary of the 8.8 magnitude earthquake that struck our country. We know about falling down and starting again every 25 years or so. There have been four devastating earthquakes over the last 100 years.On Sunday, the Chilean media published the numbers to remember that day last year: the energy of the earthquake was equivalent to 100,000 Hiroshima bombs; 524 people died, 25 disappeared and 800,000 were affected by it. The damage costs reached $30bn: 1,500 km of roads, 4,500 schools, two airports, 53 ports, 56 hospitals were damaged and 220,000 houses were destroyed.Just a couple of weeks after the quake, Sebastián Piñera, the first rightwing Chilean president since 1958, assumed his duties. The ceremony was marked by two strong tremors and a tsunami alert. Like that first day, his first year has been marked by the earthquake's effects and what we call "the Reconstruction". For this first anniversary, the government released a document with their evaluation of this process, highlighting its achievements – among others, 100% of students attending school 45 days after the earthquake, and all roads, airports and ports working – though not all of them are completely repaired.But the big problem is the one which affects people more directly: housing. On the document released by the government, it is claimed that 80,000 emergency houses have been constructed; 75,000 of them on the affected families' own plots of land. There are another 4,291 families that lost their houses in the earthquake, but don't own any land. They are the ones who have been having the worst time during this year. They are living in 106 emergency camps, in extremely bad conditions. The government has not given them access to public services because, they say, it doesn't want temporary camps becoming long-term villages. So these families, including some middle-class families used to live renting or in their own houses, have been living this whole year without access to drinking water and sharing chemical toilets with their neighbours, among other privations. The centre for investigative journalism, Ciper, has revealed further problems: nearly 2,000 families living in these emergency camps are not going to receive any kind of help, because the government judges they don't fulfill the official requirements. Among them are people who have not been able to prove they were actually affected by the earthquake, and people who live on their own – though why the government decided that one-person households don't apply for this benefit is a mystery.These people represent the 40% of the camps' population, yet the government says that 80% of this population has already been granted housing benefits. The numbers don't match. This is not the first time the government has been caught trying to make their work look better than it really is. Last Thursday, it released a set of before-and-after pictures showing how different places were damaged by the earthquake and how they look like after their reconstruction. It didn't take long for people to realise that two of those "after" pictures were taken before the earthquake.The government did a mea culpa and said it was a mistake. But people are angry, and there have been protests. If they are obliged to spend, as seems likely, at least another year living in these camps, things may start getting ugly. The government should take more seriously the responsibility of helping the reconstruction of these Chileans' lives. To have their own houses again would be just the minimum compensation for people who lost everything.