Up to 200,000 people marched through Santiago yesterday. Students and teachers protesting over education were supported by the Chilean Trade Union Congress, which called on members to join the march. It ended with police turning water cannon and teargas on the protesters. But the protests aren't going away. For over a year now, this revolt has been developing. Mass protests and general strikes have shaken the government, as when 600,000 workers walked out last August.The main frontline of conflict is the country's education system. In 1981, the Pinochet regime dismantled free public education. Primary and secondary education is paid for by a vouchers system, which involves the government paying private sector providers to educate the young. Higher education is dominated by private professional and technical colleges, which cost up to £530 a month to attend. The state exists primarily as a regulator rather than a provider. As a result, working-class Chileans often receive at best a poor education, and students end up burdened with debts.But the demand for free education drives a popular wedge right into the country's economic structure. The students and workers say that the country's tremendous copper resources should be used to pay for reforms rather than to enrich investors. The struggles to change the constitution reflect a recognition that the political framework established by the dictatorship is itself part of the problem. Protesters look longingly abroad to Bolivia and Venezuela, where constitutional change has been part of the struggle against the old regimes.Regional protests have focused on the problem of "centralism", in which local needs are seen as being subordinated to the requirements of elites in the capital. In February, an uprising broke out in the Aysén region of Chile, in a struggle over privatised hydroelectric projects. But the demands of the citizens' assemblies went far beyond the specific issues at stake: they assailed the constitution imposed during the dictatorship, demanded subsidies for the poor, employment opportunities, and the democratisation of regional decisions on the exploitation of natural resources.Workers' struggles have erupted with surprising militancy. Earlier this week, workers at the construction company Skanska used backhoe diggers against police during a strike over working hours. This is especially significant as union rates are extremely low in Chile, and legal industrial action is very difficult. Last week, the relatively conservative president of the Chilean Trade Union Congress, Arturo Martínez, was defeated by the Communist party member Bárbara Figueroa. Martínez's reign had been disfigured by corruption, and he was seen as a pawn of the Socialist party. A number of militant student federations have appeared to challenge the moderate, Socialist party-aligned Confederación de Estudiantes de Chile (Confech), which initially led the protests. An increasingly visible leftist student movement is Consejos Estudiantiles, linked to the far left Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria, formerly a guerrilla movement which sought to build armed resistance to Pinochet.The demands of the movement are extremely popular. But Chile's president, Sebastián Piñera, is a billionaire who is estranged from the needs of most Chileans. Having been a supporter of the rightwing opposition to Pinochet, he has sought to continue the dictator's neoliberal policies. And, like Berlusconi, his wealth and free-market policies are tied to media interests: he purchased Chilevisión, now leased to the US media giant TBS, prior to assuming office. His approval ratings have plummeted throughout this season of unrest.In many ways, the pattern of unrest in Chile is repeating that in Quebec, and Asturias. In Quebec, an ongoing, militant student revolt centred on opposition to increasing tuition fees broadened into a call for a "social strike" bringing workers' demands to the fore. The student leaders asserted that the issue was one of class. Unions have provided logistical and legal support for the students, and the protests have spread through working-class neighbourhoods throughout Quebec. The unrest has already matured into a restless, broad-based social movement. Likewise, the Asturian miners' revolt escalated from a dispute over jobs into a wider conflict with the government, drawing in supporters across the country with a march on Madrid that attracted tens of thousands of supporters. A protest camp inspired by the Indignados movement was created by supporters in the regional capital, Oviedo.The tendency in these cases is for struggles that would previously have remained local, or sectional, to ignite a wider social rebellion aimed at concentrations of class power. In the context of a global crisis, localised flashpoints can no longer be contained. Diverse constituencies, from students and workers to local community groups, are finding that their aspirations are contiguous, their struggles linked. They have sought ways to unify their demands into a wide, frontal assault that cannot be contained or co-opted. In Chile, this has produced an incredibly optimistic, energised and combative left that dares to challenge the country's social order in a fundamental way for the first time in decades. The country that Pinochet terrorised is no longer afraid.