Majestic Wine said today that drinkers were switching to more affordable "New World" wines and Prosecco to beat the credit crunch.Britain's largest wine warehouse chain said consumers were looking for "value for money" with bottles from New Zealand, South Africa and Chile selling better than those from the eurozone. Sales of bottles of wine in the £20 plus price bracket - Majestic's average selling price is £6.41 - were up 14.4% on the year as Britons sought to create a restaurant-style dining experience at home, said chief executive Steve Lewis.His comments came as Majestic reported a 9% rise in first half profits to £6.1m. Like-for-like sales were up 5.4% in the 26 weeks to 28 September. He said Majestic expected to pick up market share from First Quench Retailing, the owner of Threshers and Wine Rack which fell into administration earlier this month, but does not want to buy any of its stores as it was "not interested" in high street locations.Off-licences have come under severe pressure in recent years due to the increasing dominance of supermarkets which account for 70% of the off-trade. First Quench had a 9% market share whereas Majestic has around 3%. Its administrators have already announced plans to close a third of the group's 1,200 stores. "The removal of capacity from the high street has to have a beneficial effect for us," said Lewis. The retailer has 153 warehouse-style stores and sees scope to add another 100 sites. Shares in Majestic, which have risen 78% over the last year, closed up 3.7% at 254p.After a year-long trial, Majestic changed its trading strategy this autumn, lowering the minimum customer purchase requirement from 12 to six bottles in a bid to make the chain more accessible to current and new customers. When the threshold was set at a dozen Lewis said many customers had only shopped once a year, adding: "Initial indications following the full rollout are encouraging."Majestic hopes higher sales to private individuals, which were up 8.9% in period, will offset weak demand from its business customers. Sales at its corporate business, which accounts for around a fifth of turnover, were down nearly 7%. "Every finance director in every company across the land has put a red line through corporate entertaining and gifting," said Lewis. "Whereas private customers, if you've got a compelling proposition, are still prepared to spend their own money."Alcohol has become a battleground of the big supermarkets chains over the Christmas sales period, with wines and spirits often used as loss leaders to lure shoppers into store.