I couldn't stand that silence, and the result was my play, Death and the Maiden. I wanted to look at the question of how we coexist in the same country, even in the same room, with someone who has caused us grievous, perhaps irreparable harm. Would we be able to resist taking revenge, if that revenge were made possible? My protagonist, Paulina Salas, captures the doctor she believes raped and tortured her many years ago, and puts him on trial in her beach-house. During one long day and night, she must try to extract a confession from that man. More crucially, she has to decide what, if any, violence she might inflict on him, whether to kill or spare him.The play opened at the small theatre upstairs at London's Royal Court in 1991, and won the Olivier award for best play, along with a best actress award for Juliet Stevenson. It was followed by a Broadway run with Glenn Close, Gene Hackman and Richard Dreyfuss, and then turned into a film by Roman Polanski. I was astonished by the play's success, mainly because it ended so ambiguously on so many levels. I did not let the audience know for certain if the doctor was really guilty, or what Paulina did with her prisoner. Nor did I resolve that central dilemma: how to seek justice and yet not lapse into violence, how to break the cycle of recrimination and retaliation?These questions have stayed with me, and are now the subject of a new play, Purgatorio, which can be read as an intellectual and emotional sequel to Death and the Maiden. In Purgatorio, I lock a man and a woman in a stark, bare room. She seems desperate to escape from what could be a hospital, or an insane asylum. The man, apparently her therapist, appears just as desperate to help her. But both have hidden agendas. Slowly, it will be revealed that they are both in the afterlife, kept there until they have atoned for crimes they have committed. Both are victims and both are perpetrators; both are patients and simultaneously healers.Why return to the questions at the heart of Death and the Maiden? Because in that play - as in other plays of mine, such as Widows and Reader - I was in a way letting the audience off the hook. It was an agent of the state who was torturing, or "disappearing" bodies, or censoring. This permits spectators the luxury of distance - the thought that it's just a matter of ridding the world of such repressive figures and everything will be all right. But there is no such comfort in Purgatorio, where both my characters are implicated in something dreadful. What is the worst thing a man can do to a woman? What is the worst thing a woman can do to a man? These two have done it to each other, in spades. I wanted to make sure that, in the supremely private and claustrophobic relationship I had wrought for them, they could not blame the government, or history. I wanted them to dwell in the murky moral landscape where most couples live and love and fight.We inhabit a time of fear and mistrust: nothing could be more urgent than asking ourselves how we should react when we have been overwhelmed by a monstrous offence; nothing could be more imperative than the need to understand how easy it is to go from victim to accuser, from accuser to invader, from violator to victim.In the austerity of that room, the man and woman I dreamt up embark on the quest for guidance and deliverance that Paulina Salas originally formulated in Death and the Maiden. Stripped of all defences and masks, they go at each other with all the hope they can muster. They wonder, as I do, if we will be able to find a way out of the endless cycle of hatred and retribution in which our species seems to be trapped.· Purgatorio is at the Arcola Theatre, London, until February 9. Box office: 020-7503 1646.