The long ordeal of the 33 trapped Chilean miners is finally at an end – and the buzz about book deals and film rights to the men's dramatic story has already begun.The miners themselves are reported to have made a pact to collaborate on their own book, but in the UK the first book was signed up on Monday, before the rescue had even begun. Freelance journalist Jonathan Franklin, who has covered the dramatic story for the Guardian from day one, is to pen an account of the saga, provisionally titled 33 Men, for publisher Transworld.Franklin, who is an American but has lived in the Chile's capital Santiago for 15 years, spoke about the book on his mobile phone from Chile, after 48 sleepless hours covering the emotional scenes as the miners emerged."This is one of the great rescue stories of all time," he said, admitting he himself had wept as the first miners were released on Tuesday night. "It's the reason we all want to be reporters: a remarkable story of the world coming together for a good reason. It taps into human altruism, the desire to work together, perseverance, faith that good things happen, never giving up." The early chapters of the book, he said, were already written.As a journalist, Franklin had had "a backstage pass to the whole thing. I was allowed to tape record the psychologist talking to the [trapped] men, I spent last night in the hospital talking to the [newly freed] miners." He intends his book to reveal the characters of the miners themselves ("You could probably do a book on every one of them") and reflect their black humour: one of the men played dead, for a joke, during the first 17 days spent in the collapsed mine without food, while another attempted phone sex with the nurse who was attending to him 700m above.Transworld publisher Bill Scott-Kerr, who bought 33 Men at last week's Frankfurt Book Fair, said: "As far as I'm aware, Franklin is the only print journalist in the inner circle at the mine, party to a lot of the strategy and to the stories of the relatives at the top, the wives and girlfriends." He added: "What I think is really interesting, apart from the drama of the story itself, is the miners' lives in this isolated outpost in Chile, which is a bit like the Wild West. People seem to live by their own rules, and it's a very rugged existence - tough people living in a tough place."The publication date for the book is still to be confirmed. "It'll be sooner rather than later, but I don't want Franklin to compromise the depth and breadth of the story by making it a rush job," Scott-Kerr said.Literary agent Annabel Merullo at Peters, Fraser and Dunlop, who is handling the book, said it had also sold to France and Germany, with film interest from the US."It's happened so quickly," she said. "When the story broke, we talked about it at the agency and said, 'Is there a book in it?' We decided there only was if we could get someone really good to write it. Jonathan's coverage was so much better than everyone else's. He has incredible access at the mines and he's covered the story from day one."