Chile lifted its tsunami warning on Thursday and Pacific islands experienced only minor waves, hours after a 8.3 magnitude earthquake had led to fears of massive swells. Related: 1 million evacuated as Chile hit by magnitude 8.3 earthquake “The tsunami warning is lifted for all national territory,” the Chilean government’s national emergency office said in a tweet. The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center (PTWC) had issued a threat message saying saying hazardous tsunami waves were forecast for some coasts. “Tsunami waves have been observed,” it said in the latests update on Thursday.The PTWC said the first waves were arriving on the eastern town of Rikitea, on Mangareva island in French Polynesia, but they were only 28cm high. It was the early hours of the morning in Rikitea, meaning few people would be on the beaches.Much of the nation’s population lives in low-lying coastal areas at risk of flooding and there were concerns waves could rise to between one and three metres. However, even that is small when compared to the 2011 quake in Japan in which waves reached 14-metres in height above sea level.Tsunami generated by M8.3 #earthquake from central Chile arriving in French Polynesia (Rikitea)In some areas, such as Hawaii, initial fears of a large tsunami were lowered, the PTWC said in a update.“However, sea level changes and strong currents may occur along all coasts,” it said, warning that larges swells might continue.On Chile’s Easter Island, around 3,500km (2,174 miles) from the mainland, residents received a tsunami alert. One tourist hotel, the Puku Vai, said on Twitter that guests were safe.Our guests have all received information and instructions regarding #tsunami alert. We're in safety zone so your family or friends are safe.The tremor struck off the Chilean coast, about 232km north-west of the capital, Santiago. It hit about 8pm local time (11pm GMT). Seismologists predicted that waves would reach South Pacific islands between nine and 12 hours later. Waves would hit New Zealand, Australia and Japan between 12 and 24 hours after the quake.The Ministry of Civil Defence in New Zealand warned people in the coastal areas of Chatham Islands and the east coast, nearly 10,000km from Chile, to stay out of the water overnight.“Expect unusually strong currents and unpredictable water flows near the shore,” it said.The US National Tsunami Warning Center released a chart of how the earthquake energy might spread across the Pacific. It showed the waves would lose height over the huge expanse of the ocean. Related: Chile earthquake: one million people evacuated after 8.3 magnitude quake – rolling report On the Chilean mainland, waves of up to 4.5 metres were recorded at Conquimbo and two metres at Tongoy. The country’s president, Michelle Bachelet, said both areas had been declared catastrophe zones and troops would be sent in to deter looting.In the Solomon Islands of the South Pacific, the local meteorological service said: “At this stage we don’t know if a tsunami has actually been generated.”The Fiji Times quoted the country’s government as saying the public should be on watch for the first wave to arrive at midnight local time. It advised “no immediate action”.“The Mineral Resources Department Seismology section has issued a tsunami watch and advisory a short time ago, warning residents in those areas to be on watch and get updates through the media,” it said.A watch means a tsunami is possible, according to Chevy Chevalier, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service in Honolulu. “A watch is for everybody to be aware of it, that it’s a possibility,” he said. “A warning means it’s happening right now or it’s imminent.”Eight people have been reported killed in Chile’s largest earthquake since the February 2010 tremor that killed more than 500. About 20 people have been reported injured so far and 1 million people have been evacuated from their homes.The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report 