I don't want anyone to have to suffer the torture or exile my family and I were made to endure.On 16 September 1973, five days after the military coup that toppled President Salvador Allende, I was seized by the military police in a street in Santiago, Chile's capital. I think they took me because I was a member of the Socialist party and close to Allende.I was repeatedly tortured for months, first in the basement of a police station, and then in the national stadium, which the military regime had turned into a large concentration camp for political prisoners. I was blindfolded and handcuffed for most of the torture, so I couldn't see my torturers.I was beaten on my head and body countless times; they broke my arm in several places after smashing it with a rifle and I almost lost an eye; they held my head under cold water and electrocuted me; they kicked me in my testicles, burned me with cigarettes and suspended me by a hook with weights on my legs. I heard of people being executed by firing squads.At the police station, there were bags of concrete covered in blood. The police interrogated me about the whereabouts of politicians close to Allende; I wouldn't give them any information. They threatened to kill my six-year-old daughter. They said they would shoot her in front of the concrete bags, and then do the same to me.I didn't know if my family members were dead or alive for eight months. I spent almost two years in several concentration camps. In June 1975, I was expelled from Chile by a government decree. I received refugee status in the UK, and my wife and three daughters joined me in exile.Before the coup, we lived in a middle-class neighbourhood in Santiago. I was working at the racecourse and my wife worked for the government. We were saving to buy a house and had a comfortable life. We would often go out to restaurants or go dancing.But after the torture I got very depressed. I struggled through flashbacks and suffered from constant headaches. I lost almost all of my hearing. I have been suffering intense lower-back pain since then and I need a stick to walk. I can't feel my left hand fully. On arrival in the UK, I was declared permanently disabled. My wife worked at all sorts of odd jobs to support our family while also taking care of me. My eldest daughter had to stop studying architecture in Chile to come. We all struggled in a new country and with a different language.I'm a torture survivor, but in reality I'm dead in life. I will die a tortured man. Every time I shave and see the ugly scar above my left eye, which was caused when I was hit with the butt of a machine gun, the only thing I see is Augusto Pinochet. I'm 80 years old and I have been waiting for justice half my life. In the 40 years since I was tortured, nobody has ever been punished for what happened to me. There is no real justice in Chile. I feel the different governments have just delayed dealing with past atrocities, until we are all dead.I was fortunate to find Redress, a charity in London that helped me to fight my case to seek justice and reparation from Chile. Many other victims are alone. It took nine years for my case to reach the Inter-American court, the highest human rights court in the Americas, and two more for the judges to reach a judgment. A ruling was announced on 30 October.The court ordered Chile to pay me £20,000 for the lack of justice in my case. They said it had taken too long for Chile to complete a criminal investigation into my torture and they ordered it to do so as soon as possible. They also urged Chile to cover the costs of my medical and psychological treatment in the UK that I need as a victim of torture.No amount of money will be able to compensate me and my family for our suffering. The torture and forced exile destroyed our lives. But I am satisfied that the ruling sets a precedent. I hope it serves as a reminder that this should never happen again, anywhere in the world.