The air was thick and heavy with the smell of yak. Feeling slightly sick and light-headed from the squeeze and stuffiness, I asked the bus driver to stop by the roadside for a breather. As I spilled out on to the road, so did my morning meal.I was on the road in Gannan (Southern Gansu), heading for Langmusi, a sleepy Tibetan town straddling Sichuan and Gansu province. The rest of Gansu province is better known for its tasteless, bone-dry deserts and Unesco-accredited grottoes. Its arid weather is as erratic as its bus timetables, with sharp temperature fluctuations of 10C even in summer. In the south though, a little piece of heaven exists for those who seek it.The town of Langmusi has a feeling of a supernatural peace and unsurprisingly so. At all times of the day, devout locals murmur chants as they turn prayer wheels outside the monasteries.Guidebooks will point you to Sertri Gompa and Kirti Gompa for a visit, and even if you have missed the intricate architecture on the inside, its red and gold roofs shimmering in the sunset will leave you with a profound impression. It is also along these windswept corridors that one catches a rare glimpse of Tibet as monks scurry in and out the monasteries for their appointed prayers.While the folds of their robes and deeply wrinkled faces make for a great black and white portrait, do be aware that many are not particularly comfortable about being in front of the camera. Ask before you shoot.Despite its spirituality, the town is also a bustling centre of trade, wooing visitors with indigenous handicrafts, silverware and hand-woven scarves made from yak's wool. After a couple of beers, it is easy to make friends here and organise enough people for a trek – by horse or on foot – into the surrounding mountains, or better still, a day trip to Zoige, another piece of heaven said to be China's fourth-largest grassland.The view of Langmusi from a hilltop was all the more appreciated knowing that this was a place that could face the consequence of accelerated desertification triggered by climate change.As the sun finally went down, I took one last shot before heading back to the town centre to haggle for a good piece of yak wool shawl.Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com