When I was in Beijing in July, I had the China Daily – the state-run English language newspaper – delivered to my hotel room every morning. On my last day in the city, July 18, I almost dropped my croissant when I opened the paper and saw a report about me.Shortly before leaving London for Beijing, I had given a speech at the Battle for China, a conference organised by the Institute of Ideas, at which I argued that western governments have no moral authority to lecture anybody – including the Chinese – about human rights. I argued that respect for liberty is at a historic low in America and Europe, where governments think nothing of introducing 42-day detention without charge, spying on us through CCTV cameras or email surveillance, and bringing in new thought crimes – and therefore asking President Bush or our own beleaguered PM to pressurise China to "embrace liberty" was a bit like "asking Rose West to open a halfway house for young runaways".China Daily reported my comments (including the joke about Rose West), telling its readers that a British journalist had said that Bush and Brown should not be called upon to help "liberate China" since "people in the moral gutter cannot take the moral high ground". I was even more startled when I discovered that an article I wrote for Times Online to accompany my speech in London had been republished in the People's Daily, the main organ of the central committee of the Communist party of China.Two of my articles for Comment is free have also been republished in China – both times without my, or the Guardian's, permission and both times in a politically truncated form.In June, China Daily republished my Cif piece calling the Dalai Lama a "ridiculous" political figure who has been embraced by western governments as a "battering ram in their culture war with China". However, it cut the line that said: "Tibetans now suffer the double horror of being ruled by undemocratic Chinese officials on one hand, and demeaned by the Dalai Lama and his western supporters on the other."More recently, on the day the Olympics kicked off, China Daily re-ran my Cif piece on why Chinese people are optimistic about their country's future but western observers – who tend to find industrialisation and economic growth rather distasteful these days – are not. But it forgot to include my conclusion: "Chinese people's material lives are improving; let us hope their political lives rapidly improve, too."I've had a flurry of outraged emails. "So are you now actually in the pay of the Chinese Communist party, you unbelievable bastard?" – that kind of thing. That's not surprising, considering that many people immediately assume that anyone who criticises western China-bashing, thinks economic growth in China is a good thing, or refuses to swear an oath of allegiance to the gospel according to Human Rights Watch must surely receive from Beijing wads of yuan stained with the blood of protesters massacred in Tiananmen Square. (It really didn't help matters when, around the same time, the state-run Zimbabwe Herald republished an article of mine attacking western intervention in Zimbabwe. Thanks a lot, Mugabe.)No, I'm not in the pay of Chinese state officials; I didn't even know they were planning to republish my articles. However, the re-emergence of some of my work in China is revealing.First, it shows that Chinese editors take a more cavalier approach to copyright issues than most western editors do. As an internationalist, I'm not opposed to seeing my arguments republished in China, or anywhere else. But there must be a more upfront, fruitful way that ideas can be shared across borders which doesn't involve simply taking articles and submitting them to a rush-job edit. An open and honest sharing of content between the east and west, based on respect for copyright, would be a great way to break down cultural barriers.Second, it actually shows how rife is China-bashing in the west. At a time when there is an extraordinary left/right, transatlantic consensus that China is a threat – encompassing everyone from white-haired rightwingers in America offended by China's economic rise to trendy students in Britain who think China is polluting their pristine parks in with its global smog – it seems Chinese editors are on the lookout for sceptical western voices that say something different.In today's borderline Sinophobic climate, perhaps my articles – and those of a handful of other journalists, too – have been snapped up as evidence that not everyone in the west thinks China's economic growth is a filthy disaster or that its human rights abuses in Tibet and elsewhere are somehow more unusually cruel and barbaric than those of our own governments in Iraq and Afghanistan. This is a two-way street: Chinese state editors should be more upfront about which of our articles they want to reprint, and western reporters should do more to challenge the simple-minded demonisation of China, which – who knows – may be a contributing factor in their apparent unwillingness to engage.