The Obama administration devoted the early part of this week to high-level negotiations with China, flooding the "strategic and economic dialogue" with dozens of top-level officials who engaged their counterparts from the People's Republic in wide-ranging policy discussions. In fact, it was reminiscent of the full-court press the administration put on congressional Republicans in the early part of the year.The central difference, of course, is that the administration appears to be making progress with the Chinese, or at least finding a fundamental common ground, whereas the Republicans are as fractious as ever. Before conservatives go straight to the "takes a socialist to know a socialist" jokes, though, they should reflect on why, exactly, the Chinese are willing to work with the administration.First, the Chinese get macroeconomics. On a phone call with reporters on the first day of the conference, a senior Obama administration official mused that one of the reasons that discussions had been so productive is that the two countries followed similar approaches to the financial crisis and global recession: a fiscal stimulus, loose monetary policy and a willingness to shift broad macroeconomic goals – from borrowing to savings and investment in the US, and from exports to domestic consumer demand in China.That's why the Chinese, for instance, seem to buy the administration's promises of fiscal rectitude. Though they worry about American debt, since they own so much of it, Chinese officials accept the White House's explanation that once the economy begins to recover they will begin implementing policies to tighten inflation and lower the deficit. One Chinese official was particularly effusive in his praise of a speech delivered by Peter Orszag, the director of the White House office of management and budget, on the subject. But it's clear they understand the logic of using government demand to replace lagging private investment until the economy recovers.Meanwhile, Republicans have tried to start bank runs, offered doomsday warnings of stagflation and played Herbert Hoover by urging massive effective budget cuts that would increase the negative effects of the recession.No wonder Obama has had more luck working with the Chinese than with the Republicans. It's not about socialism – in fact, the Obama administration continues to urge the Chinese to liberalise their financial system. It's just accepting the basic principles of macroeconomics.Second, the Chinese get science. The two countries signed a memorandum of understanding at the dialogue, laying out a framework to pursue emissions reductions, invest in low-carbon energy and protect the environment. This is further than the administration has gotten with many Republicans who refuse to believe that global climate change is even real, much less worth doing something about.Which is not to say that this memorandum will result in huge changes. Despite the recognition of the problems of climate change, the Chinese are still concerned about the economic costs of reducing emissions. But they're willing to consider the long-term balance costs and benefits, which is a real start toward concrete decisions to go green. Finally, the Chinese get non-zero sum competition. Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, raised a few eyebrows the other day when he argued that the US should maintain its fleet of expensive F-22 fighter planes in order to fight India, a country the US surely counts as a friend. But it was even worse when he corrected his statement, saying he meant to say the fighters were needed in case of conflict with China. But China, of course, is a country the US should engage, not confront.A few days later, Dai Bingguo, one of the two leaders of the Chinese delegation to Washington, told an audience of business and political leaders: "Don't lose any sleep over China!" He explained that China did not seek arms races or hegemony, and even historically focused on its own internal development.While it may be wise for the US to be prudent in a relationship with a country whose interests don't always match our own, it's also clear that cooperation is a better path than confrontation. Hence President Obama's remarks on Monday that he also envisions a "a future where China is a strong, prosperous and successful member of the community of nations. A future when our nations are partners out of necessity, but also out of opportunity."Republicans have thus far not demonstrated that they understand the value of engaging countries that can be perceived as threats or alien to US culture, whether with relatively uncontroversial example of China or the hot-button issues of Cuba and Iran.Of course, none of these commonalities means that real progress will be made in the US-China relationship, just as Republican obstruction doesn't mean that there will be no progress on the Obama administration's domestic agenda. But it always helps to start with an interlocutor who you can agree with on basic principles. China may be far away from Obama both geographically and politically, but the Republicans might as well be living on the moon.