David Ignatius has an interesting column in The Washington Post this morning explaining why Bahrain might be the issue that has the most dramatic impact on the future of US foreign policy. Why Bahrain? Because Saudi Arabia cares a great deal about what happens there, and Saudi Arabia is rather important. Ignatius:U.S. officials have been arguing that Bahrain's Sunni monarchy must make political compromises to give more power to the Shiite majority there. The most emphatic statement came last weekend from Defense Secretary Bob Gates, who said during a visit to Bahrain that its "baby steps" toward reform weren't enough and that the kingdom should step up its negotiations with the opposition.This American enthusiasm for change has been anathema to the conservative regimes of the Gulf, and on Monday they backed Bahrain's ruling Khalifa family with military force, marching about 2,000 troops up the causeway that links Bahrain to Saudi Arabia. A senior Saudi official told me the intervention was needed to protect Bahrain's financial district and other key facilities from violent demonstrations. He warned that radical, Iranian-backed leaders were becoming more active in the protests."We don't want Iran 14 miles off our coast, and that's not going to happen," said the Saudi official. U.S. officials counter that Iran, so far, has been only a minor player in the Bahrain protests and that Saudi military intervention could backfire by strengthening Iran's hand.Well, first of all, it always surprises and depresses me that people like this Saudi official can't see that creating some room for reform and dissent strengthens a society instead of weakening it. It's only when people feel completely shut out and oppressed that they turn to others. If they felt they had a stake in the society, they'd contribute to it.We had our own version of this debate in the US in the 1950s. American cold war liberals generally said: let socialist governments govern. As long as they're anti-communist - and usually, socialists were the biggest anti-communists of all, because they knew the bastards the best - let them take the helm if they win. With no basis on which to appeal to socialists for solidarity, communists will be that much more shut out.Conservative said horse manure, socialists are communists in sheeps' clothing. So, when in real life a socialist non-communist, Mossadegh, won an election in Iran, we at first let him govern (Truman and Acheson) but eventually and inevitably overthrew him (Eisenhower and Dulles). The results, you will all agree, have been absolutely wonderful to this day.But this is the way it is. Conservatives fear any unknown. They raise bogeymen (in Iran in 1953, communists; in Bahrain today, Iran) and scare people and it works nearly every time. But all this is not even the real reason I'm writing this post, so let's get to that, shall we?Farther down, Ignatius writes that Bahrain is "the most important U.S.-Saudi disagreement in decades" and unless resolved (and "resolved" of course means to the Saudis reverted to the status quo) will open up a major chasm:The Obama administration, in effect, is altering America's long-standing commitment to the status quo in the Gulf, believing that change in Bahrain — as in Egypt, Tunisia and Libya — is inevitable and desirable.The split reflects fundamental differences in strategic outlook. The Gulf regimes have come to mistrust Obama, seeing him as a weak president who will sacrifice traditional allies in his eagerness be "on the right side of history." They liken Obama's rejection of Hosni Mubarak in Egypt to Jimmy Carter's 1979 abandonment of the shah of Iran. The crackup was predicted by a top UAE sheik in a February meeting with two visiting former U.S. officials. According to notes made during the conversation, the UAE official said: "We and the Saudis will not accept a Shiite government in Bahrain. And if your president says to the Khalifas what he said to Mubarak [to leave office], it will cause a break in our relationship with the U.S." The UAE official warned that Gulf nations were "looking East" — to China, India and Turkey — for alternative security assistance.This got me wondering. America of course is called the world's policeman. What if, 25 years from now say, that were China?I'm asking out of genuine curiosity. I'm sure some of you will think of ramifications that elude me. We begin with the obvious downside that the US will no longer be the world's #1. Well, the neocons will thunder about that, but the rest of us might welcome some aspects of it. It would surely force Europe to spend more on military matters, if the US were no longer the feudal lord and protector, and America could spend less, maybe. It could also force the US and the EU to coordinate more.What it would mean for the people of the world could depend to some extent on what sort of society China itself is in the future. People who disparage American imperialism tend to forget that the US spends many billions on democracy and civil society and the promotion of women's rights and other things through quasi-governmental endowments and agencies. China has a big Africa investment fund, but I doubt much of it goes toward those sorts of things.Of course, the world's policeman also tends to get to be the world's banker, and that's the rub, really. What happens if China starts running global monetary policy? (Or is it already?)This very idea is going to provoke howls from the right, but I think that's alarmist twaddle. England once ran the world. Then it didn't. It's still a strong and wealthy and important country, and I'm sure some of you are prepared to point out ways in which it's better off without those obligations. Of course, I fear that in the end here, the Obama administration will capitulate to the Saudis and let the Bahrain regime have its way. For good or ill, the US will do whatever it has to do to prevent Saudi and the UAE from "looking east." But it's an interesting thought experiment. Have at it.