Without a car, the only practical way to travel from Urumqi to Tianchi is by tourist bus, which passes the gritty plains of Xinjiang desert and rises into the sweet air of the Tian Shan mountain range, known in China as the Celestial mountains.It's not a direct journey. First stop was at a staged riverside Kazakh settlement. Here Han tourists were treated to bowls of kumys or fermented milk at low dastarkhan tables, and dancers in fluorescent, sequinned costumes and tubeteika hats, more reminiscent of 1001 Arabian Nights. Many men rose to dance, pawing the dancers as if drunk, clearly delighted to have met Kazakhs, one of nine ethnic groups living in this north-western region.At Tianchi the bus neatly fitted into rows of idling coaches. Here the Tian Shan majestically revealed green valleys and splendid peaks. To navigate the heights to Tianchi a stairway and gondola were offered.At the top we found a lake; hugging a cove were souffle-like yurts. A Kazakh greeted us with a gold-toothed smile and invited us to dine with her.That evening we did. According to custom, females were seated on the right, men on the left. The lady's son, Taras, poured chai and explained that of the 1.5 million Kazakhs in China, many lived a traditional lifestyle, moving pasture annually, raising stocks of goats, sheep and horses. What had he seen change?"My children are studying at university in Urumqi. My mother didn't have that opportunity. After Tianchi opened to mass tourism, I established my business. In summer I live here, showing tourists our lifestyle, customs and pastures by horse."His mother presented plov, rice and cooked tomatoes or mutton. As we ate, Taras explained that his daughter had recently married. She'd chosen her husband who had been found suitable three months later at a family conference. The matter of a bride price, typically around $5,000, was then raised.One thousand Kazakhs had attended his daughter's wedding. A horse and four sheep had been slaughtered. Fish and kilos of plov and salad had crowned each table.Taras asked, "How many animals were slaughtered for your wedding?"Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. They should focus on giving our readers a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send submissions to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com