Whatever its detractors may say, feminism is very much alive. Helped by globalisation, it is still contributing to greater freedom for humanity as a whole. Recent events are testimony to the start of a new phase in female emancipation, with women taking an active part in the "jasmine revolution", a growing awareness in French public opinion of gender-related violence, and support for the desire to have children and its ethical implications.Ancient and recent history seem to have prepared the combative vitality of the "other half of the sky" represented by China's second sex. We should remember that in the land of yin and yang, Tao Buddhism and Confucius, the bourgeois revolution was nationalist, socialist and feminist. In 1912 Chinese suffragettes invaded parliament. The women's rights movement inspired the May Fourth Movement in 1919, which called for equal rights for men and women, an end to polygamy and arranged marriages, and access to higher education for women. The law on marriage introduced by the People's Republic in 1950 abolished the "head of the family" and allowed mothers to keep their maiden name and bequeath property to their children. Meanwhile, housework entitled them to property rights.Increasing numbers of contemporary Chinese women are doing more than simply contribute to the growth of an emerging economic giant, or just protesting about all those left by the wayside. Neither the consenting victims of the religious fundamentalism that prevails under other regimes, nor yet the docile agents of marketing for the hyper-connected, they refuse to be intimidated by human rights violations. More and more women are defending and promoting the rights of their sisters. They realise that by demanding that state authorities implement the international agreements China has signed – as well as the articles (33 to 37) of the 4 December 1982 constitution on individual freedoms – they are contributing to social reform and progress towards constitutional democracy. At the same time they are vigorously condemning scandals, abuses and corruption.But these women are also subject to pressure, harassment and intimidation. Growing repression comes on top of stricter surveillance of the internet and tighter control by censors, fed by the fear that the rebellious spirit of the Middle East and Mediterranean countries may spread to China.In January 2010 the jury of the Simone de Beauvoir prize for women's liberty chose to honour two Chinese women for upholding women's rights: the lawyer Guo Jianmei and the professor of comparative literature and film-maker Ai Xiaoming. Only the former was able to attend the award ceremony in Paris in 2011, her fellow prize-winner not having been allowed to leave China.Guo trained as a lawyer and is now a member of the All China Lawyers Association (ACLA) and deputy-chair of the Beijing Association of Women Lawyers. At Beijing University she founded the Centre for Women's Law Studies and Legal Services, an NGO that defends and promotes judicial reform, as well as advocating better conditions for women in the People's Republic. In March this year she became the first Chinese to win the International Women of Courage Award, which was presented by Hillary Clinton.Professor Ai teaches at the Chinese language and literature department of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, and heads the comparative literature department. In addition to her academic research on women's rights, Ai has also won recognition for her documentaries on gender violence, the difficulty of living with HIV-Aids, the dramatic consequences of the Sichuan earthquake and the harsh conditions endured by poor farmers.Two months after receiving the Beauvoir prize, Guo told us Beijing University had banned her NGO. We at the Simone de Beauvoir prize for women's liberty are increasingly concerned. Ai has also been the target of various forms of intimidation, with break-ins at her home, harassing phone calls and death threats.However, the international community is mainly interested in the Chinese economy. More or less conscious male chauvinism stands in the way of women's rights all over the world, blind to the full significance of the exemplary struggle waged by Chinese women such as Guo or Ai to gain freedom for men and women alike.We appeal to all who are convinced that women have an inalienable right to respect and emancipation. Join us in expressing your concern to the Chinese authorities and voicing your support for Guo and Ai. "The free woman is just being born," Beauvoir wrote. She continues her long march in China, raising the hope of freedom for the world of tomorrow.This article originally appeared in Le MondeJulia Kristeva is the chair of the Simone de Beauvoir prize for women's liberty