On 1 October 1954, Sir Hugh Casson, the urbane professor of interior design who had been director of architecture at the Festival of Britain, found himself standing by the Tiananmen Gate in the ancient and still walled city of Peking. In China to present a statement of friendship signed by nearly 700 British scientists and artists, he was watching a parade that the reporter James Cameron reckoned to be "the greatest show on earth". First came the troops and the "military ironwork", grinding past for a full hour. This was followed by a much longer civil parade in which the people marched by in barely imaginable numbers, beaming with joy at their elevated leaders who gazed back with the slightly "subdued" expression of still unaccustomed new emperors.Float after float rolled by, showing model factories and locomotives. Children released balloons and elastic-powered model aeroplanes; the masses united to cry "Down with American imperialism"; and Picasso's peace dove was everywhere. Having recently migrated from earlier European congresses, this simplified bird appeared to have usurped the traditional dragons of Peking.The spectacle with which China celebrated the fifth anniversary of the communist liberation was brilliantly organised, as Casson felt obliged to admit. He was less impressed by the admiring expressions worn by many of the other international guests: "Gold-rimmed spectacles misted with emotion, cheeks creased with years of well-meant service in this cause or in that, shirts defiantly open at the neck, badges in lapels, and there in the middle – could it have been? – an MCC tie."That particular specimen was Ivor Montagu, a cricket-loving friend and translator of the great Soviet film-maker Sergei Eisenstein. He was also a table tennis champion who preferred "New China's" disciplined "physical jerks" to the indolence of a capitalist world in which "rich men" disdained even walking as "something you paid those less fortunate to do on your behalf". And he was by no means alone in his enthusiasm for "New China".Sickened by the rapture of the communist regime's ardent western friends, Casson quickly retreated to the shaded "rest room" beneath the viewing stand. Here he lingered among yellow-robed Tibetan lamas, sipping tea and exchanging impressions with other doubtful Britons: the classically minded and no longer Marxist novelist and poet Rex Warner, and AJ Ayer, the high-living logical positivist who would come home to tell the BBC that China's parade had reminded him of the Nuremberg rallies. They may also have caught a fleeting glimpse of the Marxist crystallographer JD Bernal, who had no MCC tie but was sporting his Stalin prize medal, collected in Moscow on the way to China. Bernal was full of admiration for New China and its celebrations, but as hour followed hour he too descended from the stand to spend a moment "sipping orange juice through a straw" at the same table as the dalai lama.Enraptured or appalled, none of these British witnesses appears to have regretted the absence of Stanley Spencer. The 63-year-old painter, so famously associated with the little Berkshire village of Cookham, had managed to escape the entire show – thanks, he later explained, to "some Mongolians", whose timely arrival at the hotel that morning had provided the cover under which he retreated upstairs to his room.It was the discovery that Spencer had been to China that persuaded me to look further into this forgotten episode. I soon realised that an extraordinary assortment of Britons had made their way to China in 1954, including the former prime minister and leader of the Labour Party, Clement Attlee. And all this nearly two decades before 1972, when President Nixon made the stage-managed and – even before John Adams got hold of it – distinctly operatic visit that has gone down in history as the moment when the west entered rapprochement with the People's Republic of China. Were these motley British visitors just credulous idiots, for whom "Red China" was another version of the legendary Cathay? That is what the 24-year-old Douglas Hurd and the other diplomats in the British embassy compound in Peking appear to have suspected of these unwelcome freeloaders. Or was something more significant going on?Nowadays, the rapidly increasing number of British travellers to China think nothing of getting on a plane to fly directly there. Yet Spencer had good reason to feel "trembly" as he and the five other members of his entirely unofficial cultural delegation approached the runway at Heathrow on 14 September 1954. Though Britain had recognised China a few months after the liberation, it had yet to establish proper diplomatic relations with the communist-led government, and the embarking Britons couldn't pick up a visa until they had reached Prague. That meant crossing the iron curtain dividing Europe. "Did you go under or over it?" one joker would later ask, making light of a passage that was actually more like falling over the edge of the known world. The travellers then had to fly across east Europe, pausing at Minsk and Moscow before heading across Siberia and then Mongolia – all the time relying on their hosts to finance, accommodate and entertain them, and also to provide the vibrating twin-prop planes in which they would hop to the far side of the world, landing every three hours or so to refuel."There are bears in there," Spencer mused, glancing anxiously down into a nameless Soviet forest at a moment when the engine sputtered "Fit! Fit! Fit!" There were troubles at home too. The cold war was entrenched, its dangers exacerbated by the advance of nuclear weaponry on both sides. Britain, meanwhile, was financially straitened, and reliant on loans from America, which demanded adherence to Washington's hard-line foreign policy including its trade embargoes against Russia and China. Under these circumstances, it was by no means just a handful of disgruntled communists and export-hungry businessmen who yearned to make Britain's political outlook more independent. The loss of power gave a distinctly anti-American resonance to the patriotic lament of Shakespeare's John of Gaunt – that "This England" should ever be "leas'd out . . . Like to a tenement, or pelting farm".China remained hostile and isolated behind the recently lowered "bamboo curtain". Nevertheless, by the beginning of 1954 a thaw had begun to seem possible. Stalin had died in March 1953, and the Korean war had been brought to a ceasefire not long afterwards. There were indications that Moscow and its Chinese ally might be interested in making more than a slogan out of "peaceful coexistence" with the west. It was, however, France's losing war in the area then known as "French Indo-China" that persuaded many in western Europe to adopt a more optimistic view of "New China" than President Eisenhower's bomb-wreathed "domino theory" of Asia's imminent fall to communism.On the morning of Saturday 24 April, the Chinese prime minister and foreign secretary, Zhou Enlai, flew into Geneva from Moscow. He came at the head of a large Chinese delegation to join France, Britain and Russia in a conference aimed at finding a settlement to the Indo-China war. Previously, west Europeans had known the Chinese leader only through anti-communist stereotypes, or the equally partisan hymns of praise issued by witnesses such as Hewlett Johnson, the inordinately optimistic "Red Dean of Canterbury".But here he now was, anything but a Russian puppet or, for that matter, a primitive "agrarian reformer" of the kind many in the west imagined the Chinese communists to be. Diverse western Europeans were transfixed by the sight of this urbane and highly competent man, smiling into the cameras as he berated America – which had refused even to take part in the conference – and demonstrating his abilities as a regional leader by negotiating ceasefires in Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam. Later in the year, James Cameron would describe Zhou as the man who, in the course of his short visit to Geneva, had produced "the simultaneous double-effect" of "a nervous constriction in the diplomatic hearts and a violent sexual impulse in the persons of almost every European woman who clapped eyes on him".The flights to Peking began shortly after Zhou's European triumph. From Geneva, as at the Bandung conference the following year, Zhou invited the world to "come and see" what was going on behind the bamboo curtain. And Britons were among those who headed for the airport. The Labour leadership sent the opening delegation. Clement Attlee was at its head, accompanied by various other members of the National Executive Committee, including Aneurin Bevan and his former insurance minister Edith Summerskill.The cultural delegation, which comprised Casson, Warner, Ayer and Spencer, together with the geologist Leonard Hawkes and the young sinologist John Chinnery, followed later in the summer. Like the vague statement of friendship in its luggage, its membership had been decided by people close to the Britain-China Friendship Association, who were careful to come up with a group that could not easily be dismissed as communist fellow travellers. A delegation of Labour councillors and shop stewards was recruited at the last minute and guided, very reluctantly, by the communist "artist-reporter" Paul Hogarth. He had travelled a lot behind the iron curtain and could not now escape responsibility for chaperoning a very "third rate" Labour delegation whose members, as he told me, cared nothing for China new or old, and wanted only to get drunk at somebody else's expense. A more senior delegation of Labour MPs, including Barbara Castle, William Griffiths and various other "Bevanites" who had come into the Commons in the 1945 landslide, delayed its departure until early October so that its members could attend the Labour party conference, where they had joined Bevan in objecting, unsuccessfully, to Attlee's support of cold war policies.There were indeed some pilgrims among the travellers, who saw what they and China's presenters wanted them to see – docilely imbibing tea and statistics, smiling back at children in model nurseries, and sensing only a bright cooperative future in fields fertilised with the blood of murdered landlords. But the Attlee delegation was not like that. Its members had fought their own battles against communism in Britain, and they had been well briefed before leaving. They had also been given a detailed anticipation of the "show" they should expect from a collection of Chinese teachers, editors and intellectuals who had moved to Hong Kong. They liked the new marriage laws, the apparent abolition of prostitution, and also the new public health campaigns. As in Moscow, they were, perhaps, a little discomforted as they compared their own achievements while in government in Britain with China's prodigious construction of factories, mines, housing, schools and hospitals. They stood up to Mao over tea, deplored the regime's failure to do anything about the booming birth-rate and also criticised the communist-led government for imposing an absurdly distorted idea of the west on their people. If China really believed that the masses in the west sympathised with communism, and were only held down by an evil ruling class, then they might blunder into another war.Even those with strong communist loyalties tried to reduce China's exclusive reliance on the USSR. Thus, while JD Bernal was known for his mistaken support for the "proletarian science" of the bogus geneticist Trofim Lysenko, he certainly did not spend his many lectures trying to convince New China's scientists to rely on such Soviet models, arguing throughout for a renewed exchange between Chinese scientists and their colleagues in the west.It was a similar situation with the artists Paul Hogarth and Denis Mathews. They were both happy to celebrate the liberation and the ongoing reconstruction of China. And yet they were also united in their opposition to the idea that Soviet socialist realism offered an adequate model for the future development of Chinese art. They argued this point forcefully with the artists who welcomed them and accompanied them around the country. Both insisted that it would be far better to consider the new forms of figuration pioneered by Picasso and Guttuso in western Europe.Meanwhile, confusion as well as unexpected light followed from the visitors' habit of applying British analogies to Chinese realities. Attlee himself praised New China's still expanding network of cooperatives, seeing in them the principle of "voluntary action" that William Beveridge had insisted was the necessary attendant to the welfare state. The national secretary of the Women's Cooperative Guild, Mabel Ridealgh, likened China's extensive cooperatives to those of her own organisation and joined Castle in comparing China's food distribution system to the Co-op in Britain.Earlier post-liberation visitors had already set about Englishing the new Chinese scene. "It's the same in Marylebone High Street," the veteran actor Miles Malleson had remarked in 1953: he was thinking of New China's appetite for dramas with a contemporary message. Basil Davidson had reserved a different English comparison for a communist group leader in the southern city of Canton. Aware of what the regime's critics said about such watchful cadres, he insisted that she was "as much a spy on her 50 families as the chairman of my parish council, in rural Essex, is a spy on me".Hogarth was merely continuing in this line when he declared arriving in Shanghai to be like "pulling into Manchester from Sheffield", while Hangchow (Hangzhou) was like "a South Coast English seaside resort whose better days lay at the beginning of the century". He found a more original English line on China's revolutionary art. Visiting the Lu Xun museum in Shanghai, he enjoyed the discovery that those stark woodcuts, designed to galvanise illiterate peasants into action against both the Japanese and Chiang Kai-shek's reactionary nationalists, were descended from leafy English scenes portrayed by such far from revolutionary artists as Gwen Raverat, Robert Gibbings and Edward Bawden.There was a characteristically English way of looking at China's notoriously bloody "agrarian reform" too. In 1949, Mao had famously proclaimed that the Chinese people had at last "stood up", and Hogarth was happy to confirm that claim. His drawing of a "Shansi peasant" shows a man standing very upright indeed: clasping the wooden hayfork that rises next to his head, he stares back with a resolute expression that is neither cringing nor deferential.Made in the field, as was this determined artist-reporter's way, Hogarth's drawing evokes an English analogy already employed by Joseph Needham, Davidson and other visitors – the English Diggers and Levellers of the 17th century, who had torn down fences and set to work digging up the commons land stolen from them under the new Enclosure Acts.It was at once an evasive strategy and a concerted attempt to assert an English tradition uncompromised by a mutually hated British imperialism. Yet it was Spencer who raised the art of being English in New China to its strangest heights. Twenty years earlier, he had recorded the desire to write the story of his life as if it were a wandering "journey to China", and he had no sooner landed at the airfield outside Peking than he started peering around in startled recognition: "As I drove along the roads from the airports to the towns it was almost comic to see these dreams of mine coming true on either side of the road." Other delegates cringed as he harassed the guides at various historical sites with peculiar offscript questions, and tormented helpless waiters with requests for fish and chips. As for New China's artists, Spencer had no prescriptions to offer about socialist realism. Instead he informed his audience at the Central Academy of Fine Arts that he was "possibly the most marvellous visitor to China they had ever had". He ventured that his visit was "something on a par with the coming of Buddha", later explaining that he had felt obliged to emphasise this fact "because in England if people don't know who I am I am at once called upon to carry heavy suitcases".Britain's horrified chargé d'affaires in Peking, Humphrey Trevelyan, avoided that particular occasion but could not escape the "fatuous performance" in which Spencer, Ayer, Warner, Casson and Hawkes, the leader of the cultural delegation, presented their statement of friendship to the minister of culture, Kuo Mo-jo, a man whose purpose was so obviously to "exploit the word 'peace' for political ends". Trevelyan was particularly dismayed to hear Spencer "guilelessly expatiating" about "the delights of Formosa". For Trevelyan, as for Kuo Mo-jo and his colleagues, Formosa was the American-buoyed nationalist island that the communist slogans fiercely insisted was really China's Taiwan. And now here was Spencer blundering on without ever really making it clear that the "Formosa" in his mind was actually a little island in the Thames at Cookham, with a creek, a picturesque old house, and a field in which the local Boy Scouts held their musters.Judging from the notes he wrote after returning home, Spencer made very short work of the Great Wall of China too. Indeed, he reduced it to the garden wall along which he had liked to walk as a child in Cookham. He had, as he explained, climbed up by the coal cellar and triumphed over many challenges as he made his way along its length: not the advancing Manchu army, but the leaning lid of the dustbin, the ivy that stretched over some sections, and the protruding branches of cherry, yew and fir that also had to be negotiated over that wall's rather less than 4,000 mile length. Spencer – who told Zhou that "I feel at home in China because I feel that Cookham is somewhere near, only just around the corner" – was uniquely idiosyncratic, but he was by no means the only delegate who seems to have journeyed to the far side of the world without ever really leaving England behind.As for the future of this attempted rapprochement between Britain and "New China", the optimistic "spirit of Geneva" evaporated soon enough after the last delegates came home, and the blocs quickly refroze. Yet that moment of hopefulness was not entirely without consequences. Trade between Britain and China was renewed over the years to come, diplomatic relations were established, and cultural exchanges did develop. The Bevanite perspective within the Labour party cannot be said to have thrived, but the insistence on maintaining an independent British stance towards Washington was alive in the 60s, when Harold Wilson refused to commit British forces to America's war in Vietnam. Though insufficient to restrain Tony Blair from joining Bush's invasion of Iraq, it did continue to resound in the heartfelt declamations that the elderly Barbara Castle used to launch against various New Labour policies during her last years in the House of Lords. She informed me in no uncertain terms that the true delinquents of 1954 were those in power who refused to rise to the opportunities of the moment, and certainly not those like herself who went to China with the aim of lifting the bamboo curtain.Of the British artists who went to China in 1954, neither Spencer nor Hogarth would ever return. Mathews, however, would try to maintain the dialogue even as China went through the suppression of the Hundred Flowers campaign, the collectivisation of the briefly "cooperative" economy, and the monstrously costly "Great Leap Forward". He used his position as secretary of the Contemporary Art Society at the Tate Gallery to promote an exchange of exhibitions. Working directly with Chinese government agencies, he began by organising a survey show of British Graphic Art, which was taken to China by his fellow organiser and artist Richard Carline in 1955. He himself returned in 1960, accompanying an exhibition of recent paintings entitled Sixty Years of British Painting in Oils.He found China to be a very different place. Discussion was discouraged, the circulation of the show was curtailed, and he was prevented from renewing his acquaintance with some of the Chinese artists he had got to know in 1954. Mathews made no progress in his attempt to use the exhibition to create a comparative discussion about aesthetics – finding himself assailed with dogmatic slogans decreeing that all work produced in China since the liberation of 1949 must be superior to anything produced before, and that no painting of a shrimp, even by the venerated master Qi Baishi, could beat a portrait of Chairman Mao.