The Scar probably isn't China Miéville's best novel. That accolade should go to The City and the City or Embassytown, books which set out from the start to discomfit and unsettle: the first playing with spatial awareness and the very ground beneath the characters' feet; the second coining new vocabulary to portray an alien world and worrying at theories of language and meaning. But for world-building immersiveness and sheer rollicking readability – Miéville aimed to write, as he put it, "the ripping yarn that is also sociologically serious and stylistically avant-garde" – it can't be beaten.It's the second novel to be set in the Bas-Lag universe: a fantastical world in which humans, Remades (criminals punished by being surgically altered), walking cacti, women with scarab beetles for heads, "scabmettlers" who make armour from their own congealing blood and many other wild and wonderful hybrid creatures rub alongside each other. But it's also a world in which power is always wielded, brutally, from above. Miéville has lambasted JRR Tolkien's presentation of fantasy as a cosy "consolation", and The Scar is anything but consoling. His main character, Bellis Coldwine, is a lonely, withdrawn woman forced into exile: she is press-ganged onto a floating pirate city, Armada, ruled by a close-bound pair known only as the Lovers – who carve matching scars into each other's faces – and their enigmatic bodyguard, Uther Doul. We gradually discover that the citizens of Armada are on a quest to harness the power of a rift in reality – the Scar, or one of the scars, of the title – but Miéville doesn't deal in fulfillment, or triumphal homecomings. The journey is everything.The journey, and the monsters. Miéville has often said,, "I'm in this business for the monsters", and The Scar contains some of his best. The aquatically enigmatic grindylow, "unclear things … pulling their way through water". The anophelii, terrifying mosquito-people who once "ruled the southern lands in a short-lived nightmare of blood and plague and monstrous thirst" known as the Malarial Queendom and are now confined to a tiny island for everyone else's safety (the women swell up as they drain their victims of blood; the men are nervous. As in our world, only the females bite). And best of all, "the mountain-that-swims, the godwhale, the greatest beast ever to visit our world, the avanc". This mythical creature, which is bigger than can possibly be imagined – though Miéville has fun trying – is the only thing strong enough to drag the floating city towards its goal. In a world full of magic, a legendary being so extraordinary that even the characters barely believe it's real adds another layer of wonder.If Bas-Lag is a cold and hard place for its inhabitants, dangerous and mystifying by turns, however, there is something intensely reassuring for the reader about being hundreds of pages deep in a fantasy world and knowing there are hundreds more to go (the paperback clocks in at 795pp). I first read (some of) The Scar on a weekend in Porto, and remember clearly the sense of visiting two vivid new places running in tandem: the real and the fantastical. Some books are best experienced when you're 14 (I'm thinking chiefly of Alan Garner's exhilaratingly bleak Red Shift, which will always be in my top 10 even though I can never return to it with the same teenage intensity). Others can make you read as though you're 14 again: heavy with time, light on responsibility, eager to surrender to a world more extreme and highly coloured than the one around you and not at all averse to a wee bit of portentousness. And just as there is something comforting about knowing there's a rich alternative world folded into fiction to explore, there is something comforting, of course, about being able to close the book.