Around 320,000 Britons visited China in 2007. One of the world's great cultures has finally embarked on a path towards prosperity. China is a much more comfortable and welcoming place than it has ever been. Last year, Tony Blair told us that because of economic changes and rising prosperity, the movement towards democracy in China is "unstoppable."Everything from economic reforms to rising wealth levels, a growing and modern middle class (currently around 100-200 million people) behaving and acting like we do in Britain, and even granting Beijing the Olympics was meant to hasten the arrival of democracy in China. But since the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989, China is seemingly further away (pdf) from democracy.What happened? After all, the circumstances seem ripe for democratisation.There is apparently a strong correlation between free and open markets, and free societies. Prior to reforms in 1978, China's private sector produced less than 1% of output. Today Shanghai feels like a shining, new, cosmopolitan city. There are now 30 million private businesses in China producing over 70% of its national output.Yet political reform has stalled over the past decade. Importantly, the overwhelming majority of China's elites - entrepreneurs, professionals, intellectuals, students, journalists, and so on - have lost interest in political reform. When pressed, most express support for the political status quo and are even critical of the 1989 Tiananmen protests.In fact, these elites are the fastest-growing groups wanting to become members of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Almost a quarter of the 70 million party members are professionals and skilled workers. One third are college students, and another third are businesspeople. These elites, who were meant to lead the push toward democratisation, have become the party's newest and strongest supporters.The common mistake made in the west is to assume that while China's society and economy is rapidly changing, its authoritarian political institutions remain static. Those too quick to proclaim democracy on the horizon in China have underestimated the determination, capacity, and resourcefulness of the regime in its efforts to remain in power.Authoritarian regimes cannot afford to be made irrelevant by other forces. To preserve its economic relevance, the Chinese regime has gone to extensive efforts to maintain control of the major levers of economic power. This control is the heart of an economic structure that entrenches the role and position of party members in Chinese economy and society. Around a dozen key segments of the economy - including banking, construction, infrastructure, media, and telecommunications - are dominated by state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The state still owns a majority of the country's fixed assets and receives over two-thirds of the country's capital.The CCP has conducted a tireless and largely successful campaign to co-opt, and in many respects create, the rising educated and economic classes. By remaining the key economic player as well as overseeing an extensive system of awards, promotions, and regulation, the government continues to control and dispense a dominant share of the most valued economic, professional, and intellectual opportunities.This means that entrepreneurs are better off doing business as a "partner" of the state. Intellectuals and academics favoured by officials are granted generous research grants, are fast tracked into senior positions, and given personal perks. Journalists have little choice but to work for media outlets that are still subsidiaries of party organs. These are the contented middle classes emerging in China today. Far from being an independent class, why would these middle classes want to change toward a more democratic system when it could lead to their own dispossession?The CCP's hold on power remains vulnerable to a profound economic shock, such as a significant downturn in economic growth. This would impede the regime's continued capacity to co-opt and appease. Regardless, a Chinese middle class that looks and acts the same as we do in the west might nevertheless think very differently when it comes to democracy and the future of the country.