China has long inspired interest among graduates looking to broaden their horizons while adding to their CVs. The vast landscape, mystique and culture exceeds the nation's borders, but for all its thousands of years of history, it is the current expectations of the nation which is now capturing the imagination of many."I graduated in French and German from Oxford University in 2003, but realised that the bigger opportunities actually lay eastwards," says Daniel Nivern, 27-year-old director and founder of China Recruitment, an organisation that he set up two years ago to bring UK workers to China, linking them with Chinese companies and businesses that have a need for English speakers.Being based in China is not without its advantages. "Our costs are massively lower in Beijing than in London. This includes everything - office space, travel, salaries, stationary, phone lines. In fact, you can easily get carried away and end up spending money carelessly," Nivern says.The first time he touched down in China he had no knowledge of the language and no experience of Asia. Yet you can sense that his optimism helped him make it work in a country that shares so little with his own culture. But then again, this is his job."Chinese is a great language to learn and it's surprisingly easy to start communicating after a couple of weeks. The grammar is less difficult than that of most European languages," he says, but does admit that he still struggles with getting the complex different tones in the language.Now his company helps to bring UK graduates to China. He set up his company in Beijing with just £1,000 of start-up money and now employs six full-time British and Chinese staff in the company's office in Beijing, after hitting the business networking schemes around the city."The first six months were tough. It took time before things started to take shape," Nivern says. But it seems for those setting up business in China, the most valuable currency is local knowledge and an understanding of the culture."It is a land of opportunity, says Luke Hambleton, a 25-year-old graduate who studied Chinese and sinology at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London. He started out as a teacher and went on to co-found a consultancy in Beijing which advises UK business on how to deal with business in China. He writes papers on sectors and the culture of Chinese business."One of the biggest mistakes that people in the UK make about China is they misunderstand people's attitudes towards the communist state. It is common to see and hear the state and politics satirized and mocked in a way that many people in the UK would simply assume was unthinkable," Hambleton says.But it is necessary to recognise the differences between the west and China, as Rebecca Robinson, a 24-year-old graduate, who studied Chinese and history at the University of Leeds realised. She first worked as a teacher in Liuzhou, in Guangxi province in the south of China before she moved on to work for China Recruitment as a programme organiser, where she liaises with British applicants and her counterparts in Beijing and around the country."In China, you sometimes need to be patient and understand that things are more difficult," Robinson says. Hambleton agrees: "Sometimes when drawing up and discussing a contract with your Chinese business partner, it is quite common for certain key points to be hurried and renegotiated at the last minute when everything appeared to be signed and sealed. Many barriers such as language and cultural attitudes can really hinder deals."The Chinese often talk of the post-1980 generation - those entering the workforce at the same time as China itself is developing economically. They have the chance to define themselves and their own identity. This is the China of the new and one of an entrepreneurial spirit, they say."The Chinese are extremely pragmatic and for all the notions of a communist society, they have a very capitalist spirit. Building close relationships is absolutely key and this takes time, effort, patience and understanding," Nivern says. "When I started researching working opportunities in China, I found that there were very few companies that were able to offer any assistance and it was really difficult to penetrate a largely unknown country. I knew that China was going to be very different."The Olympic Games in August offers challenges and opportunities of its own, especially within Beijing - opportunities that Nivern has, like the Chinese, been building up to. "This is a momentous moment for China," he says. "It offers the Chinese two weeks when the whole world will be focused on them, and after being closed to the world for so many years, believe me, they are ready to make an impression."He is quick to acknowledge that the recent earthquake and flooding disasters may make bringing graduates to China during August more difficult. But he knows that the Olympics will give an insight into modern-day China, a country that the rest of the world in reality knows little about."Olympic fever is everywhere. There are billboards on street corners, clocks counting down, new buildings being erected all over the place, a new airport terminal with a new express train to the city, and two new lines of the subway," Nivern says. "I made a calculated decision to prioritise Mandarin and understand Chinese culture rather than seek a job using my European language skills. This was based on the promise and the potential of China."For Nivern and anyone he has placed anywhere in China, they hope that when the Games come, they will have front-row seats as history unfolds.