What is the biggest change you have seen in China? And in your own life?In the past five years, my life situation has become worse and worse. I was locked up for two years. They never told me why. I was just petitioning to get back some money that the police had stolen from me. It made me hate the party more and more. I lost hope and confidence in the government.I was beaten and tortured by officials in Baishan in Jilin. I came to Beijing to protest. If the system worked well, the culprits would be punished. But they are not. This is not the problem of one or two officials. It is the whole system, right from the top. Because the top is not doing well, the bottom is suffering even more. Under President Hu [Jintao] the situation for petitioners is even worse than under president Jiang [Zemin].What's your greatest hope for China and for yourself?My greatest hope is that the Communist party will be eradicated. They are not humane. They killed people in Beijing in 1989 and since then, they have killed people in Xinjiang and Guangdong.  Police and soldiers fired their guns on ordinary citizens.I hope human rights organisations and foreign nations will join together to criticise the Chinese government. If they do, I think the government won't dare to be so brutal to people. International pressure will help.What is your greatest fear?My greatest worry is that what happened in Tiananmen Square in 1989 will happen again. Even now, many petitioners are looking for a place to hide because they fear police will round them up before 4 June [the 20th anniversary of the crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests].Before the 2008 Olympics, the government did very bad things to ordinary people. This year, I am afraid it will be worse. I have given up trying to get justice for myself. I just want the world to know what the party and the government have done. We want political reform. There is an ancient saying: "He who has the people's heart has the nation. He who loses the people's heart loses the nation." I think the government has lost the people's hearts since 1989. They are afraid of their own people.