China is a one-trick pony. Without the US and Europe to soak up its factory output, it doesn't have a growth plan. Except that isn't quite true. Like Japan in the 1980s and the UK in the decade before the boom, it has a liking for property investment. As a sideline to its enormous manufacturing sector, there is an ever-expanding apartment and office-building craze.A reliance on manufacturing and property in Beijing is as unbalanced as the UK's binge on property and financial services until 2007. No wonder the Chinese miracle is, temporarily at least, coming to a halt.Growth has slowed, with a drop in manufacturing output chiefly to blame. Part of the fall can be blamed on high inflation, which has eaten into corporate profits and personal incomes and wealth. Policies to tackle rising prices have had little impact on the way households view the future and inflation expectations remain high. This has the effect of discouraging investment and consumption.But the bigger cause of the slowdown is the eurozone crisis and the way it has panicked all areas of the world economy to stop spending. Fears that Italy could be allowed to collapse, much in the way Lehman Brothers was in 2008, has stopped anyone with money from spending, compounding the problem that there are many people and countries without any money, only debts.The US, some European countries and the world's central bankers have pleaded with China to wean itself off cheap exports. The last 15 years of export sales have resulted in a massive foreign exchange hoard in dollars, euros and to some extent sterling.In the boom the Chinese happily pumped these funds back into the banking system for it to be lent to western consumers. However, this neat little circle of western consumers borrowing to buy Chinese goods has dislocated.Lombard Street Research, an economic analysis firm, says China will have a hard landing in 2012. It points out that indexes of production are now at levels last seen before the crash.Beijing's response this week was to loosen monetary policy. It told Chinese banks they could lend more to businesses, many of which are now struggling to cope with a sharp loss of export business.But will it tackle the fundamental problem of an indebted Europe unable to pay for Chinese goods? The signs are not good.We need to go back to the postwar period to find a similar landscape of economic imbalance. In the aftermath of war, Europe was broke and unlikely to buy US goods without a boost from Washington. President Truman instigated the Marshall plan of aid and investment. Then President Eisenhower wrote off most of Europe's debts. In particular, another nation with a huge export surplus, Germany, had all its debts wiped clean.The Chinese refuse to believe their role is similar to Uncle Sam's. To some extent they are right. Europe today may be in debt, but it remains fully functioning and rich. The problems in Italy and Britain are as much about the wealthy refusing to pay higher taxes towards deficit reduction as they are about the total sums involved. Beijing feels the postwar analogy falls flat for just this reason.Martin Feldstein, a professor of economics at Harvard University and Ronald Reagan's chief economic adviser, agrees that a Marshall plan is unnecessary. He said recently that Italy, the achilles heel of Europe, can sort out its own problems without going cap in hand to Beijing, Brussels or anyone else. Feldstein is a supporter of Greece leaving the euro and of major reforms to spur growth in Italy, Portugal and Spain.The problem is that markets are running out of patience. And who are the investors in those markets? The big US pension funds, the oil-rich sovereign wealth funds of the Middle East, Norway and South America, and the massive Chinese investment funds. If these groups backed off, just for a little while, to give the Italians a chance, a Lehman-style crisis could be averted.