“There’s a bit of a British attitude which treats China as a sweatshop on the Pearl River,” George Osborne opined during a trip to the world’s second largest economy in 2013.“One of the things I’m trying to do this week in China is change British attitudes,” he said.The chancellor’s message appears to have eluded the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt. On Tuesday, citing his Chinese wife as inspiration, Hunt suggested Britons needed to pull up their socks and work hard “in the way that Asian economies are prepared to work hard”. Related: Hunt: tax credit cuts will make Britons work like Chinese or Americans The answer, as might be expected in a country with more than 760 million workers, is complex.The average Chinese worker puts in somewhere between 2,000 and 2,200 hours each year, Wang Qi, a researcher at Beijing Normal University, told the Wall Street Journal last year.That compares to a UK average of 1,677 hours last year, according to figures from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.But Chinese work hours have been falling for at least three decades, said Li Chang’an, a labour economist at Beijing’s University of International Business and Economics. “Since the 1980s and 1990s, Chinese workers have been working shorter and shorter hours,” Li said, pointing to improved labour laws, improved productivity and the introduction of two-day weekends.“We visit many factories every year,” Li added. “In most, working conditions are improving [and] salaries increasing while working hours are decreasing.”Perhaps unsurprisingly, China’s hardest grafters are its impoverished and often exploited migrant workers, the Wall Street Journal found.China’s average migrant worker worked 8.8 hours each day in 2013, it claimed, citing official statistics. Nearly 85% of migrants worked more than 44 hours a week, earning an average of just £270 per month.The consequences of such relentless work can be dire. Reports in China’s state-run media last year claimed that a staggering 600,000 citizens were dying from over-work each year.A 2012 editorial in the China Daily newspaper complained: “Employers cajole, persuade, goad or force their workers to work overtime because they want to perform better in China’s highly competitive market to ensure that they don’t go out of business.”Better-off Chinese people are suffering, too. A report by the Boston Consulting Group claimed that half of China’s more affluent classes now complained of health issues stemming from “work pressures, family obligations, and long work hours”.“Common complaints were insomnia, fatigue, a lack of energy, obesity, and frequent illness,” it warned. “The incidence of these complaints is growing fast, especially among younger people.”But all those man-hours do not necessarily pay off. Chinese experts have urged employers to reduce workloads as a way of boosting productivity. “Working overtime is not good for workers’ health and does not improve productivity and efficiency,” said Li, the Beijing-based labour economist.“Chinese workers have to work longer hours than their peers from the more developed countries, such as the UK and US, because China’s production efficiency still lags significantly far behind those countries,” he said. “As we are still at the developmental stage of chasing GDP growth and increasing total production, long working hours will persist for a certain time.” Additional reporting by Luna Lin