Two officials in China have been fired and five more given formal warnings after a young woman was forced to have an abortion at seven months, state media has reported.The news emerged hours after Feng Jianmei's sister-in-law and a lawyer advising the family described how relatives had been followed, harassed and attacked as "traitors" for speaking to foreign media. The whereabouts of Feng's husband is unknown.The case ignited anger across China after a picture of 22-year-old Feng lying beside the bloodied body of a seven-month old foetus circulated widely on the internet.Authorities in Ankang city in Shaanxi province said on Tuesday night that they had removed the director of the Zhenping county family planning bureau and the chief of Zengjia township government. The director of Zengjia family planning office and others were given warnings under the internal Communist party disciplinary system.The Xinhua news agency reported that authorities said the abortion had severely violated planning policies and that there were no legal grounds for the demands for a fine on the couple for breaking family planning laws."The incident showed that some officials at the grassroots level have a weak sense of the law and show little concern for the well-being of the people," it added."The incident has cast a very bad influence on society and other officials should draw a lesson from this."But Zhang Kai, a lawyer who has been advising the family, said: "Only one or two officials will be removed from their position. Others have been a given serious warning and had a demerit put on their record, [but] it only means they will not get a salary rise or promotion in the next 18 months. No one is taking criminal responsibility. It does not make sense in terms of law."The family is not happy with the result. We will discuss what to do later."He added that authorities should also be paying Feng compensation; not, as they have announced, giving her a "living allowance", which is normally given to support people on low incomes.Feng's sister-in-law, Deng Jicai, said she was unhappy with the outcome but no longer wished to speak to foreign media.Feng's hospital was targeted by protesters this weekend. One held a banner reading: "Beat the traitors and expel them". Officials in Zhenping county had claimed that Feng agreed to have an abortion "after repeated persuasion". But her husband, Deng Jiyuan, said she had been hooded, abducted and forcibly injected to induce the abortion after the couple failed to pay a 40,000 yuan fine for breaking family planning laws. He said they could not afford to do so. His sister said on Tuesday he had called her to say he was safe but that she did not know where he was.The case has sparked wider discussion in China about the cost of the country's "one-child" rule, although strict family planning rules have exemptions for many families, particularly in rural areas. Experts have long been pressing for a shift, possibly to a universal two-child rule, pointing out that China's population is ageing at an alarming rate.Forced abortions are illegal in China and family planning enforcement has shifted towards less coercive methods in recent years. But abuses have continued, with experts blaming the population targets that officials must meet.