Many would be justified in thinking that China has already "gone global". This phrase, though, has a special significance for China, referring to a policy started in the mid 1990s to make its firms globally competitive. A decade later, it permitted the first outward foreign direct investment by a commercial firm, TCL, who acquired Thomson of France. The next few years witnessed Lenovo's purchase of IBM's PC business and a slew of other attempts, for example, Haier's failed bid for Maytag.The trend, though, slowed with the onset of the global financial crisis. Until the full extent of the crisis was evident last autumn, Chinese firms ranging from insurance companies to manufacturers were raising funds on domestic stock exchanges, tapping the high level of domestic saving essentially trapped in China, to position themselves to purchase distressed western companies which were suffering from the credit crunch, but were otherwise good prospects. With some signs of stability in the west, Chinese firms are resuming their "going out" policy. Even last year, China invested $56bn in outward foreign direct investment, a 194% increase from the previous year. With inward foreign direct investment averaging some $60bn per year, China is poised to turn from a net recipient to a net investor in FDI, a marker of its maturation in many respects.Certainly, throughout the crisis and before, state-owned Chinese firms have been actively investing in energy and commodity firms around the world, from Africa to Latin America. But, the interesting shift in policy is that commercial Chinese firms are seeking to establish themselves globally, with competition being stiff in many sectors of the domestic economy. Perhaps more crucial is the learning and acquisition of technology that can occur when firms operate in global markets. As China's productivity slowed in the mid 1990s relative to the early years of reform after 1979 this was a strong motivation to get Chinese firms onto the world stage.The wider implications of this policy include a continuation of the global imbalances whereby China and other high savings countries fund western borrowing. But, instead of China's current account surplus (which has hit record highs due to the greater decline in imports relative to exports) being mostly financed by purchases of western government debt, Chinese capital outflows would go into foreign firms. And such investments could therefore potentially ease the credit crunch in the west where companies are suffering from the withdrawal of credit while the banking system stabilises – while also lessening Chinese concerns over weakening western currencies due to the potential monetisation of government borrowing leading to inflation. Commercial investment by Chinese firms would help western firms weather the global credit crunch while the western firms de-leverage. It is also a more efficient way of exporting high levels of Chinese savings than via its sovereign wealth funds since private firms are better than government entities in choosing investments and in theory, less controversial. However, herein lies the key challenge.The opacity of Chinese firms, including those which are listed on stock exchanges in New York and London, leads to questions over the extent to which they are truly private. This will be an ever-prominent issue. The backlash in Australia against Chinalco's investment, which is financed by a Chinese policy bank (China Development Bank), in Rio Tinto is but one example. There is, therefore, a strong imperative for the Chinese to improve the transparency of their firms so that their non-state firms – which are the engines of their successful transition process – can enter global markets. This means greater clarity in ultimate shareholding structures, sources of finance, corporate governance and adoption of internationally accepted accountancy standards. With the UK-China summit that concluded earlier this year, the emphasis on British firms offering expertise is well placed. There are significant opportunities for firms in Britain to provide advice to Chinese companies seeking to operate in global markets. It is a valuable avenue for promoting growth in export of services –something that has been important to the British economy and thus its potential for recovery.The benefit of the "going global" policy will ultimately build up the Chinese economy, as their firms move up the value chain and help the country to "catch up." Prospects for growth may well depend on its success.