Here comes the bride, all dressed in ... plastic. At least she might be if you purchase one of the increasing number of commemorative toys being produced to cash in on the marriage of Prince William and Kate Middleton in April 2011.Never usually ones to miss out on a money-making opportunity, toy manufacturers are launching royal wedding-themed playthings aimed at children (who probably have no idea who Willliam and Kate are) and their parents in the hope that Wills and Kate fever will add to a toy market worth around £2.7bn a year in the UK alone.The most talked about toy is the £15 Happyland Royal Wedding Set, available to pre-order from the Early Learning Centre for delivery in March, though online customers have already begun receiving their sets. "Prince William and Kate sit in a gold trimmed horse-drawn carriage while The Queen, Prince Phillip and their favourite corgi are protected by a Royal Cavalry soldier in full uniform and a foot soldier wearing a smart red jacket and bearskin helmet," the marketing blurb informs us.This is, admittedly, a cute set of figurines – albeit one featuring some interesting design choices. Prince Phillip seems to be sporting a reasonably thick head of hair, while William's equally follicly-challenged bonce is tastefully covered by a military cap. The happy couple have a permanently fixed wave, while the horses appear to be the same size as the 3" human characters and the corgi more closely resembles a collie dog. But all of them have an unsettling blank stare, as though the happy royals have accidentally been crossed with a Stepford Wives toy range.Another cracker is the forthcoming Celebration Wedding Set from Sylvanian Families, a bizzare mixture of the real world and the fantasy realm of Sylvania – heavily populated by rabbits and other cute animals. William & Catherine Balmoral are both bunnies, while Louise and Amelia Periwinkle are rabbit bridesmaids and James Periwinkle a perky-looking rabbit page boy. Standing out starkly from the bucks and does is Reverend Kelvin Waters, who is possibly a beaver. Hours of endless fun for £24.99.Corgi cars has also got in on the act, producing a £9.99 1:36 scale navy blue Austin Mini – a limited edition celebration of "all things British", sporting an SW1 William & Kate London road sign on the side and a Union Jack roof. The toy car manufacturer has also produced a three-piece commemorative die cast set (featuring a Mini, London bus and a van) for £24.99 and a 24 carat gold-plated commemorative die cast Model T Ford van (£29.99). The vans sport a fetching portrait of Wills and Kate on the side, lest you forget who they are while your children are ramming them into your floorboards.Many readers will find the toys expensive, with prices not too dissimilar to items in the official range of china (which includes handmade cups for £35 a pop and pill boxes at £25), and Aynsley's royal wedding collection (coasters at £9.95, Crown bells at £19.95). But, of course, you cannot put a price on taste.Other items available across the web include commemorative jigsaws and teddy bears. But what I'd really like to see is a Star Wars-themed wedding set, with Prince Phillip as Darth Vader and The Queen as Yoda, Fergie as Mon Mothma and princesses Eugenie and Beatrice as Ewoks. Prince Edward and the Countess of Wessex could be C3PO and R2-D2 respectively, while at a push Prince Charles and Camilla could be Luke Skywalker's guardians Owen and Beru Lars. William and Kate would, of course, be Han Solo and Princess Leia, while Prince Harry would make a fine Jar Jar Binks.Or a Lord of the Rings wedding figurine set, featuring Prince William as Aragorn and Kate as Arwen and ... you get the idea. How else could toy manufacturers cash-in on the forthcoming nuptials? What other mergers of the film world and the royal family would you like to see immortalised in plastic? Do the toys offer genuine opportunities for fun and games, or are they simply soulless cash-ins designed to part parents from their cash?