China has slashed interest rates and cut the amount of money banks must set aside as reserves, as it attempts to bolster the economy in the face of the worldwide slowdown.Today's 1.08 percentage point cut, to 5.58%, is the largest reduction for a decade, reflecting the government's increasing alarm at slipping growth rates and its keenness to ensure companies and consumers spend more. This year will end the country's half-decade run of double-digit growth and the World Bank yesterday cut its prediction for GDP growth next year from 9.2% to 7.5%, which would be the lowest rate since 1990."It's certainly a lot more aggressive than anything they've done recently. I think it speaks volumes about just how much China has slowed down," said Anthony Muh, Asia Pacific head with AT Asset Management in Hong Kong.Liu Dongliang, a currency analyst at China Merchants Bank in Shenzhen, told Reuters: "All my colleagues were shocked by such a big easing."Officials unveiled a 4 trillion yuan (£385bn) stimulus package earlier this month, but it has since emerged that only around a third of the money will come from the central government. The rest is expected to come from local authorities and private investment and the authorities are keen to see banks increase their lending to struggling enterprises.The central bank cut interest on a one-year loan by 1.08 percentage points, to 5.58%; the largest cut in the lending rate since October 1997. The deposit rate will fall to 2.52%, the biggest cut since June 1999. The reserve requirement rate for the largest banks will fall by 1 percentage point to 15.5%, while that for smaller banks will fall by 2 percentage points to 14.5%. The People's Bank of China said the measures, which take effect tomorrow, are meant to ensure sufficient liquidity in the banking system to ensure growth. There have now been four interest rate cuts in two and a half months, reflecting a shift by policymakers from tackling inflation to supporting growth. The annual consumer inflation rate more than tripled last year to 4.8% despite six interest rate rises and 10 increases in banks' reserve requirements. But it peaked this spring and the central bank's vice governor Yi Gang said earlier this month that the threat of inflation had "basically vanished". Niu Li, senior economist at the government thinktank the State Information Centre, suggested the scale of the change would be crucial to its success, telling Reuters: "Compared with a series of small steps, a one-off big move is more effective in boosting confidence."But Michael Pettis, professor of finance at Peking University, warned: "This relieves pressure on companies with cash flow problems, but doesn't address the fundamental problem in the economy - lack of demand ... There is not tremendous demand producers can't fulfil because of the high cost of capital, but overcapacity."Recent months have seen a steep decline in export growth and analysts believe that next year may see exports actually fall. The government hopes to offset the problem by boosting domestic consumption, but many argue that it will take years to shift spending significantly.Stephen Green, head of China research at Standard Chartered, wrote in a note: "The hope will be that this move will trigger more buying interest for homes, as well as support investment, both private as well as the coming wave of public projects. But rate policy in this environment is a marginal factor - businesses think about possible returns on investments, and households will look at house price prospects."