For China, it was the biggest surprise of the Beijing Olympic games: Liu Xiang pulled out of the 110m hurdles. At 11.30am on Monday, the whole nation was shocked to see Liu walk off of the track. His achilles heel dashed his, and the whole nation's, golden dream.  In the hours following, an online poll on the website of Beijing's Economic Observer, 51% of the respondents voted Liu's actions were "understandable", leaving comments like "Liu is a hero, but also a normal person. No one should require an athlete to run at the cost of a possible life-long injury." The rest were against the athlete's withdrawal, demanding he: "At least finish the competition, even by walking or crawling." Three hours later, after a press conference during which his coach, in tears, defended Liu's decision, the authorities asked websites across China to run a piece of commentary, first appearing on the state-run People's Daily, urging people to show sympathy to Liu and respect his decision.  Liu was the whole nation's hero when he won China's first men's track and field gold medal at the Athens Olympics in 2004. It was a symbolic moment, when Chinese athletes finally broke into an area previously dominated by the west. To some extent, Liu was regarded as a symbol of China's ascent towards sporting superpower. Like the hosting of the Olympic games, Liu's success heralded the dawn of a new era, when China's success extends from economy to sports. Which is why Liu's performance attracted so much attention from the whole country, and possibly the whole world.  When Liu limped back to the starting line after the false start, my colleagues, watching the live TV broadcast in the office, began to speculate about the severity of his injury, reported previously in the media. After his exit was confirmed, a fierce debate broke out, with most sympathising with Liu.  Chinese people are so eager to become successful, not only in the economic field, but also in sport, to prove that the dark 20th century, when the country was invaded by western and Japanese powers, has faded permanently into history. The national frenzy after the successful launch of the Shenzhou 6 manned aircraft into orbit was more evidence of this. Liu's failure is in some way seen as shattering his nation's hopes. In this context, it's understandable that some Chinese have castigated him.  On the other hand, the expanding economy and ongoing property rights reforms have broadened the outlook of Chinese people. Many of them now believe individual property rights should be protected and that private ownership would ensure a more prosperous society. Respect for the individual is a precondition of private ownership protection. Thus, many Chinese are realising that the government has no right to intervene in their private decisions. In this context, it is understandable that Liu's decision is regarded by many as motivated by selfishness and self-preservation.I for one respect Liu's decision: he is the only one who should be responsible for himself. We have no right to ask him to sacrifice his health in the name of the nation's glory.  It is intriguing that the government has shown sympathy towards Liu. Unlike the opening ceremony, Liu's failure can be regarded as a personal one, but not a national humiliation. A gold medal from Liu would have been perfect, but it is no longer essential. Decades ago, reports in the official media praised military pilots for risking their lives to land a faulty fighter jet safely instead of aborting the mission and losing the plane. At that time the value of an aircraft, in the eyes of some officials, was higher than the life of a pilot. That is not the case now. In April 2001, when a Chinese fighter jet collided with a US spy plane over the South China Sea, the pilot Wang Wei aborted his fighter jet after the collision, but was still regarded as a hero. This reflects a positive development in China: official attitudes are changing and becoming more humane.  China's vice-president, Xi Jinping, even contacted the general administration of sport to express concern and sympathy for Liu, state (and world) media reported. If Liu can't provide additional glory to China's gold count, why not use this as an opportunity to show the more humane side of the Chinese government?