Shi Ying is a member of China's urban middle class. Her parents were workers in Hangzhou and she spent time during the Cultural Revolution in the countryside. She is now a magazine publisher in Shenzhen, where she lives with her husband and three dogs. Her daughter works in Beijing.MondayBreakfast: congee, bread and one egg. Cost this year: 3 yuan per person (cost last year: 2.5 yuan)Lunch: rice, cabbage, kidney bean, chicken paw, yoghurt. Cost 14 yuan/person (12 yuan) Dinner: pawpaw with bird-nest, steak, kidney bean, fried pork, pumpkin leaves, fish, cucumber, seedcake. Cost this year: 380 per person (280 yuan)Total cost for daily food this year: 397 yuan (294.5 yuan)Shi Ying often eats out with friends and relatives, they usually spent 50 to 100 yuan per person. But sometimes when they have meals with important guests they spend more. She also feels the pressure of price rises so instead of going to a restaurant every week she and her husband now hold more gatherings at home.TuesdayBreakfast: conjee, one egg, dumplings. Cost this year: 6 yuan (4.5)Lunch: rice, short rib, green vegetable, soup of corn, carrot and pig bones, tomato. Cost this year: 15 yuan per person (12)Dinner: With friends in a restaurant: beef, horsebeans, tofu, kidney beans, soup of kelp, soybean and pig bone, rice, water melon. Cost this year: 27/person (20)Total cost for daily food this year: 48 yuan (36.5)The price of the meat is more than twice as much as last year. But the main reason Shi Ying and her family buy less meat than before is because they wanted to avoid fat and unhealthy food. The family like soya products, they often eat tofu and other types of beans.WednesdayBreakfast: noodle with green vegetable, pancake, soya milk. Cost this year: 3 yuan (3)Lunch: fish, green vegetable, pork fried sweet bean, bread with butter, rice, kelp and pig bone soup. Cost this year: 20yuan/person (16)Dinner: beef, tofu, soy pork bone soup, rice. Cost this year: 25 yuan per person (20)Total cost for daily food last year: 48 yuan (39)Shi Ying and her family usually choose food according to whether it is healthy or not. But price is a factor. Since pork rose much more quickly than beef, they eat more beef. Apart from pig bones they don't buy pork products any more.ThursdayBreakfast: egg, congee, dumpling, rice noodle. Cost this year: 4 yuan/person (4)Lunch: duck, Chinese cabbage, kidney beans, rice and soup made from peanut, lotus root and pork. Cost this year: 22 yuan/person (15)Dinner: beef, tofu, grean vegetable, soy and pork bone soup, rice. Cost this year: 25 yuan (20)Cost for daily food this year 51 yuan (39)When Shi Ying was young, she felt very fortunate on the rare occasions when she could eat meat. But now, although she could afford to eat it every day she does not do so because of health concerns. She also worries about pesticide and fertilizer so she always chooses "organic products" even though they are more expensive.FridayBreakfast: bread, congee, egg fried rice noodle. Cost this year: 5 yuan (5)Lunch: beef fried potato, green vegetable, tofu, rice and pear. Cost this year: 18 (15)Dinner: tofu, beans, fish, rice. Cost this year: 20 yuan/person (19)Cost for daily food this year: 43 yuan (39)Even though the family have two incomes, Shi Ying feels prices are rising faster than she can handle. On weekly visits to the supermarket in the past, they would spend less than 300 yuan but now food buying trips cost them 400 to 500 yuan. Even the price of dog food increased by 30%.