As several readers pointed out in the comments to my last post, though it's great for finding stuff to add to your collection, eBay isn't the place to bag a bargain when it comes to vintage china. Most of what you'll buy will be sold for roughly market price – if something seems cheap, that's probably because it has flaws or damage. If you can't afford a SylvaC bunny, Clarice Cliff cruet set or Midwinter Zambesi tea service, there are some other cheaper options – makes of china that so far haven't obtained the same level of popularity. This is the stuff you can sometimes still pick up for a few pounds in a charity shop or at a flea market or car boot sale. But given the ubiquity and low price of this china, it's even more important to find flawless pieces. Buy because you like it, will treasure and use it, but not for its market value – sometimes a firm such as SylvaC will become a collector's must-have, but don't rely on this happening to your chosen pattern. Take the designs of Edward Thomas Radford, for instance. I love the matt glaze and handpainted flower patterns of this maker but for reasons I can't quite fathom they seem to sell rather cheaply - particularly for the later stuff, usually marked "E Radford". I am particularly fond of the anemone pattern. From the 1960s, Toni Raymond's kitchenware is also fun and dirt cheap – I am after one of the owl-shaped holders for string and scissors.After my first post one reader professed to be a collector of Hornsea, and I can see why – it's classic 1970s stuff from designer John Clappison that's still cheap to buy and tough enough to be used on a daily basis. There are designs called Heirloom (which actually began production in 1967), Bronte or Saffron to choose from. I picked up this pair of Heirloom vinaigrettes (pictured) at my local charity shop for £1 the other day. If you prefer the 1960s, Summit is a Hornsea design from this era that's not highly valued right now. (Although being more of a fan of the 1950s and 1960s I prefer Clappison's earlier work, including this stunning Aphrodite vase, which unfortunately isn't so easy on the purse).My final tip is the designs of Kathie Winkle, who worked for James Broadhurst and Sons in the 1950s and 60s producing mass-market china which was sold under the slogan "Beauty on a Budget". If you're anything like me, this is the stuff your nan probably had in her kitchen cupboards. I am a particular fan of the pattern Palma Nova. Hornsea Heirloom coffee pot (3 days to go). Hornsea Summit salt and pepper shakers (3 days to go). Radford candle holders pair (3 days to go).Next time: vintage china with a festive theme