 8.33am BST Middle East Live is now primarily a forum for readers to share links and offer commentary on developments in the Middle East and North Africa. Please post your comments below.Here's a roundup of the latest news:• Egypt is holding its breath for mass demonstrations to mark the first anniversary of President Mohamed Morsi's election on Sunday, amid speculation the army might intervene in the event of large-scale civil unrest. Opposition activists claim an unverifiable 15 million Egyptians have signed a petition demanding Morsi's removal, and expect a significant proportion of that number to take to the streets on 30 June.• Morsi's supporters are to hold "open-ended' rallies - two days ahead of the opposition protests calling for the president to resign, the BBC reports. Meanwhile, one person died and a number of others were injured in clashes in northern Egypt late on Thursday.• A new protest movement that has rejuvenated Egypt's secular opposition – which had seemed beyond resuscitation three months ago. Tamarod, which means "rebel" in Arabic, is exclusively focused on collecting signatures for a petition that calls for President Mohamed Morsi's resignation. Tamarod have also become a lightning rod for violence, with several of their offices attacked by unknown opponents.• The increasing polarisation in the country could lead to violent confrontation, warns the respected Egypt watcher Nathan Brown. Writing in Foreign Policy he says: Whatever the outcome of the confrontation on June 30, Egypt's deep structural problems will remain. But the society will be addressing them with weakened and tarnished institutions, a political process incapable of producing clear policies, embittered losers and mistrustful winners, and no accepted procedures for resolving political differences. These problems may slowly resolve themselves over time, but Egyptian politics shows few signs of patience.• GuardianWitness is inviting readers in Egypt to share their stories, videos and images of this weekend's protests. Please share your eyewitness accounts or information that will help us document the situation. • An explosion struck the Christian Bab Touma district in the Old City of Damascus on Thursday in what Syrian state television said was a suicide bombing. Opposition sources said it was a mortar attack. It was the first major blast reported inside the walls of the Old City, a Unesco World Heritage, since the uprising began. At least four people were killed and several wounded, Syrian television said.• The Independent's Patrick Cockburn, who was staying near the scene of the blast, said the aftermath appeared to resemble damage done by a mortar bomb rather than a suicide bomber. There was no blood around the spot as there would have been if someone had blown themselves up. It looked as if the mortar had been randomly fired into the Christian quarter by rebels who assume Christians, frightened of Islamic fundamentalism, are pro-government.• UN inspectors, blocked from entering Syria, are in Turkey to gather information about possible use of chemical weapons in the civil war, Reuters reports. The visit came as the head of the team, Swedish scientist Ake Sellstrom, met Turkish foreign minister Ahmet Davutoglu. • The International Committee of the Red Cross said it is planning humanitarian operations for an extended conflict in Syria in the absence of any sign of a diplomatic breakthrough.  Red Cross president Peter Maurer, said: "We don't see where a political solution should easily come from. And that's the reason why we would rather calculate for a longer conflict. Even if we would find a solution tomorrow, Syria would need badly much more humanitarian assistance than what is delivered today."• European feminist activists who spent a month in jail after a topless protest in Tunisia retracted the apology they made a day earlier to go free and claimed to have endured filthy and humiliating conditions in prison. The two French women and a German member of the Ukrainian group Femen were freed overnight after a court in the Muslim country lifted their prison sentence. Hours later, on Thursday, they arrived in France.Updated at 9.02am BST