As the justice system in Egypt grows more selective, the judiciary appears more interested in setting political scores and punishing dissent than establishing justice.It is in this frustrating context that the verdict in the case of Yara Sallam, of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR), approaches. She has already spent more than 100 days in prison awaiting trial on charges of breaching the unconstitutional protest law which has been used to lock up countless activists, dissidents and others unfortunate enough to be swept up in mass arrests since its passing last year.Sallam’s predicament started on 21 June, when men in plain clothes handed her over to the police while she was buying water at a kiosk near a demonstration dispersed earlier by security forces. Within days, Sallam found herself in the dock facing baseless and trumped-up charges of “displaying force” and vandalism, in addition to participating in an unauthorised protest. The fact that not a single shred of evidence exists linking Sallam to any violence has not stopped the prosecution from indicting her, or the judge from rejecting requests to end her unjustifiable pre-trial detention.When Sallam and 22 of her co-defendants first appeared in court on June 29, her family and friends were hopeful. After all, there was no reason to keep the defendants behind bars as none of the legal justifications for pre-trial detention had been met. The 23 defendants posed no danger to society. There was no reasonable risk that, at liberty, they would tamper with the evidence or intimidate prosecution witnesses – who happen to be policemen. Shattering hopes, the judge adjourned proceedings to 13 September while continuing the detention of the defendants. Again and again, the trial was adjourned and Sallam’s imprisonment was renewed. The judge eventually announced that a verdict would be issued on 26 October.Making any prediction of trial outcomes based on legal standards is no longer possible. Hundreds of people were recently convicted of killing a single police officer without any evidence of individual criminal responsibility or a proper chance to plead their innocence. Nowadays, courts rely on police and intelligence reports and witness testimony by security personnel to establish defendants’ guilt in politically motivated cases. Other “incriminating” evidence against journalists and activists recently presented in court has included all sorts of bizarre things. In the infamous case against three reporters working for al-Jazeera English, the evidence included video clips of their reporting in other countries, pictures of private family vacations and even a music video.Meanwhile, security agents are allowed almost absolute immunity. Just this month, several protesters who were arrested during the 6 October 2013 demonstrations against Morsi’s ousting were found guilty of involvement in the murder of fellow protesters – while not a single police officer has been charged over the unlawful killings of at least 49 people in Cairo alone that day.In acquittals of security officials in the aftermath of mass killing of protesters over the past three years, judges frequently evoke lack of evidence linking suspects to crimes. If they applied the same stringent standards of proof for protesters and other political dissidents, Egyptian jails would be less crowded.Sallam is by no means alone in suffering injustice at the hands of a state determined to crack down on independent NGOs, clear the streets and universities of protest, lock up thousands with a blatant disregard for due process rights and give carte blanche to security forces to kill and torture with impunity. But in unjustly locking up Sallam, a human rights defender, authorities are trampling not just on her rights, but also on the rights of countless victims of violations she has dedicated her life to protect despite the risks. We at EIPR, fear that her human rights work plays a role in her continued detention. On the night of her arrest, she was repeatedly questioned by police about EIPR’s management and activities. Her cousin, arrested with her, was let go hours later without charge.With Sallam’s verdict approaching, one tries to remain hopeful against the odds. Last month, at the United Nations general assembly, President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi renewed his promise of “a new Egypt, a state that respects rights and freedoms … enforces the rule of law, guarantees freedom of opinion for all”. Such promises ring hollow as long as Sallam and thousands of others find themselves arbitrarily locked up, at the mercy of a judiciary that routinely denies victims the protection of the law, while allowing perpetrators to evade justice.