Fears for the integrity of Egypt's legal system deepened on Monday after 529 supporters of the ousted Islamist president Mohamed Morsi were sentenced to death for the murder of a single policeman, in a mass trial that lasted less than two days.Lawyers and analysts said the sentences were likely to be commuted on appeal. But their scale and the brisk way they were enforced heightened concern for Egypt's rule of law amid a crackdown on political opposition. At least 16,000 mainly Islamist dissidents have been arrested since Morsi's overthrow in July.Amnesty International described the news as "injustice writ large", and said it was the largest single batch of death sentences it had seen anywhere in the world in recent memory.The sentences are likely to spark yet more unrest, with Egyptians from both secular and Islamist backgrounds expressing anger. Supporters of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood announced large-scale protests to begin immediately and continue on Tuesday.Sixteen defendants were acquitted after lawyers said they had not been allowed to present a proper defence during either the trial's first hearing, on Saturday, or the second and final session on Monday.Ahmed Shabeeb, a lawyer for the men sentenced to death, said: "This is a disturbing verdict that infringed all laws, regulations, as well as the 2014 constitution."Shabeeb claimed that the judge, Saeed Elgazar, sentenced the men out of spite after being told during Saturday's 45-minute-long session that his behaviour was unconstitutional."Don't talk about the constitution, I don't want to hear about that in my court," Elgazar had said, according to Shabeeb. The judge's outburst reportedly started a fierce argument that he tried to resolve by calling armed security officials to guard the judicial bench, Shabeeb added."He swore he'd give a verdict at the next session on Monday, and that is what happened," Shabeeb said. "It is a reckless verdict that was borne from anger."The defendants were sentenced in Minya, a southern city that was hardest hit by a spasm of anti-state and sectarian violence that erupted across Egypt last August. Mobs thought to be sympathetic to Morsi attacked dozens of churches and police stations in revenge for the state's brutal clearance of a pro-Morsi protest camp in Cairo.A deputy police commander, Mostafa el-Attar, was killed in the Minya violence, and it was for his murder and the attempted murder of two others that the 529 were sentenced to hang.Families of the accused and rights lawyers described the process as a miscarriage of justice. "Nothing can describe this scandal. This is not a judicial sentence, this is thuggery," said Waleed, whose father was among those condemned, and who asked not to publish his surname.He said Monday'ssession lasted five minutes. "And during those five minutes none of the lawyers or the defendants were listened to, not even the prosecution. The judge just came in to acquit [the 16] and sentence to death the others," he said.Mohamed Zaree, head of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, said: "This verdict is a disaster. To rule in the second session of a trial – it means the judge didn't hear the defence or look at the evidence. Even someone from the second grade of the law faculty would never have issued this verdict, it goes against the basic principles of criminology."Many compared the sentences unfavourably to the 10-year jail term given last week to a police captain who was found culpable for the gassing to death of 37 prisoners last August.The death sentences are the latest instalment of a campaign of repression that has seen over a thousand in which more than 1,000 dissidents have been killed, thousands more have been arrested, and journalists have been jailed for advocating or reporting narratives that oppose the post-Morsi state.But Nathan Brown, a professor at George Washington University and an expert on the Egyptian judiciary, said the verdict was highly unlikely to have been directly ordered by a central figure such as Egypt's army chief, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi."Parts of the judicial apparatus are fully on board with the new repressive order, at least for now," said Brown. "Many felt that they were under attack by the Morsi presidency and they have rallied around what might be called the 'party of order' represented by the military, the security apparatus, and the top of the religious establishment."I think it is more a matter of a common mentality than direct co-ordination. Indeed, the court here has gone so far that it is difficult to see that it serves the interest of the regime."Egypt's foreign ministry was at pains to emphasise the conditional nature of the sentences, hinting at embarrassment at Monday's events. "The law allows the verdict to be appealed," its statement read, in red type that was emboldened and underlined. It claimed the ruling "would be overturned as soon as the defendants demand a retrial".More draconian verdicts are feared on Tuesday, with the same Minya court due to try 683 other Brotherhood supporters and officials including its leader, Mohamed Badie, and the head of its political wing, Saad al-Katatny.