With a bulging suitcase of author recommendations in hand (along with a couple of bottles of Vinho do Porto), it's time for the world literature tour to move on from Portugal after an inspiring month.The number of mentions you gave to Fernando Pessoa (ApeofGod tells us that "as Pound said of Eliot, 'I can only repeat, but with the urgency of 50 years ago: READ HIM") mean he's now at the top of my wish list; PatriciaC recommended particularly his The Book of Disquiet, "a beautifully written yet very painful response to the almost banal daily observations and occurrences in the narrator's life".In fiction, António Lobo Antunes and Eça de Queirós (JohnCa highlights De Queirós' The Maias) were very popular, while ptolo assured us that Agustina Bessa-Luís "is definitely Portugal's greatest novelist", and liked the sound of the prolific Gonçalo M Tavares, who he said only started publishing at the age of 31 and has written, in the last seven years, at least 22 books. If you're looking to get into Saramago, LeoToadstool recommended his novel The Year of the Death of Ricardo Reis, in which one of Pessoa's heteronyms survives his creator and returns from Brazil to 1930s Portugal to "meet his maker".Literary tourers again proved equal to the question set by exam master BillyMills, who asked about the potentially fraught relationship between Portuguese and Spanish writing. "I think our literature remains original and set apart from the rest of Europe, and also Spain," said NunoH, who believes the country's writing is closer to South American writing such as Borges and Marquez. "Not so plush as those, but very intelligent and closed up on itself." MariaCastro was adamant that the relationship is very different to the one between Ireland and England, saying that the main theme running through Portuguese literature is that of Portugal itself. "The Spanish ruled Portugal from 1580 to 1640, when they were barely the country we've come to know as Spain these days," she added. "Our problem is mostly with ourselves and with Africa."Understandably, voting on where we go next isn't quite as exciting as enjoying the place where we are, but yet again there were very few votes on our next destination, which was tied between Egypt (two votes) and a combined Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia (two votes). So, as Egypt has been on the shortlist quite a few times, we're off to the land of the pharaohs.From today's bestselling novelist Alaa al Aswany, and Naguib Mahfouz, the first Arabic writer to win the Nobel prize, to the country's ancient myths, Egypt has a literature stretching back thousands of years. So please, tell us where to start.And while you're at it, remember to vote on where we go next – you can see where we've already been here. I fancy a trip to South America, personally.