Quickly!" a voice said urgently. My friend and I were ushered against the wall near a field clinic tent. Seconds later, makeshift flamethrowers lit the air beyond the tent to our right and in front of us as a swell of people surged from Tahrir Square into Talaat Harb Street.It was 9pm on January 25, the second anniversary of the Egyptian revolution, and we were trapped in the field clinic.When we had arrived at the edge of Tahrir from Talaat Harb Street, some men from the Dostour party had seen us and refused to let us enter the square, saying that they wouldn't be able to protect us. One man, his distress obvious, told us how difficult it was to rescue women attacked by the mobs.Now, inside the clinic, there was a wall behind us, a fence to our left, and barbed wire strung between the two, blocking the only other exit.My friend, Gameela Ismail, a prominent public figure and rights activist, called over an ambulance driver working the square. She told him our situation. He tried to get someone to us, but the ambulances were on the opposite side of the square. There was no way to move through the crowds.The shouting and flamethrowers continued. Two middle-aged women were guided around the tent to us – the men protecting us had rescued them from the mob. While we were being urged into the field clinic, the group moving out of the square included remnants of the Egyptian Women for Change march, mostly women over 40, which had been attacked and dispersed in the square. Many women made it away from Tahrir, but a few got stuck in the throng – including the women now with us.One woman, shaking and crying, put her head on my shoulder, and I wrapped my arms around her. Her companion screamed and yelled. Gameela pleaded with her to save her energy; we had no idea what would happen next, or how long we would stay out of sight – and reach – of the mob. Another woman, also rescued from the mob, soon joined us, crying and yelling.Suddenly men wearing black ski masks and carrying long knives and clubs were jumping the fence to our left. It was impossible to tell which side they were on, but they turned out to be from the Black Bloc and joined those protecting us. Some of them were now trying to rescue another woman stripped naked by the mob metres away.Moments later the shouting around us increased. "Basouraa!" – quickly! – yelled one of the men with us. I turned to see a few men holding up the barbed wire barricade and motioning us under. We quickly doubled over to get under the wire and out into the street. One woman's hair caught on the barbs, but she managed to get free.We hurried down the street, away from Tahrir, Gameela calling out to make sure all the women were with us. Twenty or so men accompanied us. One large, tough-looking man wore a green beret and carried a heavy club covered in metal studs. I was glad he was on our side.