Wael Ghonim, 31, created the Facebook page We Are All Khaled Said that played a key role in the Egyptian uprising in January 2011.I was blindfolded in a makeshift prison, who knows where. I'd been there for six or seven days, and was beginning to lose hope. I thought of my wife and kids, and began to question why I'd got involved, why I'd returned to my homeland. I didn't think I'd ever get out, but I knew this was a cause worth dying for. I thought to myself, it doesn't matter whether you live to 30 or 70, it's what you do with those years.I had never considered myself political – I still don't. I was a product manager for Google in the UAE when I started the Facebook page in June 2010 with a friend. There was already one called I Am Khaled Said, but that felt too strident, too aggressive. Khaled had been tortured and killed by the state police. For us, he became an iconic figure. He was young and middle-class, and was killed, some say, for exposing police corruption. He could have been any of my friends, and we could have been him.Initially, the other Facebook page was more popular, but ours began to take off. Today, it has 1.8m followers. I used the pseudonym El Shaheed, or the Martyr, to protect my identity. People liked the fact that we were anonymous, that it was all about the cause. People started posting on the page about the need for change, arranging demos. The 25 January protest was first mentioned on 14 January. We asked if members were going to take to the streets as the people of Tunisia did. Political groups started to adopt the call and it snowballed. It became mainstream when the opposition championed the demo and the dictatorship inadvertently promoted it by warning people not to go. We had no thoughts of a revolution, we just wanted a better country. It helped that I was not an activist – that can put a distance between you and others, and we wanted the page to talk the talk of the average person.The fact I wasn't living in Egypt didn't seem relevant to me, but as 25 January drew near, I knew I had to be there. I'd never have forgiven myself if I had told people to risk their lives from the comfort of my computer room. My wife wasn't happy. I went on the 23rd. The 25th was brilliant. It was no longer just people talking in cyberspace. Millions were demanding the overthrow of Mubarak.On the 28th, at about 1am, I was taken prisoner. I was walking home from a restaurant when three state security people surrounded me. One pushed me to the ground, another covered my mouth, and I was bundled into a car. It was terrifying. I was blindfolded, nobody talked to me and I lost all concept of time. The only thing that gave me any structure, an internal clock of sorts, was praying five times a day. After 10 days, they told me they'd release me: they'd finished their investigations and concluded I wasn't guilty of anything – initially, they couldn't believe I wasn't part of an international conspiracy to bring down the government, that I was just an individual tired of living under a dictator. I spoke to my wife to tell her I was to be freed. She was incredibly emotional. When she had lost contact with me, she'd feared the worst. A lot of people were taken captive in this period; many were later found dead.I knew I had unfinished work in Egypt, so I returned to my mum, brother and sister in Cairo. My wife was upset: she feared the same thing could happen again and next time I wouldn't be so lucky. I didn't see her or my children until the week after Mubarak resigned on 11 February. When I was released, it seemed pointless to hide my identity. After I had been kidnapped, a friend leaked my name, and the fact that I ran the Facebook page, to a newspaper in the hope that it might help find me. When I left prison, I went on one of Egypt's biggest TV shows. People have called me a hero, but that's ridiculous – this has not been a revolution of heroic individuals, but about people coming together to overcome dictatorship. The cause is the hero. I have been given awards and was named one of Time magazine's most influential people of the year, but I find it embarrassing. For one thing, my fellow administrator Rhimin has had it tougher than me: he was called up for national service last year. And second, anybody could have started the Facebook page. We are all Khaled Said.A few weeks ago I helped set up a political pressure group, Our Egypt. Those involved don't want political power, just to ensure it is exercised fairly. I know the country has made mistakes over the past year, but I am optimistic about Egypt. I will be protesting again on 25 January, and I do believe we will grow into a mature democracy.• Revolution 2.0: A Memoir from the Heart Of The Arab Spring, by Wael Ghonim, is published by Fourth Estate (£14.99 and ebook). To order a copy for £11.99, go to theguardian.com/bookshop. • This article was edited on 16 January 2012. In the original, we misspelled the name of Wael Ghonim's fellow administrator. This has been corrected.