The Egyptian government has refused to concede that terrorists brought down a Russian passenger jet in the Sinai desert last week, despite the US and the UK saying that intelligence points strongly to the crash being caused by a bomb.Egypt’s foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, pushed back against international suspicions that the tragedy was an act of terrorism, as intensifying restrictions on air travel threatened to cripple the country’s vital tourism industry.“We have not dismissed any possibility but there is no hypothesis yet, before the investigations are over and a full report is ready,” Shoukry said on Saturday.His comments came after several countries decided to block flights to the popular Red Sea resort.Shoukry said foreign intelligence that had triggered the international travel restrictions had not been shared with Egypt. “We expected that any technical information should have been shared with us, at a technical level, before publicising it in the media,” he said.Security officials said, however, that they had launched an investigation into local staff and ground crew in Sharm el-Sheikh who had come into contact with the MetroJet Airbus A321 before it crashed 23 minutes after takeoff, killing all 224 people on board.Egyptian authorities are checking cameras at the resort’s airport for any suspicious activity related to the crash, security officials told Reuters. “We want to determine if, for instance, anyone sneaked past security officials or the metal detectors. We are also trying to determine if there was any unusual activity among policemen or airport staff,” one of the officials told the agency.The US has offered to assist the investigation with satellite imagery and other intelligence information, but neither Egypt nor Russia had so far asked for such help, a senior Obama administration official said on Friday.“As far as I know, we haven’t been asked, as of yet,” the official said.French sources close to the crash investigation told Agence France-Presse that black box data pointed to a bomb having gone off on board the flight.A group affiliated to Islamic State, which is known to operate in the Sinai peninsular near to where the plane crashed, claimed responsibility last Saturday. David Cameron has since said UK intelligence services had gathered information suggesting that a bomb “had more likely than not” been the cause of the explosion. He has also grounded all British flights bound for Sharm el-Sheikh.Twenty-four hours after Vladimir Putin criticised the UK for banning its flights to and from the resort, the Russian president went one step further and suspended Russian air traffic to and from all airports in Egypt.In a fresh blow to Egypt’s already struggling tourism industry, he also began the return of all Russian tourists on holiday in the country. Moscow has imposed similar travel restrictions on returnees to those brought in by the UK, forcing them to leave their hold luggage behind.As many as 79,000 Russians are currently thought to be in Egypt, mainly in Sharm el-Sheikh. The move will further add to the chaotic scenes at the airport, where thousands of holidaymakers are stranded. Egyptian authorities said on Friday that it would be unable to accommodate the mountains of luggage being left behind. Around 1,400 British tourists have been brought back to the UK, but another 2,600 are still stuck at the resort. Only eight of the scheduled 29 flights departed on Friday, but more are expected to arrive back in Manchester and Luton on Saturday. In a further blow to the region’s security, it has also emerged that a plane carrying British holidaymakers to Sharm el-Sheikh came within 300 metres (1,000ft) of a missile as it neared the airport in August. The government confirmed that a Thomson Airways flight carrying 189 passengers from London Stansted took evasive action after the pilot spotted the missile.The crew of flight TOM 476 landed the plane safely and passengers were not told about the incident, which otook place on 23 August. The incident will underline fears that regional instability could threaten flights, and questions have been raised over the decision not to inform the public of the near miss. A government spokesman said: “We investigated the reported incident at the time and concluded that it was not a targeted attack and was likely to be connected to routine exercises being conducted by the Egyptian military in the area at the time.”