Defence lawyers for three journalists on trial in Egypt over charges of broadcasting “false news” and aiding the Muslim Brotherhood made closing arguments on Thursday.The nearly 18-month legal ordeal undergone by the three has been widely denounced as an attack on press freedom. Journalists Mohamed Fahmy, Baher Mohamed, and Peter Greste were arrested from a Cairo hotel room in December 2013. The three, who had been working for al-Jazeera English, were convicted and spent more than 400 days in prison following an initial trial.After an appeals court ordered a retrial last December, Greste was deported home to Australia, while Baher Mohamed and Mohamed Fahmy were released on bail in February. Greste remains on trial in abstentia.In a courtroom inside Cairo’s Tora Prison on Thursday, defence lawyer Khaled Abu Bakr refuted each of the charges against Fahmy, asserting there was no evidence of any connection between him and with the Muslim Brotherhood, which was banned and declared a terrorist organisation after the military removed president Mohamed Morsi from power in 2013.“He mentioned to the judge the ABCs of journalism,” Fahmy said outside the courtroom following the session. “Our job is to speak to the terrorists, to the criminals, to the killers, whoever it is. Our job is just as messengers, nothing more, nothing less.”Fahmy said he believes the judge, Hassan Farid, is focussing on technical aspects of the case, in particular whether the journalists had been working with government accreditation, and whether the network was licensed to broadcast in Egypt. Fahmy blames al-Jazeera for endangering him and his colleagues and is now suing the Qatar-based network for damages.“I made it very clear, in very aggressive and detailed rhetoric, that we inquired, and I as bureau chief inquired, and so did my team, about the legalities of our situation, and we got confirmation from the network that we were legal,” he said. “If there is a conviction related to that specific accusation, the network needs to be accountable 100% for this issue.”The prosecutors presented their closing arguments on Monday, reiterating a narrative of the journalists operating as a “cell” from a room in the Marriott hotel in Cairo. They alleged the journalists altered footage of protests in order to destabilise Egypt.The prosecution rests on a trove of videos, apparently seized from the journalists, presented as evidence in the trial. In an earlier session of the retrial, a court-appointed committee of experts said they found no evidence of fabrication, and could not establish that the footage had been broadcast.At the conclusion of Thursday’s session, Judge Hassan Farid adjourned the proceedings until 11 June, when other defence lawyers will present their closing arguments. 