Tutankhamun has always been a source of popular curiosity and intrigue. But debates about his demise have been put aside recently in favour of his beard – and its unfortunate experience with glue.Pharoahs aside, the likes of pyramids, mummies and hieroglyphics all make ancient Egypt is a fascinating topic that can really capture the imagination of teachers’ young charges. It’s also great context for learning about early civilisations, not just as part of the primary history curriculum, but across a range of subjects and stages.Find out what students already know by working as a class to create a mind map of ancient Egypt. These glossary cards by Seeme Resources contain some useful keywords. Working in groups, challenge students to match the words to their definitions or ask them to choose one word each to illustrate and write a sentence about. You could then use this work to create a “word wall” with this colourful vocabulary-themed poster in the centre.You’ll find a wealth of information on the geography, history, culture and religion of ancient Egypt in this interactive whiteboard activity by the Guardian. It works really well if you have access to a computer suite where students can work in pairs. Before starting, ask pupils to identify two or three questions they have about ancient Egypt. They can then explore the resource, which has been designed like an expedition into a tomb, for answers. Alternatively, prepare a list of questions in advance to challenge your students to work independently. For example: When did people first settle in the Nile Valley? What job did a scribe do? Who discovered Tutankhamun’s tomb? What is papyrus? How long is the River Nile?If you want to take a closer look at the River Nile, this ebook, by Teaching Packs, explains why the river was so important to the ancient Egyptians and how they used it. As a design and technology project, challenge groups to construct a “shaduf” – a type of water-lifting device – using materials such as straws, string, plasticine and a yoghurt pot. A complete version of the teaching pack, which includes information on ancient Egyptian food, drink, clothing and jobs, is available here.The British Museum has a fantastic range of resources to support teachers working in the new history curriculum. These include a mini-lesson for key stage 2 about how papyrus was made and what it was used for. Reinforce students’ learning by asking them to write their name or a short message in hieroglyphics. There’s also a mini- lesson about the development of mummification which you could follow-up with this experiment to mummify an orange by the Young Archaeologists’ Club.If you would like to read about at ancient Egypt in the news, this article by The Day looks at efforts by scientists to discover what Tutankhamun’s face really looked like. Students are encourage to debate whether such an undertaking is necessary or desirable. You’ll find lots more articles about Egypt here, including a piece about the beard on Tutankhamun’s burial mask being glued back on after it was knocked off by cleaners. As an extension activity, ask students to write a news report as if they were covering the discovery of Tutankhamun’s tomb by Howard Carter in 1922.For primary 3 to primary 5 students in Scotland, this worksheet, for those visiting the National Museum of Scotland (NMS) in Edinburgh, sets out eight challenges pupils must solve using the Egyptian artefacts they find as they explore the museum. The accompanying teacher’s notes feature ideas for use back in the classroom. These include designing a god or goddess with the head of an animal, making a statue for a pharaoh’s tomb and creating a model of an ancient Egyptian temple. The NMS also offers a series of online games about ancient Egypt and a workshop suitable for students aged six to 11.Finally, we have a range of resources to brighten up your ancient Egypt displays including page borders, writing frames, display numbers and letters all by Twinkl. There’s also an activity for primary pupils to design a sarcophagus on squared paper, and a net for making a square-based pyramid which you could use to give a maths lesson with an ancient Egyptian twist.