 4.43pm BST I'll close the liveblog now as the pace of events in Cairo has slowed. There will be more article being posted in the coming hours by Patrick Kingsley and Ian Black from Cairo which will also appear in the Observer tomorrow. 4.39pm BST  4.02pm BST #pt: teenagers drove me to a police stn, where i was detained for 90 mins perhaps, then taken to 2nd stn nr Ramses, &released after 30 mins 4.02pm BST #pt: they duffed me up a bit, took my laptop &phone, &drove me several miles. Then two teenagers on 2nd moped managed to get me off (cont) 4.01pm BST hi everyone - sorry for a 2nd scare. am safe now but v briefly: was surrounded by a mob near Ramsis perhaps three hours ago (cont)Patrick's now elaborating on his "arrest". 3.50pm BST Reports are now emerging that the security forces are in full control of the al Fateh mosque and all protesters have now left.Also, a bomb has been detonated outside the Egyptian consulate in the Libyan city of Benghazi but no one has been injured. 3.45pm BST I have just noticed Martin Rowson's apt cartoon on the situation in Egypt. 3.15pm BST Situation in Cairo and elsewhere in Egypt appears to have calmed down. Patrick has once again been released by the police. 2.26pm BST Guardian correspondent Patrick Kingsley is currently detained in al Daher police stations after a citizens' arrest. @petersbeaumontPatrick's second arrest today. This is indicative of how tense Cairo is. Other reporters have been beaten up. 1.14pm BST A poster below the line has linked to footage of Egyptian television broadcasting images of dozens of men of different ethnicities who it accuses of being foreign terrorists.It's difficult to say anything that other than there is footage of a room full of men with their hands tied up. The existence of foreigners in Cairo which is home to the most important Islamic university, Al Azhar, is no surprise. Such footage will convince Egyptians that they are under foreign attack which many have always believed regardless of evidence and provide reasons for banning the Muslim Brotherhood again. 12.58pm BST Live footage of bombardment of mosque on al Jazeera here. People running around in confusion but no sign of guns. 12.51pm BST Witnesses are now reporting that a gun battle has broken out between security forces outside the mosque and one person inside the mosque. The order of events is far from clear but bullets are flying around Ramses Square again.Updated at 12.51pm BST 12.47pm BST AP have just quoted Egyptian security officials who say the brother of al-Qaida's leader Ayman al-Zawahri, Mohamed, has been arrested. The arrest is probably connected to the mass of arrests of prominent members of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt rather than al-Qaida activity. 12.42pm BST Reuters have just snapped two lines from the Egyptian government. 12.29pm BST The Egypt Independent website reports that Tamarrod, the organisation whose protests ushered in the military coup against Mohamed Morsi, is now agitating for a rejection of American aid.Tamarrod also wants to revoke the 1982 Egypt-Israel peace deal. It seems like a mild rebuke to the US for its measures against the government's suppression of protests in the last week.The Egyptian army receives $1.3 billion per year in military aid which it spends on American made-equipment such as Apache helicopters.Updated at 12.30pm BST 11.58am BST There are reports that people inside the mosque are now leaving and getting attacked by the army supporters outside. The security forces are trying to intervene and they have also entered the mosque. 11.56am BST We understand that Patrick Kingsley is now free and we are waiting to hear from him. 11.50am BST Reuters reports that one of the sons of Muslim Brotherhood General Guide Mohamed Badie was killed on Friday in Cairo during the "Day of Rage" protests against the army-backed government.Ammar Badie, 38, died of a bullet wound sustained while taking part in protests in Ramses Square on Friday, it said. Mohamed Badie's whereabouts are unknown. He has been charged with inciting violence and faces a trial that starts on Aug. 25. 11.34am BST Amnesty International called for a full investigation into the violence against protestors on Friday.According to Philip Luther, their director for the Middle East and North Africa‘There seems to be little doubt the security forces have been acting with blatant disregard for human life’  11.30am BST I was just trying to get through to Patrick Kingsley to find out what was going in Ramses Square but it appears he has been led away by the police. 11.24am BST #BreakingNews: Armed groups fire at the Asbakia police station in central Cairo: Al Arabiya correspondent. #EgyptThis refers to the police station closest to Ramses Square. 11.10am BST now heavy automatic gunfire on Ramses. Don't think we're leaving anytime soon.More from Patrick at the mosque. 11.00am BST trying to access al-Fath mosque from Ramses St. plenty of police and army. Suddenly around 15 gunshots. Retreated inside Red Crescent bldg.Patrick Kinglsey is also in the al Fateh mosque area. 10.52am BST The Egypt Independent, a government-controlled website, reports that the presidency will hold a press conference at 3pm local time (2pm BST) to "explain the situation". 10.45am BST LIVE image: Islamist protesters leave #Cairo mosque after seeking refuge overnight http://t.co/XGQQKqmk7y #Egypt pic.twitter.com/ROKTo5efihAl Arabiya has tweeted this image of the al Fateh mosque with black-uniformed policemen on the steps. 10.39am BST The instability in Egypt has led to the postponement of the retrial of former president, Hosni Mubarak, according to Reuters. Mubarak and his sons, Alaa and Gamal were due to appear in court today but did not because of "security reasons".It was the first time Mubarak, 85, had missed a session in the retrial, which got underway in May. The judge adjourned proceedings until Aug. 25. Mubarak was convicted and sentenced to life in prison last June for failing to stop killing during the 2011 uprising that swept him from power. But a court ordered a retrial in January after accepting appeals from both the prosecution and the defence.  10.35am BST PA are reporting that four Irish citizens are among hundreds of people trapped in the al fateh mosque.The three women and a teenager are children of Hussein Halawa - the Imam of Ireland's biggest mosque in Dublin. The four siblings, who are on holiday in Egypt, sought refuge in the mosque on Friday.Omaima Halawa, 21, who is with her two sisters Somaia, 27, and Fatima, 23, as well as their younger brother Ibrihim, 17, described the scene in Cairo as very frightening."We are surrounded in the mosque both inside and outside," she told Irish national broadcaster RTE. "The security forces broke in and threw tear gas at us."She said they had been warned they could be shot if they tried to leave. vilians in Cairo. 10.31am BST Sarah Carr witnessed the transition from protest to violence in Ramses Squares and she describes it here 10.26am BST I have just been speaking to Ian Black who is outside the al Fateh mosque.I'm standing about 150 yards from the mosque which is surrounded by troops and armoured personnel carriers. There are groups of people shouting in support of the government, General al Sisi and the army. They are calling for the army to get tough with the "terrorists" they say are inside inside the mosque. There has been the occasion burst of gunfire.There are no obvious signs of support for the people in the mosque who I beleive tried to leave at around 6pm on Friday before the start of the curfew. For some reason they were not able to leave which has led to this standoff.Many shops are shut but there are a lot of people around and there remains potential for more bloodshed. 10.13am BST Very sketchy on the side streets, citizen patrols appear to be roughing up foreigners. #Egypt 10.12am BST Tense stand-off outside el-Fath mosque. Military blocking off the area, citizen patrols walking around under their noses, wielding batons.Louisa Loveluck, Cairo-based journalist has just arrived at the al Fateh mosque 10.07am BST There appears to be a standoff developing at the al Fateh mosque near Ramses Square in Cairo, scene of much of yesterday's violence. Various reports suggest that it is under siege or that soldiers have entered the mosque. Live footage shows scores of people inside the mosque, including imans, doctors, journalists and protesters. Some people are lying on the floor and there is at least one shrouded body.Updated at 10.12am BST 9.51am BST More killed in Egypt during 3 days than in Iraq during last month. And I’m deeply worried by Iraq…The Swedish foreign minister puts the violence in Egypt in context. 9.47am BST The Associated Press estimate that more than 82 people were killed on Friday including 72 civilians and 10 policemen.In the Red Sea city of Suez, 14 people were killed in clashes between protesters and security forces. In Egypt's second-largest city of Alexandria on the Mediterranean, 10 people were killed during clashes between the two rival camps. Security officials said violence was also fierce in the province of Fayoum, an oasis region southwest of Cairo, where seven people were killed during an attempt to storm the main security building there, a security official said. Two policemen died in the attack. 9.41am BST After scores of deaths on Friday and the army claiming to have arrested more than 1,000 members of the Muslim Brotherhood, early indications suggest that supporters of the Brotherhood and the security forces are set for another day of violent confrontation across Egypt.Read our latest article from Cairo here.