8.24am: Welcome to Middle East live. The tents are back in Cairo's Tahrir Square. Protesters have started a new sit-in in the square in protest at the pace of change from Eygpt's interim government, the New York Times reports.The camp follows the fiercest street fighting seen in central Cairo since the fall of Hosni Mubarak left more than 1,000 people injured.Political analyst Nabil Abdel Fattah explained why protesters have returned to the streets:Nabil Abdel Fattah, a political analyst at the al-Ahram CentreThese clashes are the result of Egypt's new regime trying to reproduce the authoritarian policies and brutal, unaccountable security apparatus that were the tools of dictatorship for the old regime, and they are a critical turning point for the revolution.We are seeing the same tactics – tear gas, bullets, state violence – that Mubarak used, and more importantly we are hearing the same discourse from Egypt's interim rulers. 'This is a plot to destabilise the country, there are shadowy groups trying to sow discord.The Washington Post says Egypt is not prepared for elections due to take place in September.Meanwhile, there are intriguing developments elsewhere in the region:• France's decision to parachute weapons to Libyan rebels risks "Somaliaisation" of Libya, the African Union has warned. Jean Ping head of the African Union Commission told the BBC:The risk of civil war, risk of partition of the country, the risk of Somalia-sation of the country, risk of having arms everywhere... with terrorism. These risks will concern the neighbouring countries.• Nato is reviewing the conduct of its military campaign in Libya in the wake of France's decision to arm rebels. The revelation surprised officials in Nato's headquarters in Brussels and raised awkward questions about whether the French had broken international law – UN resolution 1973 specifically allows Nato nations to protect civilians in Libya, but appears to stop short of permitting the provision of weapons.• The Syrian army has moved out of the central city of Hama to the surprise of activists and diplomats, the New York Times reports. They differ over how to interpret the government's decision there, asking whether the departure points to a government attempt to avoid casualties and another potentially explosive clash in a restive country, or to an exhausted repressive apparatus stretched too thin.But residents in Hama, the fourth largest city in Syria, have celebrated the departure as a victory that came after one of the worst bouts of bloodshed there in the nearly four-month uprising."Hama is a liberated city," declared one activist who gave his name as Hainin.• A large protest took place in central Hama last night, footage from activists claims._• A new report on the unrest [pdf] by Swedish Syria-watcher Aron Lund says that the regime is running out of choices. The report, entitled "Ghosts of Hama" in reference to a massacre in the city in 1982, concludes:Since piecemeal reform doesn't seem to be doing the trick for Bashar al-Assad, and piecemeal repression on a city-by-city basis has also failed to stem the tide of protest, the regime will increasingly be forced to consider the two extreme choices in its arsenal. To force a conclusion, it could either try to present a final 'grand bargain' of serious concessions, and make it stick through a negotiated process or a credible referendum – or, it could attempt to eradicate open dissent through a nationwide crackdown and mass police terror, like Hafez al-Assad in 1980.Neither choice seems like a particularly appealing route to take for the regime. The third alternative, to try to muddle through using carrot and stick, and bet that the opposition is going to exhaust itself before the regime does, is also a high-risk strategy for Bashar. Syria, as a country, is very poorly equipped to handle long-term unrest. The regime's legitimacy risks being fatally compromised by its failure to ensure stability, and the emergence of open dissent in a formerly closed system of president-worship will make a return to the status quo ante impossibleA senior Saudi Arabian diplomat and member of the ruling royal family has raised the spectre of nuclear conflict in the Middle East if Iran comes close to developing a nuclear weapon. "We cannot live in a situation where Iran has nuclear weapons and we don't. It's as simple as that," the official said. "If Iran develops a nuclear weapon, that will be unacceptable to us and we will have to follow suit."• Iran's embattled president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has warned his opponents against detaining any members of his cabinet in his first public reaction to the recent arrests of his close allies. The president said the arrests were politically motivated, and vowed to defend his government. Ahmadinejad's inner circle has been reduced to a handful of people after a power struggle emerged between him and Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.• The US has unveiled new sanctions against Iranians accused of helping Syria in its crackdown of protests.9.19am: Is the Arab Spring over? Two Middle East experts discuss the future of the unrest on BloggingheadsTV. Jillian Schwedler, from the University of Massachusetts-Amherst, says it would be a mistake to conclude that the Arab Spring is over and that "everything is on the table".But Gregory Gause, professor of political science at the University of Vermont, claims it is over in the sense that unrest has stopped spreading. The contagion effect has been halted by oil rich countries buying off dissent, he claims._9.52am: French arms parachuted to Libyan rebels will end up in the hands of al-Qaida, African Union commissioner Jean Ping told reporters._9.58am: The injuries to Yemen's president Ali Abdullah Saleh are so severe that it is unclear when he will return from Saudi Arabia, vice president Abdu Rabu Mansoor Hadi admitted in an interview to CNN.But Hadi said he expected Saleh to make a speech to the nation in the coming hours that will help change the situation, CNN said.10.32am: Syrian troops have withdrawn from the cities of Hama, Deir Ezzor and some Damascus suburbs, according to Wissam Tarif, from the human rights group Insan.He claimed the move was not tactical but a sign that the army is over stretched."It's exhaustion, it's an operation that is not sustainable," Tarif said in a Skype interview from the Hague, where is compiling evidence of human rights abuses in Syria.Tarif pointed out that although the Syrian army is "huge" it is only the infamous 4th division and the republican guard who can now be relied upon to put down the unrest. They number about 60,000 troops, Tarif said. He claims the withdrawal from areas raises big question about how the regime can finance the army. The withdrawal from Hama also potentially opens up an opposition base, Tarif said.The regime does not know how to handle the opposition Local Co-ordination Committees, Tarif claimed. One of the reason why the regime wanted the opposition meeting in Damascus is that they are scared. They know traditional opposition figures, but they don't know the LCC. Security people are thinking who are these young people? They don't have security files [on them]. They are the young people in each town and city who have engaged in the uprising and have paid a huge price, people who have proven to be highly organised and highly skilled...They are organising the protests, they are close to the street, they are talking to them on a daily basis. For the regime that is scary.On human rights abuses, Tarif said the evidence was overwhelming. "So far we have presented evidence [to the ICC prosecutor's office] which shows that the crimes in Syria are systematic, widespread and define crimes against humanity." He says there is evidence that 1,457 civilians have been killed by the security forces. The victims include 98 children. _11.08am: A court case into the killing of the Egyptian uprising hero Khaled Said, has been delayed until Septempter, Al-Masry Al-Youm points out.A hearing on the case in Alexandria did not last for more than 10 minutes before the postponement was announced. The court's verdict in the case was previously due to be announced that same day.The judge also ordered that a committee be formed to redo an autopsy of the body.11.15am: Some residents of the central Syrian city of Hama say the regime has already been toppled in the city, writes Nidaa Hassan.For two or three weeks, security forces have left Syria's fourth biggest city largely alone. "There are currently no posters of the president, no security forces and no checkpoints," said one young woman.Activists say at least 70 peaceful protesters were killed on June 4 when security forces opened fire in the city during Friday protests.Two security guards were killed in revenge attacks after funerals, but when tanks approached the city the following weekend, they did not enter, according to some reports. Others say the tanks entered for a day last week before withdrawing again. Residents say thousands of protesters now turn out for Friday demonstrations in the Town, with sit-ins in al-Assi square and demonstrations every night. "The atmosphere is like a carnival," said a person who attended last Friday's protest. "There are old and young people, women, men and children; the whole city is out."Syrians surmise that the government is leaving Hama alone because it doesn't know how to deal with a city deeply scarred by a previous crackdown in the 1980s. In the face of an Islamist uprising the government of then-president Hafez al-Assad launched a brutal army assault on Hama which killed at least 20,000 people, many of whom were civilians. The ensuing resentment and hardship this fuelled until today was recognised by president Bashar al Assad in his speech on June 21. Hama is not the only town from which some forces appear to have withdrawn. Residents of Deir Ezzor, a tribal city in the east, say army troops have withdrawn - after removing the statue of Hafez al-Assad. Security forces have been in and out but are currently present, although allowing peaceful day to day life to continue, a resident says.The city is a volatile mix of tribes and economic woes; most there own weapons. One man from the city says the forces are scared to crack down there. "They know that if they push us too hard, they will have a huge, potentially uncontrollable, problem on their hands," he said.The peace in Hama and Deir Ezzor coincides with a push by the Syrian government to regain international credibility, especially before the July 10 national dialogue. It allowed a meeting of intellectuals to go ahead on Monday and allowed in some foreign journalists. "I think the government is trying to keep a lull before July 10 realising it is losing strength," said one analyst in the capital. Activists say the government is buying time, pointing to the huge numbers of demonstrators in Hama and Deir Ezzor as evidence of the opposition that pours out in places free of security.Questions are being raised as to how the government will bring Hama back under control. "They may be hoping the dialogue will win people over but I don't think it will," said one diplomat. "But re-entering Hama would be tricky."Homs, Syria's third city, remains pinned down by army and security forces. Damascus and Aleppo have been largely free of mass uprisings but the security presence has been bulked up.Nidaa Hassan is the pseudonym of a journalist working in Damascus11.34am: Khaled Said's family has welcomed the review of a case of two Egptian policemen accused of beating him, AP report.The state forensic report concluded that Khaled Said died as a result of swallowing a packet of drugs. The finding has been widely ridiculed because photos of Said's battered body showed his face bloodied and his jaw shattered.Said's death in June of last year in Alexandria captured the attention of millions in Egypt and helped spark the 18-day uprising that ousted Hosni Mubarak in February. Witnesses say police agents dragged him from an Internet cafe after an argument and savagely beat him on the pavement outside.Said's family welcomed the review, which raised the possibility that the more serious charge of manslaughter could be added to the indictment against the policemen, currently charged with illegal arrest and the use of excessive force."We want them executed," said Zahra, Said's sister, who attended Thursday's hearing.11.46am: Protesters in Egypt are demanding the resignation of the interior minister, Mansour al-Essawy, in the wake of the crackdown against protests in Tahrir Square, according to Al-Masry Al-Youm press round up.According to privately-owned daily Al-Dostour, around 3000 protesters demanded the resignation of Essawy and compared him to his predecessor, Habib al-Adly, for ordering the security crackdown on protesters. Protesters chanted "We are not thugs, the Interior Ministry are thugs," and "Essawy and Adly are one hand," according to the paper.There is report that a British citizen was among 40 people arrested in the violence. And that football match between Ahly and Zamalek ? It ended in a diplomatic 2-2 draw.12.31pm: About 2,000 activists are camped out in Tahrir Square and are determined not to leave, Jack Shenker reports from Cairo.In a phone report Jack said activists are getting support from some politicians in their criticism of the police handling of the unrest. But protesters fear they are losing the PR battle with the military government over what happened during the clashes. As the government continues to maintain that the violence was caused by counter-revolutionary thugs, Jack said activists in Tahrir Square are having to convince passers by that they are genuine revolutionaries. "There's a lot of frustration among protesters that they are losing the PR battle," Jack said. Jack could not confirm a report that a Briton was among those arrested in the violence on Tuesday night, but he said British citizens were involved in the unrest. Jack also went to the Cairo derby last night. He said the atmosphere was incredibly intense and very different from the QPR matches he's used to. But predictions of widespread violence at the game proved wide of the mark, he said._12.50pm: As Jack mentioned, an Egyptian court has awarded compensation to a victim of police violence, in the first ruling of its kind.It could help placate public frustration at the lack of police accountability, Jack said. "People are very keen to seen victims being compensated, and police being held to account," he said. Al-Masry Al-Youm has this report on the case. Meanwhile, the prominent Egyptian blogger Zeinobia reports on the frustration at the continuing delay in the Khaled Said case.In a post on Egyptian Chronicles she writes: Needless to see people are extremely angry for this adjournment especially it is not the first adjournment in an important trial lately , also it comes in less than 72 hours after Tahrir clashes and the return of sit in... Many believe that this is a political move and that the police agents were going to be acquitted.1.44pm: Lebanon's senior prosecutor has received criminal indictments for four members of the Shia militant group Hezbollah, who are accused of assassinating the country's former prime minister, Rafiq Hariri, in a car bomb attack six years ago, writes Martin Chulov.The move is a significant step in an investigation into the attack that killed Hariri and 21 others on the Beirut waterfront on 14 February 2005.Security was immediately tightened in the city after investigators from the Hague-based Special Tribunal for Lebanon visited the offices of Prosecutor General Sayyed Merza, who now has the discretion to name the suspects.Within minutes of the meeting finishing, Lebanese media outlets named the men as Assad Sabra, Hassan Issa, Salim Ayachhe and Moustaf Badredine, all senior members of Hezbollah. Hariri's son, Saad, welcomed the indictments and called it a "historic moment".2.13pm: A leading British lawyer defended his decision to join a commission set up by the King of Bahrain to investigate human rights abuses during a violent crackdown against anti-government protestersn writes Halima Ali.Opposition groups criticised the commission as nothing more than a ploy to legitimise Bahrain's rulers and allow them to continue the human rights abuses of opposition supporters. But Sir Nigel Rodley, who is one five commissioner appointed by King Hamad insisted the investigation would be independent. "I would not have joined the commission if I didn't believe it would be a vigorous and robust investigation giving a convincing account of what happened" Rodley, a member of the UN"s human rights committee, told the Guardian.The King's decree to set up the commission came ahead of talks set to take place at the weekend between Sunni rulers and Shia-led opposition. Many believe the commission and the talks are aimed at quelling criticism.Zainab al-Khawaja, whose father Abdulhadi al-Khawaja was one of eight activists given a life sentence last week, tweeted:King Hamad and his games. I feel sorry for people who had high hopes that his speech wud be meaningful #BahrainBut Rodley defended the commission. "The commission's job is to investigate and tell the story like it was. It is up to to others to decide the political implications" he said. "If you are asked to investigate, you should do that."At least 31 people died in the crackdown against the uprising. Security sweeps have detained several hundred people, human rights groups report, including doctors and nurses from two hospitals in Manama. Hundreds more public and private sector workers have been suspended for taking part in protests.During a televised speech yesterday, King Hamad said he was committed to the respect for human rights and reforms, but blamed protesters for pushing the country into a "state of chaos"._3.29pm: Security personnel have moved into to break up a rally in Syria's second city Aleppo, activists claim. A source with links to the city claimed that this clip showed plain clothed police chasing protesters through the old city district of Bab al-Nasr. _3.39pm: Maryam al-Khawaja, spokeswoman for Bahrain Centre for Human Rights - whose father was sentenced to life imprisonment last week, expressed her scepticism about the King's human rights commission, writes Halima Ali."It is a positive step that they are having the commission, but I can't help but be sceptical about the King's motives, while knowing that all these human rights abuses have taken place," she told the Guardian."There are many questions that remain unanswered. The military trials should be halted, the human rights violations need to stop and why did the King cancel a UN commission which was due to arrive in the country and instead appoint his own team?" she said.One member of the commission, Badria Al-Awadhi, has expressed support for the presence of Saudi troops in Bahrain, she pointed out."Dr Badria Al-Awadhi wrote an article supporting the presence of GCC states in the country so that is already a bad start. I am interested to see what the situation will be with her."They [the government] are trying to show a better image of the country as the national image has been destroyed, so I would like to be hopeful and optimistic but I am sceptical about what jurisdiction the king will allow."4.14pm:Russia has demanded an explanation over why France has armed Libyan rebels, RIA Novosti reports.Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said:We asked our French colleagues today if reports are true that weapons to Libyan rebels came from France. We are waiting for their answer. This, if confirmed, is a serious breach of the UN security council resolution 1970.Brian Whitaker has been hosting a live discussion on whether France is right to arm the Libyan rebels.4.46pm: Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei (or one of his staff) has turned to tweeting in English to claim that the US is involved in spreading unrest in Syria.After the US imposed sanctions on Iranians accused of helping Syria put down the unrest, Khamenei's official Twitter stream hit back at the Americans. Iran's Leader: To stimulate what happened in #Egypt,#Tunisia&#Yemen, #Americans wants to create problem in #Syria,the frontline of resistanceAyatollah Khamenei: The nature of events in #Syria are different with other nations.Iran's Leader: In other countries, movements are anti-American and anti-Zionism.but in #Syria,it is clear that American hands are in action.