Egyptian officials were last night negotiating the release of 11 foreign tourists who were reportedly seized by masked bandits in a remote southern desert area and moved across the border to Sudan.Five Italians, five Germans and a Romanian were kidnapped along with eight Egyptian guides and guards. Initial rumours that there were also Israeli tourists in the group were denied. "This is an act of banditry not of terrorism," said a spokesman for the Egyptian tourism ministry, adding that those responsible had demanded a ransom of up to $6m (£3.2m) to free the 19. Al-Arabiya TV said the abductors were asking for $15m. Egyptian army units were searching the area - where the borders of Egypt, Sudan and Libya meet - for signs of the tourists. Ahmed Nazif, the prime minister, was last night leading crisis talks in Cairo with cabinet colleagues and security chiefs.In recent years Egypt has crushed its own domestic terrorists, with the exception of al-Qaida-type bombing attacks on tourist resorts on the coast of the Sinai peninsula. There have never been any attacks by Islamist groups in the Western Desert.The tourists were kidnapped near Gilf el-Kabir, near the Libyan border. The area is a giant plateau beyond the Saharan Great Sand Sea which is famed for the Neolithic cave paintings seen in the 1996 film The English Patient. Tourists are required to obtain permits from the military to visit the site and must travel in groups with at least one security guard. But there were conflicting reports about precisely when the incident took place and there was no immediate claim of responsibility. A tourist guide told Agence France Presse that the group was travelling in three or four off-road vehicles with a permit to visit the restricted area starting from September 16, the date the group was last seen in Aswan.One of the Italians used a satellite telephone to call his wife and tell her they had been kidnapped by five men speaking English "with an African accent" very close to the Sudanese border, according to an Egyptian security official. The area is said to be a crossroads for African tribes. Another guide said the kidnappers were believed to be tribesmen from Chad.But Mustapha Tawfiq, chief of police in Aswan, told state TV that the kidnappers were four Egyptians wearing masks. In Rome the foreign ministry confirmed that five Italians were among those kidnapped and said the foreign minister, Franco Frattini, was following the matter closely. Germany said its five nationals had been missing since Friday.Tourism to Egypt, which currently raises $8bn a year, was badly affected after bomb attacks in 2004 and 2006 on the popular Red Sea resorts of Dahab and Sharm el-Sheikh. The country's worst incident involving tourists was in November 1997 when 62 people - including 58 foreigners - were killed in an attack on a popular tourist site in the southern Nile resort of Luxor.