It's being called a Middle Eastern "cold war" that pits western-backed Egypt against Hezbollah, the militant Lebanese movement that is supported by Iran and fights Israel. The weapons employed are official statements, discreet media briefings and sulphurous newspaper editorials, but it is no less vicious for that.The row erupted earlier this month when Egypt announced the arrest of 49 Hezbollah agents. It escalated dramatically when the organisation's leader, Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah, admitted that one of those detained, Sami Shehab, was indeed a member – although to add to the intrigue the name turned out to be false. Up to a dozen others are still at large.Hezbollah (the "Party of God") is a Lebanese Shia organisation but is hugely admired across the (largely Sunni) Arab world for its armed resistance to Israel. Egypt and other conservative and authoritarian regimes see it as dangerously subversive – a proxy, pawn or stooge (depending on the emphasis of the accuser) in the hands of Iran and its Revolutionary Guard corps.The explosive novelty in this spat is Nasrallah's confirmation that Hezbollah was operating outside Lebanon, where it is represented in parliament and expected to do well in June's parliamentary elections. (The US says it also trained Iranian-backed Shia militias in Iraq.)Its activity in Egypt was to "provide logistical help to Palestinian brothers, transporting ammunition and individuals for the benefit of the resistance", Nasrallah confessed. Given the furious response, it may have been a mistake to come clean.Hosni Mubarak, the octogenarian Egyptian president, was incandescent in January when Nasrallah accused him of "taking part in the crime" of Israel's onslaught against Gaza, even calling for the overthrow of his regime. Now Cairo shows every sign of milking the "Hezbollah spy network" story for all it is worth.The gravest (but uncheckable) allegation is probably that the operatives planned to attack a foreign ship passing through the Suez canal, the most sensitive artery of the Egyptian economy. The suspects' lawyer claims they have been tortured – a common occurrence in Egyptian prisons. There has also been speculation that Hezbollah was planning to hit an Israeli target – perhaps tourists – to avenge the spectacular assassination (by Mossad agents, it is presumed), of its military chief, Imad Mughniyeh, in Damascus last year.The tone of the Egyptian onslaught was set by the state-controlled newspaper al-Gomhouriya in a white-hot front-page editorial that branded Nasrallah a "monkey sheikh" as well as a "bandit and veteran criminal" who would not be allowed to threaten the country's sovereignty.Official nerves in Cairo have been frayed by the powerful resonance of Hezbollah's support for fellow Islamists in Hamas – an issue highlighted in protests during the Gaza war by the semi-outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, the largest opposition movement in Egypt and a trenchant critic of the regime.Al-Ahram, the official mouthpiece of the government, bracketed together the Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Nasrallah, Khaled Meshal, of Hamas, and Mahdi Akef, the Brotherhood leader, for their efforts to destabilise Mubarak."We admired Hezbollah in 2006 when it bravely fought Israel but we stand firmly against it when it plans criminal acts on our land," declared Fathi Sorour, speaker of the people's assembly.Sa'ad el-Gammal, another leading MP, described the "plot" against Egypt as part of a wider Iranian agenda. "Iran now constitutes a major threat to the security of the region, using its proxies, foremost among them Hezbollah, to dictate its will across the Middle East," he warned. Yemen, Bahrain and Morocco have all accused Iran and Hezbollah of trying to destabilise their regimes in recent months.Strikingly, this is precisely the view from Jerusalem, where Bibi Netanyahu's new rightwing government is intently focused on Iran (and where Mubarak's powerful intelligence chief, Omar Suleiman, met Netanyahu and his ultra-nationalist foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, this week.)"Hezbollah operatives have now been caught in the searchlight – exposed as wrapped up in Iran's ongoing project to ignite the region," commented the Israeli analyst Jonathan Spyer. "Hezbollah constitutes one of the pieces on the chessboard to be moved at will by the guiding Iranian hand."Accusations have been flying back and forth daily between Cairo, Beirut and Tehran. In the latest twist of the tale, Egyptian officials accused the Lebanese government of helping Hezbollah. Another report claimed Revolutionary Guards had entered Egypt using false Iraqi passports. Iran hit back by claiming Mossad officers were interrogating the Hezbollah suspects – a charge swiftly denied in Cairo. Now there is talk of mediation by the Arab League.In the background lie decades of mutual Egyptian-Iranian suspicions dating back to the refuge President Anwar Sadat gave the exiled shah after the 1979 revolution, as well as the peace treaty he signed with Israel later that dramatic year. In Tehran a giant street mural still commemorates the "martyr" Khaled Islambouli, the army officer who assassinated "the traitor" Sadat in 1981. This latest bitter and revealing saga feeds on that toxic legacy."Whatever the truth about the Hezbollah network, the Egyptians will exploit this story to the full," predicted Nadim Shehadi, of London's Chatham House. "The Mubarak regime is still strong but they've been taking blow after blow in the last few years. This is their chance to get on their high horse and talk about the Iranian threat and the security of the state. I am sure they will take full advantage of it."