It happened on Friday night, about 9pm. I happened to call Philip to see how he was doing. He said he was at a road checkpoint, but he seemed calm. He said he was sending me the numbers for the German ambassador and one of his friends, just in case.I wasn't very concerned. He's always out and about, and police checkpoints are pretty standard here. But later I got a text message from him, saying: "In police station with a lawyer. Don't panic."A little while later he sent another, telling me that I should call his friend Droubi for updates, not him. He said: "Right now I'm fine, all is well. They're treating me fine and Droubi is here next to me."Then his phone was turned off. The police must have taken it. The text messages hadn't concerned me much, but when I couldn't phone him any more I realised something bad had happened. Then his friends called and said he'd been put in a car by himself and taken away, they didn't know where. They were panicking, so I started to panic. The police didn't acknowledge that they had him in custody, not even to the German ambassador. They finally acknowledged it to Philip's school, the American University in Cairo, two days later, but they didn't say anything to us. We are his family.We can only makes guesses about why they took him. He lived in Gaza for two years and made a documentary about non-violent activism. During the war he helped get medical supplies to Gaza through Rafah. He is also a freelance journalist. There has been no official word about why they did it, but wit must have something to do with his criticism of Egypt's policy towards Palestine.The police didn't tell us where he was being held, but we heard he was in the state security headquarters in Nasser city. Different people would tell us different things.They police went to the flat Philip and I share and took a lot of our things – both my hard drives and Philip's laptop and iPod. They also took two cameras and a video camera. I really hope we get those things back someday. One of the hard drives has the back-up of a documentary I shot as my postgraduate thesis.The other night the police came to my parents' house while I was there. It was very scary. It was 1.30am and we were asleep in bed. Five plain-clothes officers and two policemen in riot gear, carrying automatic weapons, came to the door and demanded to come in. They were polite and didn't raise their voices, but they had no search warrant and they wouldn't show us any identification. Still, they forced their way into the house. They went to our father's home office and started looking for papers, but didn't take anything. I think it was just a decoy because at the same time they raided my place.When they left they told my father he had to come with them to fill out a report, and we were afraid to let him go. We asked them why they couldn't just do it there. Thank god our lawyer arrived at that moment. He told the police that they couldn't take my father without an arrest warrant. They left the house, but hung around outside. They had been inside with us for two hours, and they stayed outside our house until 5am. We sat up and waited for them to leave.It was really hard because we had so many false alarms that he was being released. We would hear a rumour that he was coming out, but then it wouldn't happen. We even got a call from Associated Press saying he would be out that night, but it didn't happen. We wanted Philip to come back home so much.Now he has been released, just in time for his birthday. Before this happened we had planned a big party on our balcony with dancing and food, and now we really have something to celebrate.