The days and events preceding the 1967 Middle East war are indelibly carved in my memory. In May 1967, Gamal Abdel Nasser, the president of Egypt, in response to what he considered to be provocation by the Israelis, announced that he was sealing off the Gulf of Aqaba against all Israeli shipping. He dismissed international monitors and moved huge numbers of Egyptian troops into the Gaza Strip and all along the border with Israel.This was an incredible show of muscle that was hailed and cheered not just by Egyptians but apparently by the generality of Arab people in various countries. Concurrent with these developments, a torrent of patriotic/martial songs flooded our ears and the dogs of war showed their teeth proclaiming the imminence of conflict.For me, June 1967 was the time I was going to take the general secondary school examination. This exam has always been a national event, almost as important as football matches when Egypt plays against another country. Even those who have no children taking this exam follow the news of what happens with great interest: the unanswerable questions, the mass hysteria following a particularly difficult English exam, or any incidents such as students kicking invigilators or invigilators slapping students. But in the early summer of 1967, this national obsession was drowned in the collective patriotic zeal that overtook the whole country.As I sat poring over my books and preparing for exams, I heard the songs and the harangues on radio. The Israelis, the media assured us, were nothing more than a heterogeneous and disharmonious mixture of various racial and cultural groups and individuals who came from all over the world to settle illegally on Palestinian land. Bringing them down to their knees was a question of time, no more. It was, in fact, a historical necessity, as inevitable as the triumph of good over evil.The religious establishment did not lag behind, either. The Nasser regime, for all its proclaimed socialist views, its alliance with the Soviet Union, as well as its notorious treatment and imprisonment of the members of the Muslim Brotherhood, was never openly hostile to Islam. Religious principles and creeds (Islamic and otherwise) were treated with veneration and in times of crises often invoked. So the sheikhs in countless mosques in Egypt, as elsewhere in the Arab world, urged Friday worshippers to participate in the struggle.When the exams were officially postponed to an unspecified later date, I devoted myself full time, as did millions of others, to the unfolding drama. On 5 June 1967, the news was released that war had finally broken out and that our soldiers were fighting valiantly and ferociously.We understood the point about the bravery, but the ferocity came as a huge surprise. We had been led to believe that marching into Israel would be a piece of cake. In the course of the following few days, great numbers of enemy fighter planes and tanks were reported to have been damaged or destroyed. We believed it all. With no access to foreign media, we had absolutely no idea about the pre-emptive air strike that virtually annihilated our air force from day one, leaving our ground forces without any aerial cover.For four days, the absurd drama continued. The news of victories poured in despite the dismal realities of defeat, which were not apparent to us. The cover-up, however, could not be sustained any longer.On 9 June, the announcement of a speech by Nasser kept everyone guessing. With wishful thinking more than reasoned thought, we were hoping he would declare the all-out victory once and for all. However, when he appeared on television, the man we saw was a different Nasser from the person we knew or expected to see."I have taken a decision," he announced, "for which I need your support. I have decided to withdraw totally and for good from all official posts and political roles, and to return to the ranks of the masses, to perform my duties in their midst, like any other citizen."He took full responsibility for the mess that had happened and was abdicating responsibility and returning to the ranks of the people as a private citizen.What happened after the speech is quite hard to comprehend. Throngs of people came out on the streets demanding that Nasser stayed in his position as head of the state. It was more like a passionate and nervous explosion than a reasoned decision by the people. For years, Nasser acted like big daddy. People looked up to him and expected to be saved by and through him. When the danger of his disappearance became a reality, everybody was simply aghast. It was unthinkable. How would Egypt survive without him?In a matter of hours all the streets of major cities were swarming with wailing women and crying men, all shouting "Stay, Nasser, stay". People in their millions were out on the streets to say that in spite of the defeat, they were still holding on to their dreams. It was a vote of confidence not in Nasser or his regime, which had obviously bungled things so badly, but in their dream for a better life. For me it felt like a preview of what it would be like on doomsday.People knew, though, that the country had met with a colossal defeat. Soldiers and officers returning from the front, looking haggard and scruffy, became a familiar sight. They came back with tales of horror, some real and others imagined, stories of heroism and humiliation. People wavered between extreme pity and intense anger. There were rumours of attacks by the mob against soldiers, who more than any other segment in society bore the brunt of the defeat, and of popular frustration.In a matter of months, the military went from being the pampered favourites of the regime to being the despised and blamed category whose inefficiency had brought about the collapse of a once beautiful dream.June 1967 represents a turning point in my life, marking the end of innocence and the advent of adulthood. I also see it as marking my nascent cynicism. This was the time when the nationalist and socialist ideals inculcated in a whole generation of my contemporaries suddenly collapsed, leaving a frightful vacuum. The country was in shambles and the future was as uncertain as the morning mist. Even when the secondary school examination results were published and my name appeared in the national paper among the top five names, I hardly felt the thrill or gratification of success.The Ministry of Education sent me a cheque for £20 in recognition of my academic achievement. That was all the accolades I received. A whole new chapter began in my personal history as well as in the history of the country and the region as a whole.