On Saturday a cartoonist will find himself in court in Cairo, facing a possible two-year prison sentence for writing a graphic novel. It's not just any graphic novel – it happens to be the first graphic novel in Arabic.In modern visual form, and using language you might hear on the street, Metro tells the story of a software designer in "a chaotic modern Cairo pulsing with financial and social insecurity". Forced into debt by corrupt officials, he decides to rob a bank. "He finds himself caught in a vortex of financial and political corruption; the only relief comes from Dina, an idealistic journalist," according to Words Without Borders, which has published extracts in English. (Because it was ­originally in Arabic the graphic panels should read from right to left.)On 6 April last year – around the same time that western audiences were flocking to see a film based on the graphic novel Persepolis, set in Iran and published in Paris – Metro's publisher in Cairo was raided by the police  (without a warrant). All copies of the book, by Magdy el-Shafee, were confiscated. Booksellers were ordered to remove the book completely, not only from their shelves but even from their computer stock control systems. Shafee and his publisher, Mohammed al-Sharqawi, were both arrested on charges of "offence to public morals".This is not an unusual occurrence, even though Egypt is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which says everyone has the right to freedom of expression.Last week, amid a glut of high-profile media trials, a court cancelled the licence of a small literary magazine over a poem it published more than two years ago. Helmy Salem's poem, Laila Mourad's ­Balcony – referring to a 1940s Egyptian movie star, was described by the judge as "presumptuous drivel".Against this backdrop stands the Metro case, complicated by the status of Metro's publisher, Dar el-Malameh, which – as the news website Menasset points out – is not just any publishing house: "It is run by former political activist and blogger Mohammed al-Sharqawi who was infamously kidnapped in May 2006, and subsequently sodomised and tortured by members of Egypt's state security police."After his release al-Sharqawi was outspoken about his treatment in detention. His arrest in April last year, ostensibly in connection with a political demonstration that day, apparently occurred miles away – and on the same day that Metro was confiscated.Meanwhile, el-Shafee faces possible prison, at the hands of the same people who tortured his publisher. Citing Superman and Tintin as his childhood heroes, he was the first to establish a comic website in Arabic.I blogged about the case last year when el-Shafee and al-Sharqawi were arrested. On 2 April this year the Egyptian blogger and relationship counsellor Marwa Rakha wrote about it on Global Voices, bringing together a useful number of links.El-Shafee published an open letter on Facebook two weeks ago, asking people to pledge their support. This case is playing out largely as a Facebook campaign, with Arabic pages put up by al-Sharqawi often the only source of information. At a hearing on 2 April, the judge called for a report on the novel from a committee of experts and adjourned the case for two weeks.So now we await the outcome of the trial, this Saturday, of el-Shafee: mild-mannered cartoonist by day and, between the pages of his book, intent on saving Egypt for free speech and artistic freedom. But will Egypt let him?