Debates about women's rights are not new to Egypt. They have been around since the early 20th century. Now, even in 2010, there is no consensus on what role women should play in society. The issue was brought into the spotlight again when Egypt's state council – the court authorised to settle disputes concerning the exercise of public power – voted by an overwhelming majority to bar a female judge from serving on its benches. A week later, the supreme constitutional court decided the ruling was unconstitutional and overruled it.It was surprising to see that many women opposed the idea of a woman being a judge. For many Egyptian women, calls for women's rights do not really strike a chord. What are perceived as inequalities by rights activists are seen by them as simply differences between a man and a woman. This thinking has been deeply ingrained in the minds of generations of Egyptian women (and of course, men). Most women have been taught that their main place is in the home. If we are to elevate the status of women in Egyptian society, this needs to change.Thousands of Egyptian girls who are currently pursuing higher education will eventually settle down at home and choose not to pursue a career. If this is their free choice and not the result of their belief that they are inferior, then nobody has any business telling them what to do. However, when the thought that they will never be as good as a man in any particular job is repeatedly reinforced over the years, this is unacceptable.In some faculties, such as Alexandria University's faculty of medicine, more than half of the students are girls. This does not stop many male professors from wondering: "What brought all of you here in the first place? You just take up space and resources and in the end you'll all get married and stay at home."For the girls who intend to pursue a career, it is frustrating and offensive. One fifth-year medical student told me: "I've been hearing that same line for five years now. I've gotten used to it but it's annoying and provocative. They should be encouraging us. Gender has nothing to do with competence."Sadly, many women (and men) do not think this way. It's totally natural and expected for men to view themselves as superior in a patriarchal society. The tragedy is when women agree with them. Many women abhor the idea of being treated by a female doctor (unless they need a gynaecologist) or being operated on by a female surgeon.The prevailing opinion is that men make better doctors than women. This isn't seen as misogyny, but as a natural difference between men and women. Just like a man is better at medicine, a woman is better at raising children and preserving the family structure.Similar reasons are offered to explain why a woman can't be a judge. Women have been told for so long by men that they are less capable than men of making difficult decisions, or that they think with their hormones and emotions more than their intellect, or that their periods and premenstrual tension affect their ability to think clearly, that they've finally started to believe it. Such beliefs have nothing to do with age, either. Young and old women alike share these sentiments.Not only do many Egyptian women accept these "differences", they also believe to be in a better position than any western woman. Thanks largely to Hollywood and American TV programmes, the western woman is viewed by Egyptians, many of whom have never had actual contact with the west, as an immoral, decadent woman with no honour who is valued for her body rather than her intellect and ability.With such thoughts firmly in place, it is no wonder that the very idea of women's rights is viewed by many as an alien concept imposed by nosy western powers that are jealous of non-western societies and want to strip women of their honour and clothes. Many automatically assume that any mention of women's liberation means a call for women to take off their clothes and "walk around naked in the streets".With such a negative (or absent) perception of women's rights, no progress is ever to be made. Calls for greater women's rights, while important, will not achieve everything on their own. What's necessary is a change of attitude; a radical change of public thinking. While this is not something that can be done overnight, it is not impossible.The mother has far more influence on the development of her children's thinking than the father. A mother should set an example for her children in herself. Change starts in the family, where sister and brother should be taught they are equal. One woman professor in Alexandria's faculty of medicine told me she believed that "letting women out of the home was a mistake. Women should stop working and go back to their main duties". This is exactly the kind of example children and students do not need.I am not trying to generalise. There are of course many exceptions – otherwise there would not be a debate on women's rights to begin with.A final note: many who are not familiar with Egypt may argue that Islam is the root cause of the lack of women's rights in Egypt. This is not true. The prevailing attitudes regarding women and gender roles cross all religious boundaries and are shared by many of Egypt's Christians too.