Egyptian officials have announced unexpectedly that the colleagues of the freed Australian journalist Peter Greste will face a new trial on Thursday, dashing hopes that at least one of them would follow him to freedom sooner.Greste’s Canadian colleague Mohamed Fahmy was expected to be deported home to Toronto in the days after Greste’s release, and the Canadian foreign minister claimed that his deportation was imminent.But Fahmy’s hopes have now been dashed by the sudden announcement of the resumption of legal proceedings against him and Baher Mohamed, a third journalist with al-Jazeera English who has no chance of deportation as he holds no foreign passport.The two men were arrested along with Greste in late December 2013 and accused of making up news stories and helping terrorists. All three were convicted in June 2014, and granted a retrial on 1 January.Once a dual national, Fahmy secretly gave up his Egyptian citizenship in order to qualify for deportation. But while Greste was released last Sunday and arrived home on Thursday to a hero’s welcome, his bureau chief’s release was stalled and now looks to have been held up completely.In a statement on Sunday, Fahmy’s family said: “Mohamed never requested that he drops his citizenship. The authorities visited him before the appeal hearing on January 1st and made a deal with him to renounce it in return for his freedom, claiming this was the only way out for him and Peter.“Now, the general prosecutor is complicating matters even though both the presidency and the prime minister have expressed their desire to let him go as soon as possible. Yes, we are worried and we have been let down by the Canadian government’s conservative approach in the handling of the case.”The Canadian government called for Fahmy to be released immediately. Lynne Yelich, minister of state for consular affairs, said: “Canada is deeply concerned with the announcement that a retrial date has been set despite assurances that Mr Fahmy would be released along with his colleague, Peter Greste. “Canada calls for the immediate release of Mr Fahmy.”Fahmy’s international lawyer, Amal Clooney, said she would visit Egypt in the near future to meet her client for the first time and to try to expedite his release.Thursday’s hearing has raised hopes for Mohamed, who cannot be deported and whose only chance of freedom is through expedited legal proceedings. “It’s a good thing that the decision will be on Thursday,” said his wife, Jihan. “I thought it would be later – like after three months, and I was so angry about it. I hope to see the release of Baher on that day, just as Peter was released.”Even though Greste was nominally deported to face further punishment in Australia, in reality he has won total freedom. As a result, Baher Mohamed’s family feel their relative is essentially being punished for the crime of being Egyptian.“I’m furious of course, it’s such a painful thing this discrimination between the foreigners and the Egyptians,” Jihan said. “The manipulation of the law shows that Baher is innocent – Peter wasn’t actually deported, he just went to be with his mother and father in Australia and doesn’t face a trial.”Sunday also brought bad news for Greste’s former cellmate Ibrahim Halawa, an Irish teenager jailed pending trial in a separate case. Halawa, 19, was arrested while he was still a minor at a 2013 protest calling for the return of the ousted Islamist president Mohamed Morsi.The mass trial of 494 defendants including Halawa has repeatedly been delayed. There were hopes that a hearing on Sunday might lead to the case being thrown out, but instead it was delayed once more, for another month.“He’s reached that stage where he feels he can’t take it any more,” said Halawa’s sister Somaia, who was detained with him for several weeks in 2013 before being released. “A human brain can’t even imagine what we had to deal with to go through, and what he has continued to go through since then.”