Decried daily by secularists at home and labouring under heavy clouds of suspicion abroad, Egypt's first Islamist president, Mohammed Morsi, showed he had teeth. He sent in helicopter gunships to attack Islamic militants in the Sinai, the first time the Egyptian air force had been used in the peninsula since the 1973 war with Israel. And he followed this up by sacking the head of the Egyptian general intelligence service, the head of the republican guard, the governor of North Sinai and the head of security in Cairo. For a president struggling to establish civilian rule two months after he was elected, these are bold moves.Morsi was responding to the biggest challenge to his presidency yet, a mass cross-border attack on Israel staged by up to 30 jihadi militants on Sunday night, in which an Egyptian border post was overrun and 16 of its soldiers killed. Try as the Muslim Brotherhood might to avoid an open confrontation with militants who hail from the same ideological roots but who broke away from them decades ago, Morsi rightly decided that the time had now come for him to act. For him, not least every Egyptian, the attack on Sunday was not only aimed at Israel but on the state of Egypt itself. It challenged Egyptian sovereignty in one of its most sensitive areas, the desert Sinai peninsula, which after the 1979 peace treaty with Israel has been largely demilitarised.The peninsula has since nurtured the essential ingredients of a classic security vacuum: a population marginalised and on the periphery of a weak state; an influx of arms from Libya; Bedouin tribesmen who run the guns; jihadi militants; gas pipelines; and a long and as yet unsecured border with Israel. To add the final ingredient of this rich brew of actors and their targets, there is the old sore of Egypt's border crossing into Gaza at Rafah. The attack took place just 10 days after a meeting between Morsi and the Hamas prime minister of Gaza, Ismail Haniya. Two branches of the same movement had little difficulty agreeing on measures to regularise cross-border traffic and to close the tunnels. As result fuel oil, badly needed by electricity generators, had started to flow into the besieged Palestinian enclave for the first time in years. Within hours of the attack, which was condemned loudly by Hamas, the Rafah border was closed again, and everything returned to the status quo.The volatility of the Sinai is such that the potential for a further conflict is great. There could, however, be three positive outcomes to the current crisis.A security clampdown on the Egyptian side of the border could be used to normalise the border crossing at Rafah, and close the tunnels. It is not known how many Palestinian militants participated in the cross-border raids, but with a Hamas leadership on one side of the border and a Muslim Brotherhood leader on the other, it should not be too difficult to close the tunnels. In the event of monitored and regulated traffic on the surface, the tunnels would become a liability for both sides.This would be strenuously opposed by Israel, which sees little distinction between the arms flowing into Sinai, and the arms flowing into Hamas' hands in Gaza. But Israel might have second thoughts about automatically rejecting Egypt's second demand, a renegotiation of the Camp David accord to restore Egyptian military control of the peninsula. In response to each emergency, Israel has informally allowed derogations of the treaty on Egyptian troop limits and capabilities. Israeli and Egyptian generals contact each other. All this could be formalised.The third outcome is that the old guard in the Egyptian military has come to be seen for what they are: not powerbrokers of the deep state but a busted flush. Corrupt and unable to guarantee sovereignty in a part of the land where they had total control, the high command needs to be replaced by junior officers whose loyalty is to the state, not to their pockets. The supreme council of armed forces has not come out well from Sunday's attacks.