Little more than two weeks after the start of Egypt's elections, threats to press freedom - including the censoring of a major new English-language newspaper - have increased. The second issue of the Egypt Independent, which was due out on 1 December, was pulled after objections were raised about an article critical of the military.The article, headlined "Is Tantawi reading the field correctly?", was written by the American historian Robert Springborg.It questioned the ability of Field Marshal Hussein Tantawi to stem discontent within the ranks and speculated on a possible internal coup. The issue was then shelved altogether after an intervention by Magdi el-Galad, editor of Al-Masry Al-Youm, the Arabic-language sister publication of the Egypt Independent.He recently declined an offer to become information minister in Egypt's new government and has developed a close relationship with the military over the years.In response to concern over the censorship, Galad published a defence, entitled "Put that in your pipe and smoke it." It accused Springborg and Alastair Beach, a journalist with The Independent, of failing to understand Egyptian culture.Galad insisted that his decision to stop the article was motivated by a concern for national security, accusing Springborg of attempting to incite a coup. Galad wrote: "I could not care less for the broken record about freedom of speech, employed by the West to achieve its nefarious ends against us, when it suppresses those freedoms to protect its interests and national security." Despite Galad's apparent control over the Egypt Independent, the latter carried an online editorial denouncing Galad's decision and alleged that Al-Masry Al-Youm of falling victim to self-censorship. Other press freedom threats: the Egyptian Gazette reported earlier this week that several Egyptian journalists, including prominent television presenter Amr al-Leithi, had received death threats. Al-Leithi, who recently presented a series on radicalism in Egypt, told the media that he had filed a complaint with the country's chief prosecutor. The news website Bikya Masr reported that two female Egyptian journalists working for the Al-Fagr newspaper were sentenced to one month in prison each after a sheikh, Youssef al-Badry, sued them for having "invaded his privacy". Sally Hasan and Fatima al-Zahraa Mohamed were also banned from writing for three years. They had published an article about paying for a "spiritual session" at the sheikh's residence. The International Press Institute's press freedom manager, Anthony Mills, said: "Censorship and threatening behaviour toward the media have no place in a democratic society. "The current elections in Egypt offer an opportunity for the Egyptian authorities to demonstrate a new respect for the rule of law and the rights of the press after decades of authoritarian rule. Unfortunately, recent actions by the military leadership indicate a troubling unwillingness to brook criticism or to stand up for the safety of journalists."Sources: IPI/Index on Censorship/The Independent