France has told citizens visiting the UK to exercise caution, warning that a terrorist attack on public transport or tourist sites is "highly likely".In a notice on the defence ministry website, the French authorities said: "We advise [travellers] to be extremely vigilant on public transport and at popular tourist sites."The alert came days after the UK said there was "a high threat of terrorism" in France and Germany, and the US warned its citizens to stay away from high-profile sites in EuropeYesterday, French security forces arrested 11 suspected Islamic extremists in raids across southern France, although officials downplayed any link with the increased terror alerts.The French interior minister, Brice Hortefeux, said: "Yes, there is a terrorist threat at the moment in Europe. It must be neither overestimated nor underestimated." .Anti-terrorist police detained eight people in Marseille and Avignon after an investigation into a Paris-based Islamic organisation. Separately, three people were held near Bordeaux and Marseille, amid growing fears of a strike by north Africa-based militants affiliated to al-Qaida.France has been on its second-highest alert against a possible terrorist attack for the past fortnight. The US government, in a warning repeated by Britain, issued a travel alert for Europe at the weekend.Speculation has centred on Germany as a target, apparently based on information a captured German militant gave US interrogators in Kabul. Berlin has been dismissive, however, insisting there is no intelligence to warrant an increased alert level.Germany's interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, said today he saw no indications of any imminent terror attack on Germany. "No one should doubt that Germany is a target for terrorists, but on the other hand there are no concrete, immediate attack plans that we are aware of," he told Deutschlandfunk radio.French police said they found a Kalashnikov submachine gun, a pump-action shotgun and ammunition during the raids. The detainees are suspected of arms trafficking. They are being investigated for alleged links with "criminals linked to a terrorist organisation".In the second operation, two men were arrested in Marseille and one in Bordeaux. Their details were found on the mobile phone of a French-Algerian man, Ryad Hannouni, 28, who was arrested on Saturday in Naples. He is suspected of leading an Islamist extremist group sending youngsters to fight in Afghanistan. Italian police reportedly found a bomb-making kit at his home.Le Figaro said the three men arrested in the second French operation were suspected of finding accommodation and producing false papers for militants returning to France from the Afghan-Pakistan border region.Since militants executed a French hostage in north-west Africa in July, Paris has become more embroiled in conflict with the group al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (Aqim), last month warning of possible attacks in Europe, senior European sources said.A US drone killed five Germans in the Afghan-Pakistan border area on Monday, Pakistani sources said. German authorities declined to confirm details. Officials in Germany have been scathing about what they see as US alarmism before midterm elections in November.