The Roman Catholic church does not approve of untramelled globalisation so an international trade in communion wafers should not be threatening the livelihood of French convents. Yet it is. Nearly sixty contemplative houses in France are feeling their livelihoods threatened by falling demand for the wafers that the make. Not only is the number of Catholics in France falling, but their product is undercut by cheap imports from Poland, which come from a secular factory. Bad enough that the French were threatened by "The Polish plumber"; the Polish wafer is an even more serious attack on the tranquil heart of France.For the moment the danger has been averted after the nuns publicised a threat by the shrine at Lourdes to switch to the Polish wafer. But in the long run, this little industry may be threatened like every other part of traditional French agriculture. In vain the charming little websites showing in detail how the wafers are made. One convent explains themselves: "We know we are useless in the eyes of many in a world shaped by the pursuit of profit and of efficiency, but our happiness is rooted in a love freely given" and it's a shame to think of these 18 sisters outside Avignon forced to find some other way to earn a living. But in the wider world, the change has already happened.At Christmas, the New York Times ran a remarkable story about a Rhode Island bakery which has captured 80% of the market for communion wafers in the US, Canada, and even here and Australia. The Cavanagh company's wafers are truly ecumenical. They are praised by Anglicans, Lutherans and Methodists as well as Roman Catholics. They can be snapped theatrically without crumbs. And 850m of them were sold last year. The cunning thing, though, is their marketing strategy: in Catholic dioceses, they sell to monasteries and convents, which then sell them on to the churches, keeping an income without the industry. I do not think St Benedict would have approved. His rule established that monks should spend a third of their waking hours in prayer, a third in study, and a third in manual labour. The hard work of baking was part of its attraction. In this country, the manufacture of Catholic communion hosts is largely the responsibility of the contemplative orders. Some of the convents here are already selling on the Polish wafers, according to Sister Mary Bernadette, who has the improbable job of press officer for the Association of British Contemplatives. And this is probably the least inflammatory solution to the French crisis. If it were discovered that an American firm were muscling into the supply of French communion wafers, the riots against McDonalds would look like a tea party in a convent of contemplatives.