It looks as if François Hollande and the French Socialist party are heading for a dominant position in the country's political structures exceeding their expectations. The results of the first round of voting for the national assembly indicate that the socialists and their allies will have a majority after next weekend's second round. Indeed it is quite possible the socialists will get a majority on their own, removing the need for compromises with smaller parties, particularly those of the hard left.This would crown the process under which the socialists have added the presidency to the already strong holdings they have in regional, local and big-city government, and in the senate. It is not a mandate that the French have bestowed on Mr Hollande with huge enthusiasm. But it nevertheless hands him an opportunity to rule and to make policy that could be of critical importance for France and for Europe. Unlike other recently elected European leaders, Mr Hollande will have some real room for manoeuvre. The key factors here are his solid domestic political base, France's unique leverage over Germany and in Brussels, and the growing perception across the continent that the austerity solution, as crudely conceived and brutally applied so far, is worsening the European economic crisis rather than helping to resolve it.France is more a part of that crisis than – under Nicolas Sarkozy, casting itself as one of the doctors rather than as one of the patients – it was prepared to admit. French firms are closing down by the week, outsourcing is undermining French employment, and the country's fiscal position is by some accounts worse than that of Italy. Some charge that his announced policies, which include cutting the deficit massively by 2017 and putting money into growth-oriented projects to achieve a spurt of 3.5% next year, are overambitious and short on detail. But Mr Hollande is known to have been working with some of the best French economists on policy changes, including those designed to halt growing inequality, that could turn the situation around.Detail is often a liability in campaigning, but it is a necessity in government. As he discloses it, and some of it will no doubt be unpalatable, Mr Hollande will have to carry a sceptical and politically weary public opinion with him while he attempts to restore the French economy, manage the relationship with Germany and rekindle French faith in Europe.He will not do it by charisma of the flamboyant kind because that is the one quality, it is widely agreed, he does not possess. But there is also a sort of charisma of normality, of perceived competence, quiet wit, sincerity and good intentions. High office can have a transforming effect and Mr Hollande is already visibly growing into his job.