Christine Lagarde's appointment as the first woman head of the IMF is a victory for French feminism. The first woman finance minister in France (or indeed any large, industrialised country) she has long been a champion of more women and less "libido" and "testosterone" in banking and politics.With Lagarde now arguably the world's most powerful woman, the left's Martine Aubry bidding this week to be France's first female president and Marine Le Pen's high poll ratings as head of the extreme-right Front National, it might look as if it's a boom-time for women in French politics. But the picture is more nuanced than that. French feminists' verdict on the female score-card of French politics is: could do far better.When Nicolas Sarkozy was elected in 2007, he wanted half his cabinet to be women, something he has never quite achieved. He started out with several women in major posts, including Rachida Dati in justice, and Lagarde in finance, but the numbers have progressively dwindled. Currently, of 23 ministers, seven are women. Of eight junior ministers, three are women. Sarkozy was under pressure to include important jobs for women in his post-Lagarde reshuffle this afternoon, but made only small gestures towards women; the most important was Valerie Pecresse taking budget portfolio and being made government spokesman.On the opposition front, both Aubry and Le Pen are "daughters of" famous political fathers, carrying the weight of political dynasties and often asked about their fathers' influence, which is assumed to define their political moves. Both are feminists and say they are their own people. Aubry, the daughter of Jacques Delors, former Socialist finance minister and president of the European Commission, acknowledged in her presidential bid speech this week that she had learned a lot from her family. Le Pen works with and consults with hers.Another woman could enter the presidential race next month if Eva Joly, the investigative judge who relentlessly pursued major French corruption cases, wins the Green ticket. The party's primary race is expected to go to a second round vote on July 12.After the New York arrest of Dominique Strauss-Kahn over the alleged attempted rape of a New York hotel worker last month, there has been an outpouring against sexism and sex-discrimination in France. When one woman minister complained she no longer felt comfortable wearing a skirt in parliament, many female politicians agreed. Lagarde's appointment to the IMF has lifted the mood. But it will take more than one woman to turn around the statistics.Women MPs make up 18.5% of parliament, compared to 21% in the UK, 33% in Germany and 46% in Sweden. Less than a quarter of French Senators are women.In French boardrooms, only 15% of executives in large French companies are women. A new law has set a quota for 40% by 2017.French law on sex-equality means that political parties fielding lists of candidates in elections must ensure 50% of the names are women. If not, the party's funding is cut accordingly. Some parties seem happier to take the financial hit than field women. In 2010, with 26% of women out of 588 candidates, Sarkozy's ruling rightwing UMP party lost over 4m euros.A female politician once told the story of how Lagarde would often ask company heads why there weren't more women in their boardrooms. If they replied that it was because there was a lack of candidates or women at that level, she would reportedly open her desk drawer, get out a pile of top women's CVs and hand them over. Women in French politics are hoping that spirit lives on in Paris after she leaves for Washington.