Draw a line on the map from Geneva to Chambéry 50 miles to the south and you mark the eastern boundary of a region that has rich resonance for British holidaymakers. Every year we flock in our thousands to the Savoie Mont Blanc region – to Alpe d'Huez, Tignes, Val d'Isère or Courchevel – to spend days on the piste and evenings consuming vin chaud and fondue.And that will probably have been our only contact with the wines of Savoie, a wild paradise famed for its physical beauty and for its walking, cycling, boating and skiing – but not for its vineyards. And that is a shame, for Savoie whites and reds are undergoing a remarkable transformation. Once crisp and cheerful but little else, they are developing deeper, richer tones and an allure that was absent until relatively recently. Hence the decision of Savoie Mont Blanc Tourism to promote the region's wines as attractions in their own right.Savoie and its wines certainly make a heady combination. For a start, the region's grapes are rarely encountered elsewhere: Altesse and Jacquère produce exotic, fruity dry whites; Mondeuse makes rich, slightly peppery reds. For good measure, they are grown in some of the most beautiful settings I have encountered. At Chignin, for example, the vineyards – carved out of high, rocky slopes – are dominated by four ancient, ruined towers, each draped in a thick layer of ivy. So steep are the hillside terraces that grass is planted in strips between the vines to stop the soil being washed away. On my visit, on a sunny afternoon in autumn, with the towers rising above these undulating vineyards, the place had a relaxed, magical allure.But it is the wines that matter. Until recently, both whites and reds were made and sold fairly cheaply: to be swigged with raclette or mixed with sugar, spice and lemon to make vin chaud. Now the region's winemakers have made a deliberate decision to take more care: producing fewer bunches of grapes from each vine, using less fertiliser, and slowing fermentation by keeping the tanks cool."If you let your fermentation run too fast, you lose aroma. You need to keep it slow," says Pierre Abry of the Cave de Chautagne (+33 4 7954 2712, cave-de-chautagne.com) at Ruffieux, where the local wine co-operative has built a museum dedicated to local wines. Visitors can taste the grapes and compare their bouquets. Explanations were in French when I was there, but English versions are promised for this year.The message is that quality has triumphed over quantity. A good example is provided by the Chautagne Blanc, produced at the Ruffieux co-op. It has a clean, slightly flinty taste and makes a fine aperitif. Similarly, the Chignin 2010 of Jean-François Quénard's Domaine Quénard (+33 4 7928 0829, jfquenard.com) at Chignin is delicate and slightly honeyed, while Christophe Richel's Mondeuse (+33 6 8020 7594) is a deep red, rich wine with a velvety, violet-scented taste. Richel is a huge, friendly bear of man – he could be a flanker for a French rugby team – and will chat until the cows come home about his wine. His tasting cellar, like those of most Savoie producers, is cosy and clubbable."We want people to be surprised at how good our wines are," says Pascal Barlet, whose family business, Les Caves du Prieuré (+33 4 7944 0222, caveduprieure.com), produces one of the region's special wines: Cuvée Eole. This is a distinctive sweet white made from early-harvested Altesse grapes that are left for months before pressing so their sugar content builds up.A relaxed approach to wine appreciation is also easy in a region with such rugged charm. Lac du Bourget, a few kilometres north of Chambéry, is the largest natural lake in France: you can take a boat trip on it in the morning (from the town of Aix-les-Bains, +33 4 7963 4500, gwel.com, adult €11.80, child 4-12 €8.20), then visit a vineyard in the afternoon. Or hire a bike – there are electric ones to help on the hills – and follow a vineyard tour arranged by the tourist office (Chambéry Vélostation (chambery-metropole.fr/83-velostation.htm, €3 for a half-day's hire, or €6 for an electric bike). Or you can, as we did, hire a 2CV (+33 6 8160 7316, lesdeuchesdulac.fr, €190 a day for two people), the original lunch-box on wheels, chauffeured by a driver in full Maurice Chevalier kit, including striped blazer and straw boater. It's a cramped, unbelievably lightweight way to travel but it is relatively eco-friendly. Hit a rabbit and you come off second best.Despite this Gallic image-making, Savoie Mont Blanc has a strong Italian feel. Victor Emmanuel II, the first king of Italy, came from the House of Savoy; Italy's last king, Umberto II, is buried here, at Hautecombe Abbey; and Italy's most famous relic, the Turin shroud, was kept for many years in the cathedral at Chambéry, capital of the département.Chambéry is small and stylish, with narrow streets and Italian-style porticos. Income from Savoie's ski resorts has brought a prosperous, confident edge. Restaurants are lavish but fairly casual. Try Le Bistrot (6 rue du Théâtre, +33 4 7975 1078, restaurant-lebistrot.com, mains from €15); L'Atelier (59 rue de la République, +33 4 7970 6239, atelier-chambery.com, mains from €15); and Côté Marché (60 rue Vieille Monnaie, +33 4 7985 0435, cotemarche-restaurant.com, three-course menu from €37). At Jongieux, 30km north – near the Caves du Prieuré and Domaine Edmond Jacquin (+33 4 7944 0235, vin-savoie-ejf.fr) – there's the Michelin-starred Les Morainières (route de Marétel, +33 4 7944 0939, les-morainieres.com, four-course menu from €45).For a place to stay in Chambéry, the Hotel des Princes (4 rue de Boigne, +33 4 7933 4536, hoteldesprinces.eu, doubles from €88) has comfortable rooms. Best, however, is Chateau des Allues (+33 6 7538 6156, chateaudesallues.com, B&B doubles from €120) near St-Pierre-d'Albigny, outside Chambéry, which offers stunning opulence at B&B prices. This is one of the best hotel bargains I have come across. Try it, try the local food – but most of all try the wines of Savoie.• The trip was provided by Savoie Mont Blanc tourist board (savoiemontblanc.com), with Eurostar/TGV travel from Rail Europe (0844 848 4070, raileurope.co.uk, returns to Chambéry from £109). For information on wines, see vindesavoie.net. Buy Savoie wines online from Snooth (snooth.com) or Yapp Brothers (yapp.co.uk)