The political cartoonist of his time JS Gillray depicted William Pitt and Napoleon carving up the plum pudding of the globe (Pitt helps himself to the larger slice). Britain and France always were the best of enemies. They share similar delusions. Each harbours a misplaced belief in the exceptionalism of their culture, the universality of their language and the intelligence of their diplomats. To this list should this week be added the moral superiority of their economy. Two French cabinet ministers and a senior bank official reduced the cross-channel dialogue to the level of a year-six spat in a playground by suggesting the US credit ratings agencies should more usefully turn their attention on Britain, a land with a greater deficit, more inflation and less growth than France. The French finance minister François Baroin might have been trying to deflect attention from the anticipated loss of his country's own AAA rating, by saying that the economic situation in Britain was very worrying and he would rather be French in this crisis than British. But he and the prime minister François Fillon were not just having a pop. This was a regular fusillade.Comrades, we are in the same boat. A sinking one. Fitch put six eurozone countries on negative watch – Belgium, Spain, Slovenia, Italy, Ireland and Cyprus. The exit of any or each from the eurozone would impact on Britain. So there's no room for crowing. And that applies as much to British eurosceptics as it does to French ministers blowing raspberries. Oh, and add to that David Cameron's less than helpful calls to the non-euro states of Denmark, Sweden and the Czech Republic, which were taken by France as agitation against a fiscal compact before it had even been finalised. The truth is multiform. Some of Cameron's cabinet colleagues are rightly having kittens about the position he has landed them in, and some of the other 26 EU members harbour grave, as yet sotto voce, doubts about the deal they signed up to. The two do not cancel each other out.As Simon Tilford of the Centre for European Reform argues, the fiscal compact agreed in Brussels and about which a draft version circulated yesterday hard-wires pro-cyclical, fiscal austerity into the institutional framework of the eurozone. The German view of the crisis is a morality tale, pitting sinners in the profligate southern periphery against the virtuous in the north who put all their savings in a bank rather than spend it. The crisis is as much a tale of excess bank leverage and poor risk management at the core as it is of excess consumption at the periphery. Look at what is happening to a country which is doing all that Germany is asking of it. Ireland's GNP shrank by 1.9% in the last quarter. Ireland does not have any room for manoeuvre. All the bailout money is going towards financing the deficit and the debt.There are political downsides to the Brussels deal. Britain is not alone in disliking the idea of a two- or multi-speed Europe. The Czech Republic, Poland, the Baltic states, Hungary, all of which have lived on the periphery of one empire, the Soviet one, have no desire to live on the periphery of another. Austria and Finland think Germany has got the economics of the cure wrong. Italy's technocrat prime minister Mario Monti won a vote of confidence in the lower house speeding up the passage of the austerity budget bill, but in Italy's dysfunctional body politic some are waiting for that plan to fail. In France Marine Le Pen is making hay on her long-standing opposition to the euro.There is little Christmas cheer in this picture. If the leaders of countries like Britain and France don't realise what they have in common, it is no exaggeration to say that Europe risks being torn apart by nationalism, economic protectionism, and the anti-immigrant xenophobia of the far right. Folk need to get back round the table. They do not do that by shouting at each other.