So now we know: the French pensions minister Michèle Delaunay has accrued a €5m private fortune, including €10,000 worth of watches, Arnaud Montebourg, the industry renewal minister, has a Charles Eames chair, and the culture minister has declared a David Beckham T-shirt. These are the headlines of the great unpacking – le grand déballage – that has French politics reeling.France's politicians are notoriously a very private class. From François Mitterrand's second family to Dominique Strauss-Kahn's serial philandering, their private lives traditionally stay a closed book. Finances are treated even more circumspectly. But with one past president, Jacques Chirac, convicted of corruption, and another, Nicolas Sarkozy, under investigation, there is a new mood. Perhaps unwisely, François Hollande had campaigned on the promise of providing an "exemplary" government. It was a promise that was an invitation to dig. Accordingly, the investigative website Médiapart dug. It revealed that the budget minister, Jerome Cahuzac, had salted away €500,000 in a Swiss bank account. He compounded his tax avoidance by repeated denials. Last month, he admitted it and resigned.Mr Hollande, whose ratings are already lower even than his predecessor's, responded by announcing that his ministers would publish the details of their private wealth at the start of this week. His strategy is clear enough: impose political transparency (shooting France from somewhere near the bottom of the league table to somewhere near the top), clamp down on tax havens, and win back popular support.He is not the only European leader who finds himself embarrassed. Spain's prime minister Mariano Rajoy is accused of tax dodging, and novelty candidates representing none-of-the-above, like Beppe Grillo's Five Star Movement in Italy, make sweeping gains on the back of voter cynicism. Tax irregularities that might have been tolerated in better times are now pounced upon as confirmation that all politicians have noses in the trough. In Britain too. Yesterday, Downing Street renewed a promise David Cameron made a year ago to insist on publication of ministerial tax returns.There is little evidence that President Hollande's gesture will achieve its purpose. Commentators on the left and the right criticise what they say is a lurch from transparency to voyeurism. According to one poll, 70% of voters are uninterested in hearing about the accumulated wealth of the governing class. What they care about is corruption in the wider sense. Mr Hollande's problems did not begin with his dishonest minister. It is just that, compared with the others – tackling the economy or instigating tax increases – he is simply the easiest to deal with.