If you have happy memories of childhood holidays spent camping in France, then the modern holiday parcs throughout the country are sure to please your own brood. These days, tents are just one of many kinds of accommodation – you can now take your pick from Gypsy caravans, tree houses and safari tents, as well as the traditional tents and mobile homes. With great facilities on the sites, there's no better reason to pack up the car, cruise across the Channel and enjoy a camping holiday.The prices were correct at the time of going to press; availability for late July and August may be limited at some campsitesAt the Domaine de Dienné, tents and mobile homes are a thing of the past. Here, you can choose between colourful Gypsy caravans or star-gazing cabins complete with telescope, star-chart and a perspex ceiling. No need to come back down to earth for the activities on site either, with a tree-top adventure course and "fun-trambo" (a cross between bungee-jumping and trampolining), those with a sense of adventure are well catered for. For a futuristic day out, the excellent Futuroscope theme park is just 20 miles away. Meanwhile, those who would rather take it easy will appreciate the fresh bread and croissants delivered to the door each morning, and enjoy the pretty surrounding countryside. • +33 5 49 45 87 63, domaine-de-dienne.fr. Canvas Holidays (0845 268 0853, canvasholidays.co.uk) offers seven nights, including a Dover to Calais ferry crossing, from £663 for a family of four starting August 20Vendée, one of the best areas in France for a family holiday, is just four hours' drive from the ferry ports of Saint-Malo and Cherbourg and this peaceful site is within easy reach of the area's best attractions. From the gorgeous beaches at Saint-Gilles-Croix-de-Vie and Les Sables d'Olonne, to the magnificent historical Puy de Fou theme park, children of all ages will adore a holiday here. The picturesque Camping La Garangeoire is set among lakes, meadows and woods and offers a host of activities, including crazy golf, trampolines and boating on the lake. • + 33 2 51 46 65 39, camping-la-garangeoire.com. Seven nights in July for two adults and up to four children staying in a three-bedroom Villagrand Deluxe mobile home costs from £1,100, accommodation only. Ferry crossings or fly-drive packages can be arranged at a supplement through Keycamp (0844 406 0200, keycamp.co.uk)This peaceful lakeside site is ideal for "tweenies" and teenagers who can safely roam the 84-acre resort independently and enjoy activities such as mini-golf, cycling, karting and archery. There are also four pools and waterslides. The site itself offers a choice of tents, mobile homes or – for real camping softies – luxury log cabins complete with dishwashers and flatscreen TVs. The site is ideally situated for trips into Paris, just 90 minutes away by coach, or to Disneyland Paris, while the Chateau de Pierrefonds, the setting for the BBC TV series Merlin, is just a short drive away. • + 33 3 23 55 50 02, la-croix-du-vieux-pont.com; a seven-night stay in a holiday home sleeping up to six costs from €810-960 in the summer holidays. Also available through Eurocamp (0844 406 0402, eurocamp.co.uk) If your kids are fans of fairy stories, then why not take them to the land of fantasy castles? This rural campsite is on the doorstep of one of the Loire's most magnificent châteaux, Château de Chambord. With a water park, tennis court and mini-golf to occupy the children, mum can practise her Sleeping Beauty routine at the small on-site spa. Accommodation comes in the shape of tents and mobile homes, while the tree houses provide the perfect abode for your own little Hansels and Gretels. • + 33 2 54 87 05 42, camping-des-marais.com. Keycamp (0844 406 0200, keycamp.co.uk) offers seven nights from 17 August for two adults and two children in a supertent, with Dover to Calais ferry crossing, from £790 The Dordogne has long been a favourite destination for family holidays, and this picturesque parc is close to the River Dordogne, the medieval town of Sarlat and the cliff-top Chateau Beynac. The site's restaurant, reception, shop and bar are housed in beautiful golden stone Perigordin buildings, and many pitches enjoy beautiful views of the surrounding countryside. Parents can get some personal space in the Mezzanine mobile homes, which come with a separate children's play room above the main living area. There are both indoor and outdoor swimming pool complexes, waterslides and evening entertainment. • +33 5 53 02 64 00, saint-avit-loisirs.com. Eurocamp (0844 406 0402, eurocamp.co.uk) offers seven nights in luxury tent from 16 August for £759 (sleeps up to six), accommodation onlyThis relatively undiscovered area of France is a haven for foodies and the on-site restaurant at Camping Val de Cantobre doesn't disappoint. It is set in a beautifully converted mill, with lovely oak beams, serves a variety of local dishes and is popular with locals. The small and popular site is surrounded by spectacular scenery, making it perfect for those with a spirit of adventure; activities on offer include canyoning, rock-climbing and horse-riding. There are also four swimming pools on site and both tents and mobile homes are available. • rcn-campings.fr. Canvas Holidays (0845 268 0853, canvasholidays.co.uk) offers seven nights in a Classic two-bedroom mobile home from 1 July for £648, including P&O Dover-Calais ferry crossing. Seven nights in a Maxi Tent from 20 August costs £777At this beachside site on the south coast of Brittany, there's something for all the family; mum and dad can use the spa and well equipped gym, while the kids can enjoy the large covered pool, waterslides, play areas and children's club in July and August. The nearest beach is ideal for poking around in rock pools and the town – with its large beach, bars and restaurants – is a 15-minute walk away. To top it all, the site is set in a beautiful area of France and has lovely views across the bay. • + 33 2 98 57 05 37, escale-stgilles.fr. Matthews Holidays (01483 284044, matthewsfrance.co.uk) offers seven nights from £756 to £967 per family in the summer holidays, including midweek Dover-Calais ferry crossing for two adults and up to three children If the thought of a long car journey fills you with dread, then this large and lively campsite is the one for you. Just 22 miles from the ferry port of Saint-Malo, it is set in the grounds of a chateau, and has a fantastic choice of accommodation. Thatched woodland lodges and treehouses are available as well as the usual tents and mobile homes. There is a riding school on site and the fantastic water park includes an indoor pool and slides, making it ideal for children of all ages. • + 33 2 99 73 53 00, lesormes.co.uk. Canvas Holidays (0845 268 0853, canvasholidays.co.uk) offers seven-nights in a Maxi Tent for two adults and all children, including return off-peak P&O Dover-Calais ferry crossing, from £930 in mid-August or £734 from 25 AugustFor a taste of Provencal village life, head to this small site in the foothills of the Massif des Maures in the Var department. Activities on offer include boules, tennis, football and volleyball, and there are two swimming pools with water slides. Half an hour away are the beaches of Fréjus, Saint-Raphaël and Saint Aygulf, while Saint-Tropez, Grasse, Cannes and the spectacular Gorge du Verdon are all about an hour's drive away. The sunnier climes of the Riviera lend themselves to outdoor living and Eurocamp's luxurious safari tents, complete with comfy beds, wooden deck and equipped kitchen, allow you to do so in style. • rcn-campings.fr. Eurocamp (0844 406 0402, eurocamp.co.uk) offers a seven-night stay from 23 August for £604.80 per family in a Safari Tent (sleeps up to 6 people, maximum 4 adults), accommodation onlyPerched on the edge of Lake Biscarrosse with its gentle sloping beach, La Réserve offers a wide choice of water sports including waterskiing, sailing and canoeing. There is a variety of mobile homes on offer, and the site has bars, a restaurant, a take-away and gas-fired barbecues to use. The surrounding area offers wide, sweeping beaches on the Aquitaine coast 13 miles away, and the jaw-dropping Dune de Pyla (the highest dune in Europe) is a little further north. Foodies and wine lovers can enjoy the oysters on offer at Arcachon and the wineries of Saint-Emilion and in Bordeaux. • + 33 5 58 09 74 79. Siblu (0871 911 7777, siblu.com) offers seven nights in a two-bedroom Esprit holiday home from 17 July from £873.30 (sleeps up to six) Carolyn Boyd is editor of France Magazine