'That couple there, the Jacobs, live opposite me. They're one of the old farming families of La Grave. He's almost 100," says our guide, Katarina, waving, as we make our way down the narrow street lined with stone houses, and past the 11th-century Notre Dame de l'Assomption church.We join the main street of La Grave – in the Massif des Ecrins area of the French Alps and best known as a mecca for off-piste and extreme skiers – and pass a handful of shops and bars, Katarina naming almost every person we see."This is my boyfriend, Pascal. He's a mountain guide," she says. "Pascal, this is Nicola and Chrigl. They're visiting, but I've told them that after three days in La Grave they'll want to move here."It's a bold statement, but that's exactly what happened to Katarina. She came here from Slovakia for a ski season eight years ago and never left. "There's no place quite like it," she says.Directly below the 3,984m Meije (La Grave's answer to the Matterhorn), the village feels untarnished by the fast, tourist-driven economies and commercialisation of many ski resorts. And yet the greatest names in skiing and alpinism cut their teeth here, on some of the longest, steepest, most extreme descents on the planet.But, contrary to what I'd thought, La Grave isn't just about skiing. In summer, once the snow starts to melt, terrain that is inaccessible to anyone without skis, crampons or ropes opens up, with 668km of maintained trails spanning the Ecrins national park. You can keep it simple with day trips, stay overnight in a mountain refuge, or (as of last summer) bed down in a traditional Mongolian yurt – on a farm at the end of the valley, a gentle two-and-a-half-hour walk away. It's there that we're heading with Katarina.We've parked in Le Chazelet, a historic hamlet above the La Grave valley, and have set off on a trail north that follows the Torrent du Gâ. Kids are swinging off ropes into the water (I don't blame them – the mercury is hitting 30C). We climb gradually and pass through three hamlets, aptly called Low, Middle and High Village. Katarina tells us stories about life in these hills – the way locals keep their valuables in their mazots (small outhouse-like chalets) in case of a house fire – while pointing out wild spinach, absinthe and gentians (there are 1,800 plant species in the Ecrins).It's not just flora that Katarina has an eye for but fauna too: from the bearded vultures circling overhead to the marmots I manage to spot just as their fat bottoms disappear into a hole. I have an excuse: the views are proving a distraction. I had expected drama, but this is something else. Behind us towers the mighty Meije, its snowy glacier crumbling into precipitous seracs (columns of ice formed by intersecting glaciers), which give way to great expanses of rock, and eventually trees, grass and pasture. The intricacies are mesmerising. In front of us, the trail twists through the valley, past prairies carpeted with wild flowers, before disappearing between big green peaks.Suddenly we see them: two white specs by the river, below the 3,020m Pic du Mas de la Grave … the yurts. We are greeted by owner Fafu (who lives in the adjacent farmhouse with his wife Pascaline and two children) and a round of cold beers. There are two yurts: one is for sleeping, with a log burner and double-bunk beds for eight, piled with blankets; the other is the kitchen, where Fafu makes meals for his guests, and serves them at a big wooden table. Outside is the shower (a tap with spring water and a bucket) and outhouse.Dinner is served: quiche made with eggs from the farm, followed by beef and onion daube (stew), brownies, and the best génépi liqueur I've tasted, made by Fafu's dad. The evening unfolds as the Meije becomes bathed in pink alpenglow. We scale the hill opposite the yurts with Fafu's kids to watch Pascaline round up their 2,500 sheep and 20 goats. We help milk a goat (the family make their own goat's cheese) before returning to the yurts as it's getting dark. We wrap up in blankets and sit out under the stars: it's the annual Perseid meteor shower and the sky is ablaze.The next morning we wake to whistling marmots and a breakfast of homemade bread and jam, before setting off on what will be a seven-hour hike back to Le Chazelet (covering a total of 23km over two days).The initial section, across the river and up to the Col des Trente Combes, is steep and rocky; I rely on my walking sticks like they're extra limbs. There are a couple of hours' respite as we weave through the grassy valley past shepherds' huts, pausing for sandwiches. Then it's another ascent, up to the Emparis plateau. The view from the top is fantastic: the Lac Noir (which is actually deep blue) backed by the Meije, with the ski resorts of Les Deux Alps to our right, and Alpe d'Huez behind. We drop down the other side and join an ancient mule track down to Le Chazelet.After beers on the terrace of Hotel Castillan – a renowned après-ski hang-out in the centre of La Grave – it's an early dinner and then bed at the Auberge aux 3 Frênes in nearby Villar d'Arène.The following day we join a guided walk on the Girose glacier. Chrigl and I ride the Wonka-like cable car up to 3,173m. There are 11 in our group, and our guide, Thomas, helps us put on our crampons, while roping us all together.It's a slow, steady march up to the seracs at the top of the glacier. The crunchy ice is a stark contrast with the lush green meadows we were walking among yesterday. Thomas points to shallow ripples in the snow: crevasses up to 80m deep, covered with the remaining blanket of this year's late snowfall. The rope was a good idea. He explains to us how glaciers form and how to read them for – relatively – safe places to stand.It's warm, even at this altitude. Above us, alpine choughs ride the thermals. Some people say the birds, nicknamed becs jaunes for their distinctive yellow beaks, are the spirits of skiers and climbers lost. Whether or not that's true, as we pause briefly to take in the tumbling view of the glacier, rock and valley below, I reflect that even if we don't do like Katarina and move here, a small piece of me will forever be soaring and swooping over these magical peaks.• Accommodation was provided by la-grave.com. La Yourte Des Bergers (+33 6 8296 2635, layourtedesbergers.fr) has one-night stays from €38 adults, €30 kids, including dinner and breakfast. Auberge aux 3 Frênes (+33 4 7679 9065, 3frenes.com) has doubles from €39pp B&B. Hotel Castillan (+33 4 7679 9004, castillan.pagesperso-orange.fr) has doubles from €42pppn. To hire a guide contact the Bureau des Guides (+33 4 7679 9021, guidelagrave.com). For information on walking routes visit cheminsdavant.com. The glacier workshop at the festival costs €30 adults, €30 kids, including lift ticket, glacier walk, equipment hire and lunch. Easyjet (easyjet.com) flies to Lyon (two hours' drive away) from six British airports from £58 return