Champagne might be prohibitively expensive to drink, but it's a great place to visit, with all the major producers used to hosting tours round their cellars. In Epernay, stroll along the recently revamped Avenue de Champagne (termed "the world's most drinkable address" by Winston Churchill) and gawp at the 19th-century mansions belonging to the likes of Moët & Chandon (+33 3 2651 2020, moet.com), Mercier, Pol Roger, De Castellane, Perrier-Jouët and Boizel. For €15 you get a tour of Moët's vast, 27km-long cellars and a glass of Moët Brut Imperial.The Rhône Valley is rich in wine, being home to the likes of Côte-Rôtie and Hermitage in the north and Gigondas and Châteauneuf-du-Pape in the south. Do some research on websites such as yapp.co.uk and provencefoodandwine.com beforehand. In the southern Rhône, visit Domaine de Beaurenard in Châteauneuf-du-Pape (+33 4 9083 7179, beaurenard.fr) for a fascinating (and free) no-appointment-necessary tasting in their ancient cellars; and in the northern Rhône visit Maison Chapoutier (+33 4 7508 9261, chapoutier.com) in Tain l'Hermitage for the same. And, if you can wait until January next year, head to Ampuis for the four-day-long Foire d'Ampuis (+33 4 7456 1820), where for €8 you get a free glass and a chance to meet 60 Rhône producers.Travellers to the city of Bordeaux can find the price of even the most basic glass of wine alarming, so beware. The best place in town to get a decent, well-priced drink is Le Bar à Vin (3 cours du 30 Juillet, +33 5 5600 4347, baravin.bordeaux.com). A light, spacious wine bar attached to l'Ecole du Vin (+33 5 5600 2285, vins-bordeaux.fr), it could hardly be more central, being a few hundred yards from the Grand Théâtre. It is also full of information about tours through the region as well as wine courses in l'Ecole itself. Heavily subsidised by the CIVB (the Bordeaux producers' association), it has a wide-ranging selection of local wines by the glass at absurdly accessible prices.There is no shortage of places to stay in and around Bordeaux but, again, these can be pricey. Among the best value are the Hôtel de Sèze and its sister, the Hôtel Royal Médoc (rue de Sèze, +33 5 5681 7242, hotelsezemedoc.free.fr). They are right in the heart of the city and are both much favoured by the English wine trade. They're simple and basic but, with rooms starting from €60 for a double, they're great value. For something a bit more wacky and out-of-town, try the wonderful treehouses (+33 5 5646 2948, naturacabana.fr) in the grounds of the Château de Malleret, 15km from Bordeaux. Prices start from €145 for three in a cabin.Saumur in the heart of the Loire Valley and its vineyards is within easy distance of the Channel ports. If your budget allows, book into the handsome Hotel Anne d'Anjou (+33 2 4167 3030, hotel-anneanjou.com), where rooms start from €105 per night. If budget doesn't allow, head for the Ile d'Offard in the middle of the river and the Hostel rue de Verden or its neighbouring campsite, Camping de l'Ile d'Offard (€16 for a two-person pitch, +33 2 4140 3000, cvtloisirs.com). Enjoy the superb local sparkling wines and honeyed chenin blancs and take a tour (and sample the excellent absinthe) at the tiny Combier distillery (48 rue Beaurepaire, +33 2 41 40 23 00, combier.fr).Alsace is a perfect place for pottering about with its Route de Vin (alsace-route-des-vins.com) easily negotiated by bicycle, so long as you're prepared for the occasional steep hill (you're in the foothills of the Vosges here). The region's medieval towns and villages such as Colmar, Obernai, Ribeauvillé and Turckheim are absurdly picturesque with cobbled streets and half-timbered houses. Nearly all producers have free tastings for the public, with no obligation to buy. Park your bike at the foot of the main street in Riquewihr and wander up to the clock tower, taking in the various wine shops en route, perhaps stopping for a plate of choucroute à l'Alsacienne. Hugel et Fils (3 rue de la Première Armée, +33 3 8947 9215, hugel.com) is the best place to start.Gascony is a blessed spot, whose inhabitants, despite enjoying a diet rich in foie gras and confit de canard, boast lower levels of heart disease than anyone else in France and live an average five years longer. They put this down to their wines. Stay at British-owned Domaine de Lauroux (+33 5 6208 5676, lauroux.com), where a gîte for six starts at €600 per week, and explore the region. Visit Bastide d'Armagnac (labastide-darmagnac.net) with its enchanting square colonnaded central place; Notre-Dame des Cyclistes (notredamedescyclistes.net), a tiny 11th-century chapel where Tour de France competitors come to pray; the exquisite hamlet of Larressingle (and taste its equally exquisite armagnac – tinyurl.com/6z7yo22); the food market of Eauze and buy foie gras, croustade and armagnac direct from artisan producers. (tourisme-gers.com).Go hiking on Les Calanques, the limestone cliffs with jaw-dropping views that run along the Mediterranean coast between Marseille and Cassis. Scramble down to an isolated cove for a gentle swim and a languorous picnic. Be sure to pack some bottles of Provence's hidden vinous gems in your basket, such as Cassis, Bandol, Palette and Bellet. Cassis itself is a delight, a bustling fishing port with dozens of restaurants, each attempting to outdo the other with their pistou soup and bouillabaisse. Enjoy them with Cassis wine (of which there are only 14 producers), a heady blend of marsanne, clairette and ugni blanc, and not to be confused with the blackcurrant crème de cassis.Corsica might seem a bit off-piste but the wines are increasingly fine (and remain excellent value) and the island itself is a bewitching spot with snow-capped mountains, rugged granite hills, flower-strewn meadows and pristine sandy beaches. Head for the hills around Sartène and seek out the delicate local rosés. Or stop at roadside taverns to scoff wild boar salami and figatellu (liver sausage made from the local Corsican black pig), washed down with aromatic, herb-tinged reds made from the strange-sounding nielluccio and sciaccarellu grapes. And if you make it to Cap Corse in the far north, seek out the luscious, lip-smacking dessert muscats, long thought to be the island's crowning glory. Producers to look out for include Domaine Saparale (saparale.com), Domaine Torraccia and Domaine Pieretti (vinpieretti.com).Being in northern France, Montreuil-sur-Mer isn't in wine country at all. It is, though, home to the French outpost of the Wine Society (01438 741177, winesociety.com) and, as such, well worth a visit. Close to both Calais and Boulogne, it is easily accessible from the UK and ideal for a day trip. You can save a minimum £18 a case by buying from here rather than the Wine Society's shop in Stevenage, and with over 200 wines to choose from there's no shortage of choice. A return on Eurotunnel (08443 353535, eurotunnel.com), plus petrol, plus lunch for two, comes to around £90; the saving on buying five cases of wine is £90. Enjoy a day for free in France!