Nicolas Sarkozy's government today launched a robust defence of its widely criticised crackdown on Gypsy immigrants in France.A week before convening a meeting of several European interior ministers in Paris to drum up support for the hardline policy and to seek to extend it across the EU, senior French officials told the European commission in Brussels that the demolition of Roma camps and the expulsions of hundreds of families, mainly from Romania, were in line with freedom of movement laws inside the EU."I explained the principles on which we acted," said Eric Besson, France's immigration minister, after meeting Viviane Reding and Cecilia Malmström, the European commissioners for human rights and policing. "Everything is in total conformity with European law, the 2004 [freedom of movement EU] directive, French law and the republican principles of France."Reding is to report to her fellow European commissioners tomorrow on the political and legal impact of the Sarkozy anti-Roma campaign. Officials in Brussels have been squirming with unease over the past week when pressed to respond to the crackdown, although Reding was strongly critical of the French."Nobody should face expulsion just for being Roma," she said. "Some of the rhetoric that has been used in some member states in the past weeks has been openly discriminatory and partly inflammatory." But Besson and Pierre Lellouche, the French Europe minister, delivered a trenchant defence of a policy that has split the French cabinet, triggered criticism from former Sarkozy allies and been denounced by the Vatican, the United Nations, human rights campaigners and some of the main political parties in the European parliament.Targeting the Romanian government, Besson argued that no country in the EU could forfeit its welfare duties and dump its citizens on another member state. Lellouche said that France contributed €5bn net a year to the EU budget while Romania received €4bn, but spent a mere 0.4% of that on its large Gypsy minority.The authorities have deported more than 8,000 Roma to Romania and Bulgaria this year, including almost 300 last week. Despite the criticism, Besson signalled a tougher line, with new laws being drafted making it easier to kick people out. He is strongly supported by Silvio Berlusconi's government in Italy, which is also pressing EU governments to bypass the commission and agree to a bigger crackdown.The French have convened interior ministry officials from Italy, Britain, Germany, Spain and Belgium, suggesting the aim is to fashion an alliance of big EU governments. The Belgians, holding the EU presidency, have been reluctant to attend for fear of legitimising the crackdown. Malmström was initially not invited until her boss, José Manuel Barroso, the commission president, phoned Sarkozy.