We English tend to think that the French don't do cool. Back in the day, French music was filed under "World" and consisted of the dirge-like ballads of Edith Piaf, Charles Aznavour and Jacques Brel (who was Belgian anyway). The advent of the 1990s and Daft Punk went some way towards changing that. French music slipped its way out of "World" and into those categories previously the exclusive preserve of Anglophone artists. The French even turned to hip-hop, and were more adventurous and less slavishly tied to the US original than on this side of the Channel as the soundtrack to La Haine back in 1995 (our first real introduction to French rap) demonstrated. Then came parkour. And parkour was cool. Parkour was impressive, as any search for David Belle on dailymotion or YouTube will demonstrate. It was urban. It came from the rough streets of those burning banlieues we're always hearing about. It was physically demanding too and that seemed to make it even cooler. Now it's called "free-running" and the UK government is investing in it, setting up a national governing body and providing qualifications in parkour training. No doubt this is very good for the safety of the nation's youth, but it makes the whole thing much less cool. There's nothing like the government getting its hands on a craze and stamping it with safety guidance for taking the fun out of it. Of course this kind of appropriation of cultural phenomena is nothing new. Governments do it, as in the case of parkour, but business does it better. Skateboarding, to take one example, has made quite a transition from the empty swimming pools of Venice Beach to the worldwide competitions, video games and multimillion pound empires of the present day and we might well wonder what it has lost and gained along the way. So what of the next French craze ripe for appropriation? Well, there is Tecktonik, as revealed to the readers of the Guardian back in March. Tecktonik has all the markers of a good youth craze. Groups of impassioned kids get together in small teams and perform it in public spaces. You can also watch them doing it on YouTube and dailymotion and marvel at their skills. It has a look (fluorescent clothes, sculpted hair, tight, tight trousers); it has idols,  Mondotek and Yelle being the most well-known. It has an ethos too. Rather a nice ethos. It's all clean living in the world of Tecktonik and the videos on the internet feature serious teenagers discussing the virtues of that cleanliness and then segueing neatly into the complex arm movements that are the markers of their dance. It's all rather a long way, if we are to believe the front pages of our national press, from the binge drinking performed by our teenagers in public places.Tecktonik also has a business empire up and running. The creators of the first major Tecktonik club night at the Metropolis in Rungis, Cyril Blanc and Alexandre Barouzdin, have trademarked the name. And they've got the advertising industry all excited. Tecktonik is promoted by word of mouth; it's a fine example of viral branding. And it works. There are CD compilations and a clothing line and a Nintendo game is in the pipeline (release due in November). So this particular craze comes ready packaged and with a message ripe for government approval. But is it cool? Cool has always implied a kind of authenticity apart from the machinations of corporate branding. Can the Tecktonik brand be embraced by UK kids or will this particular movement just bypass the cool phase altogether and instead be championed by the government as a groovy treatment for childhood obesity? Interestingly the business connection does not trouble the French kids, who still meet and still dance despite the labels, the albums and the high volume of T-shirt sales. So perhaps the French have reinvented cool altogether. It's older, it's wiser and it might just have a business plan.