We are in the car, deep under the English Channel, and I have earphones in. I'm listening to a French language CD, number eight of 12. Two people, a man and a woman, are on the CD, learning along with me. At the beginning, the woman kept making silly mistakes, while the man and I picked things up very quickly. I felt she was holding us back.Now that we've reached reflexives, however, the man is struggling. Like me, he speaks haltingly and forgets basic stuff. The woman, meanwhile, seems to have turned a corner. I feel myself drifting off."We're here," my wife says. "You're driving.""Je me lève maintentant," I say.The trip is a band thing – we've got two dates in Normandy – and an advance guard (two band members, two wives, three children) are staying at the cultural centre that is the site of the first gig: concert Blue-Grass par le groupe anglais, plus chicken. While we're shown round, my wife gabbles away in her special brand of French, consisting of the phrase "C'est possible...?" and a dozen nouns, all glued together with total nonsense. To my fury, she is able to make herself understood, whereas every time I open my mouth everyone looks at me as if I have two heads.That night we go out for pizza. I walk into the restaurant with the middle one and place our order. The woman at the counter stares at me for a moment, then asks a question I don't understand. For a time it seems we have reached a linguistic stalemate, but finally she reaches for her pad. I go to sit with the others."Mum's French is way better than Dad's," says the middle one."That's rubbish," I say. "She doesn't know any reflexive verbs.""That woman didn't understand what you were saying," he says. "She had to get a pencil and paper.""Yes, but that was because...""And all she wrote on the paper was a big question mark.""That's a lie," I say.Next day, we pick up the fiddle player and his wife from the train station. When we return, it's clear that the proprietor of the cultural centre and his wife are cross because they were expecting us for lunch. Here, my lack of French serves me well: I try to explain, then shrug, then exhale with exasperation. The fiddle player's wife, who speaks fluent French, takes over. They have what I assume is a conversation about the unfortunate confusion. I find they are all looking at me."Non," says the fiddle player's wife, "il comprend tout."At 5pm, the rest of the band arrives with the news that the PA system hasn't turned up. By the time we've rigged a substitute, the barbecue has been lit and people are beginning to drift across the lawn. It's a beautiful evening, and we are set up facing a terrace. The proprietor is urging us to begin so people can eat at 9pm.When the first song begins, I have my back to the crowd. I play a few notes on the harmonica, and I know from experience that it's important to check I'm holding it the right way up. The sound is surprisingly good, and the song is lovely: slow, plaintive, a little haunting. I step up to the mic and do my part. Once I've managed the first few notes, I look up.I have seen restless audiences before. I have seen boredom, and I have seen pained indulgence. But I've never seen what I see now: 100 French people sitting on white plastic chairs, whose expressions betray not just bewilderment, but disapproval. It looks like a parole hearing. I glance down at my set list: only 14 more songs, plus one more gig, to go.