At the beginning of October France’s foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, officially re-opened the Villa Kujoyama in Kyoto. Like the two other grand French institutions abroad – the Villa Medici in Rome and the Villa Velazquez in Madrid – the centre in the hills overlooking Kyoto welcomes 23 artists in residence every year for periods of three to six months. It closed in 2012, not so much due to structural worries, more out of existential fatigue. Some feared it would never open again. There were questions over resources; concerns whether those who exhibited there were a true reflection of French cultural ambitions; more importantly, were such ambitions too far removed from contemporary Japan?However, it was the fabric of the building that was the initial focus. A French architect, Adrien Petit, was tasked with the usual clean-up that ageing concrete structures require. The work was sponsored by Pierre Bergé, the erstwhile companion of Yves Saint-Laurent. The villa, designed by Kunio Kato in the late 1980s, in a style part Lloyd Wright, part Le Corbusier, makes good use of its setting, the light and shadow of the surrounding vegetation softening the concrete geometry. But at a practical level it was starting to be affected by damp where it abutted the hillside.While the repairs were under way, the Institut Français – the cultural arm of the foreign ministry – re-organised the way the villa operates. The original idea goes back to well before 1992, when it opened, and makes great play of exchange, as advocated by the writer Paul Claudel. When he was ambassador to Japan, Claudel supervised the first Franco-Japanese foundation in 1927, on the same spot as today’s villa. Its construction was indebted to a Francophile dye manufacturer, Katsutaro Inabata, who had studied in Lyon. The foundation then moved into premises opposite Kyoto University and the old site fell into disrepair. In the late 1980s, when the Institute Français was considering redeveloping the site, Inabata’s grandson, Katsuo, raised funds to build the villa we see today.The institute’s charter stresses that artists in residence should work in tandem with Japanese counterparts in the same field. This collaboration starts at the top, for the establishment is now managed jointly by Christian Merlhiot and Sumiko Oe-Gottini. Artists come here, not to work on Japan as such, but to pursue their creative work in “symbiosis” with the Japanese, “casting light on as yet unexplored territory, where two natures, two languages and two gestures mix and finally merge into one another”, in the words of philosopher Michel Serres.This was particularly true of one of the first artists in residence, when the centre was headed by Michel Wasserman. The American-born choreographer Susan Buirge launched a semi-permanent company with a master of traditional Japanese dance, and went on to create a three-part series reflecting the Japanese seasons. One of these pieces was performed at the reopening, interpreted by a Japanese pupil and accompanied by three gagaku (court) instruments.In keeping with Claudel’s idea, the institute seeks to offer both a Japanese container – the building – and French content – artists and management. Already sponsorship for the refurbishment of the villa – at a cost of €500,000 ($625,000) – has been found. However, more will be needed for ongoing running costs. The Bettencourt-Schüller Foundation will provide €750,000 over a three-year period. After that point, more private sponsorship will be needed.That will underline the need for the Villa Kujoyama to prove its cultural value. The selection of artists who fulfil its founding principle must be stricter and the content of the work on show should link to Kyoto’s great tradition of craft and fine art. This article appeared in Guardian Weekly, which incorporates material from Le Monde