President Nicolas Sarkozy has just announced the biggest military shakeup in France in generations – since in fact, since 1966, when President de Gaulle, in a typically Gallic gesture, pulled France out of the military command structure of Nato, to defy the Americans.Now France is to rejoin the military formation of Nato, the forces are to be trimmed and updated to face the growing threat from international terrorism and its sponsors, the president told a gathering of some 3,000 military officers and officials. This means that France will take the role of the principal point of contact between Nato and America and the EU's security and defence structure. French forces will be working more closely with their British allies in places like Afghanistan where Sarkozy has already sent an extra battalion battle group this year. When France rejoins the Nato command later this year, France with Britain will be the two leading European Nato powers. They alone among Europeans can send a fully equipped and trained armoured division, the key formation of up to 30,000 troops, into a major combat operation overseas.There will be increased burden-sharing in places like Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa and in combating piracy, an increasing menace across the world.France is due to cut combat forces in all three services from the present 271,000 to 224,000, and intends to spend €377bn on defence and security over the next 11 years – still a smaller amount than the UK will spend in the same period. Some 50,000 jobs are to be cut in the defence civil service.The main reason for the reform is the desperate need to overhaul France's somewhat antiquated forces and to prepare them for more agile peacekeeping, humanitarian and counterinsurgency operations. New surveillance and control satellites are to be ordered, a new intelligence committee set-up, and a special counter-terrorism force of 10,000 is to be trained for internal security as well as operations abroad. France still intends to maintain its homegrown ballistic nuclear weapons, carried by submarines and aircraft. This is hugely expensive and takes between a quarter and a third of the annual defence budget. Now there is a possibility of sharing technology with Britain and the US.More to the point, France wants to make even closer ties with Britain and the US, the "cousins", in intelligence – particularly in the fields of jihadi terrorism. The reforms are likely to draw Britain and France closer. Much of new French thinking has been coloured by the writings of General Rupert Smith whose book Utility of Force is now taught in French staff colleges and military academies. He said that light flexible forces are required to fight the 21st century's new "wars among the people".Interestingly, his ideas have been embraced more warmly by the French than the British defence establishment. Last week, in outlining his blueprint for the new British army, General Sir Richard Dannatt, chief of general staff, said he disagreed with Smith that the nature of war and conflict in the world today has undergone a fundamental shift from the "heavy metal" industrial wars from the campaigns of Napoleon to the second world war.The heirs of Napoleon, though not of Wellington, clearly think he is right.