On the Atlantic coast, we've seen all this weather before. Just over ten years ago, the coast of Charente-Maritime was struck by a hurricane and floods, and the mouth of the Gironde estuary burst its banks and filled every little fishing port and the valleys of the hinterland with salt water.This weekend the French weather services gave us plenty of warning. We shut all the shutters, moved the cars out of the way of the Scots pine that we used to love but now mistrust each time the wind soughs in its branches. For the events of December 1999 have left everyone in the area with a fear of the sound of wind.By three in the morning, the buffeting wind and rain had us fully awake, and after an enormous flash in the sky, power was cut and we were groping for torches. At dawn, we ventured out to see the damage. We were lucky, only a few branches down. We dug out the camping gas to make tea and a battery-run radio, to hear Maxime Bono, mayor of La Rochelle, saying that this was even worse than 1999.We live an hour south of La Rochelle, on the Gironde Estuary. The worst hit areas are to the north of us, seaside towns like Aytré, Chatelaillon, the Ile de Ré, and north into the Vendée, but the Gironde estuary is tidal, and reserves special treatment for those who live on its banks. Leaving our cold house behind, we drove south to check out the house of friends who live most of the year in Berlin. The coastal road was dotted with "route barrée, and route inondée" notices, and barriers had been set up to keep traffic away, but I have a French husband, so we went straight through regardless.High tide had been at 4am, and it was 104 on the French coefficient scale, which means a high spring tide. Coupled with 159kph winds, the villages didn't stand a chance. South from Royan, hugging the coast past Meschers and Talmont, flooded fields and pasture land shone blue in the bright sunlight. The road was littered with debris, tree trunks, planks, plastic bottles, mounds of rushes and old tyres. And while farmers stood and looked dejectedly at their sprouting wheat covered with swathes of jetsam, others were making the most of it, hurriedly loading their cars with free firewood. We kept the car radio tuned to France Bleu La Rochelle, which is the only means of communication for many. One woman was calling in for help from an isolated house in Les Boucholeurs, an isolated fishing village south of La Rochelle. Her daughter was stuck in a flooded house surrounded by water, with a two-month-old baby and no electricity to heat up milk. An appeal also came over for shoes and socks and warm jumpers, for those who had swum out of their homes in the middle of the night.In St Seurin d'Uze, the worst hit on the Gironde coast, no-one has forgotten the 1999 floods, in which a young woman and her child drowned. This time, the church had been flooded but already by 11am the pews stood piled high, and local women leaned on their brooms and looked proudly at the glistening floor tiles.Our friends' house in Barzan stands only a few meters from the harbour side. At the Auberge des Monards, the restaurant owners were hosing down their mud-coated dining-room, all the tables and chairs were out drying in the sun. And we spent the afternoon doing exactly the same: washing, hosing, moving furniture, wringing out bedding and clothes, and hosing all over again. Outside, it was high tide again and the water we kept pushing out of the front door had nowhere to go.Of course, the mockingly sunny Sunday brought onlookers, wanting to find a space to park among the drying chairs and the buckets and the sodden doormats – causing a minor traffic jam that prevented the fire brigade from doing its urgent job of pumping out water. Irritated, the mayor, Robert Maigre, who had been up since three in the morning doing the rounds of his commune, dragged out barriers to block access to the harbour."It's not for lack of asking," he said, "as he pointed to the harbour banks. We've tried at local level, we've tried the departemental conseil géneral but no-one's listening. It wouldn't take much, we just need the bank raised by a few centimetres, to keep us out of danger, but with only 250 inhabitants, we're too small. So here we are, ten years on, same thing all over again!"