Although born and bred in Yorkshire, I’ve been snowboarding for almost 20 years and moved to the Portes du Soleil just over a year ago. Spread over 14 valleys between Mont Blanc and Lake Geneva, it’s one of the world’s largest ski areas and a great place to live. I chose Morzine because we used to train in the halfpipe there and I made friends and contacts who started businesses and made lives here.The Mutzig Challenge at Bar Robinson is one of several urban myths (or true stories) about what people get up to here. Mutzig is a 5.5% beer best enjoyed in halves, but the challenge is to drink 10 pints. Not many people have walked away from this feat – at least not in a straight line.Triathalons are bad enough in the UK, but in the “Morzine to Chamonix triathlon of discomfort” the swim is done in a melt-water lake and the run and cycle are through the Alps.One of my favourite runs is the Satellite – an easy hike and a mellow off-piste run. In such a large ski resort, there’s a lot for everyone, from beginners to advanced skiers and snowboarders, and a lot of snow miles to be had. And you can ski or snowboard down the streets of Avoriaz in the winter. Related: Splitboarding in Chamonix: fresh terrain for grown-up snowboarders Avoriaz and Morzine get very busy during school holidays. They’re on the French side of the lake, and easy to get to: a 90-minute drive from Geneva airport and one of the shortest drives from the UK. So I’d buy a full-area pass and take on the whole circuit, which fills a day and takes you far from the crowds. Champéry, over the border in Switzerland, is much quieter, and feasible as a family day trip on the lifts.The “hangover reset” is the best reason to visit the mountains – aside from the fresh air and scenery. So long as you are able to get up and out, the cold air in your face on the first run of the day blows the cobwebs away and means you skip that hangover. Better than sweating it out on a beach in 30C.The Nico Droz road gap is a terrifying “leap of faith” snowboard jump. You jump off a 30ft-high platform and over a piste, landing on the other side and riding out over frozen Lake Avoriaz. First taken on by legendary French rider Nico Droz, and attempted by few others since then, the jump is easily seen from around the resort and looks a hell of a lot bigger in real life than it does on video.The heated terrace and wide beer selection at La Marmotte D’Or make it perfect for enjoying the last rays of sun after a hard day on the hill. It often has live music and I’ve been known to spin a few tunes there myself. In the winter, I DJ with my friend on Tuesdays at Opéra, one of two clubs in Morzine.British people get a bit wild on their holidays. Last season’s Rock the Pistes festival up on the mountain, featured Babyshambles and the Klaxons. Everyone got hammered in the afternoon and after the festival, everyone rode down. Even the bands borrowed skis and went down in jeans.For dinner, I’d recommend an “all-you-can-eat meat treat” at L’Etale in the middle of Morzine. The restaurant is Savoyard style, serving cheese, meat and red wine in various combinations and cooked at the table, either on a raclette grill or, as they do with the steak, on a pierre chaude (hot stone).I have spent winters in the mountains since I was 16. It took me three tries to get to the Olympics and missing out twice was hard, but it taught me to deal with setbacks. I’ve also travelled all over the world for qualifying events, so it hasn’t been all bad.