France today moved a step closer to increasing Sunday shopping hours, when parliament approved a weekend trading law after months of heated argument.Nicolas Sarkozy made liberalising Sunday shopping a plank of his 2007 presidential campaign – part of his drive to make France a more entrepreneurial society, where people would "work more to earn more". But his first attempt last year to see more shops open on Sunday was met with rebellion in his centre-right party, an outcry from the Catholic church and protests from Socialists that he was destroying the fabric of French society and family life by killing the sacrosanct weekend.With the row portrayed as a battle for the soul of France, Sarkozy warned rebellious MPs in his party that Sunday shopping was a symbolic change and if not passed, his image as the only man brave enough to reform France would be forever damaged. Recently, the president used Michelle Obama as a key argument, complaining that he had to intervene to allow her to browse a chic children's shop on the left bank on a Sunday visit to Paris."We're the country with the biggest number of tourists in the world – 80 million a year. Is it normal that on a Sunday, when Mrs Obama wants to take her daughters shopping in Paris, I have to make a phone call to make the shops open? So I say to all the people who supported Obama [in France]...go and explain to the Obamas why on Sunday, we're the only country that's shut," he said.Sunday working in France is a complex and muddy area – more shops are open in France on a Sunday than in strict Germany, but fewer than in Britain. The current law is such a confused mish-mash of rules and exceptions that some areas have shops open and others do not. For example, certain stores on the Champs Elysées are allowed to trade, while others must stay shuttered. Meanwhile, markets and bakers do a brisk Sunday morning trade across France.After months of wrangling, the lower house of parliament today approved a much watered-down version of Sarkozy's initial law, but it must still go before the senate next week. Under the new amended bill, shops in three big metropolitan areas, Paris, Marseille and Lille would be permitted to open on Sundays. In those areas, employees in large shops would be able to refuse Sunday hours and Sunday workers would be paid overtime. Shops in a further 500 towns and villages deemed of "tourist interest" could also open but without the obligation to pay overtime.The left has deemed it a "socially abhorrent and economic nonsense" to liberalise Sunday working hours. Unions complained of a progressive generalisation of Sunday working that would pressurise workers. Sarkozy's party claimed the measure could create thousands of jobs.The right also hopes the measure will boost tourist spending. Paris is the most visited capital in the world, but tourists spend on average less in France than they do in the US or Italy.