It may have been buried the day it was leaked to the press, but the Goasguen report, addressing the issue of dual nationality in France, is interesting on many levels.French MP Claude Goasguen's report was in fact "a project for a report", that is to say the mere beginning of an idea for a possible report, which would then have needed to be debated by a parliamentary commission to become a potential bill, then discussed by both chambers of parliament. This was never going to be more than the possibility of a debate. Libération leaked the most controversial of Goasguen's 230-page work document before it even got to the desk of the newly created parliamentarian committee on nationality.One of the many recommendations was to restrict dual nationality. In specific instances, someone applying for French nationality might be asked to renounce their other nationality, or someone born in France of foreign parents might have to choose one nationality, and one only, on reaching 18.The day this was leaked, a government spokesman, François Barouin, said that Nicolas Sarkozy's government was not in favour of such propositions. The Green and potential presidential candidate Eva Joly, herself Franco-Norwegian, denounced such a "scandalously populist" proposal. Apart from Marine Le Pen, the National Front leader who had written to the 577 French MPs asking for the end of dual nationality a few weeks earlier, no voice from either right or left came to the rescue of Goasguen, who immediately backtracked. Some were wittier than others – such as Causeur magazine.This episode is symptomatic of two trends in French politics: the influence of the extreme right in setting the national political agenda and the difficulty of debating controversial issues. It is precisely because of a refusal to engage in difficult conversations at a national level that the National Front manages to hijack important topics. Instead of screaming when a dubious proposal is suggested, why don't we serenely try to understand where it all comes from?So where do Goasguen's proposals come from? From a series of events, speeches and facts, some going back a century. A year ago Sarkozy, in a speech he made in Grenoble, pandered to the National Front by announcing that criminals of foreign origin convicted of the murders of policemen or of any national representatives would lose their French nationality. It was one of Sarkozy's now well-known emotional and calculated speeches whose sole purpose is to cater for a particular fringe of the electorate at a given time, usually taking place straight after an incident (riots, murders, any event that would strike the country's psyche). As often with Sarkozy's announcements, they are undoable or unconstitutional. What he's looking for each time he speaks is to stun his audience, in which he certainly succeeds.More recently, in April, the French football team's coach, Laurent Blanc, came under attack after he was secretly recorded raising the issue of having dual-nationality players in the French team. Blanc was asking whether there should be a quota of 30% of dual-nationals to limit potential defections during international competition. Former colleague Zinedine Zidane backed Blanc, but Lilian Thuram criticised him. The outrage was such that the questions raised by Blanc in the clumsiest terms were buried once and for all.In 2001 and 2002, at international matches (for instance, between France and Algeria), second- and third-generation French supporters booed the Marseillaise. At one match, the president, Jacques Chirac, felt he had to leave the stadium. These images shocked a country not used, at the time, to ethnic dissension. France then saw the November 2005 banlieues unrest and has, unfortunately, got used to the rise of such feeling, only exacerbated by the divisive nature of Sarkozy's policies and temperament.Booing the Marseillaise is a very symbolic gesture, especially when it comes from French nationals. France was built on an unwritten national contract, that of a community sharing not only the same geography but also a sense of a common destiny. The Republican model is that of integration and togetherness, not of peaceful cohabitation between separate communities, as with multiculturalism. Integration supposes a will to integrate and a desire to live together. Since the 1960s, the French left has shied away from any debates brushing on anything linked with, in its eyes, the awful word of "nationalism", forgetting that the political concept born in the 1840s was a progressive one.The contemporary French left has always found the Marseillaise, for instance, an embarrassing and cumbersome heritage. It is not sung for fear of looking too chauvinistic. However, to see it booed by fellow compatriots is another thing. A sign, surely, that something deep within France has gone awry. The Socialist party has chosen – as with many problems in France – to close its eyes, leaving the right, led by the National Front, to put it back on the table in the most preposterous way, as Goasguen did last week. The French left and centre-right should have the courage to debate difficult questions such as ethnic dissension, instead of just screaming until the other camp shuts up.