To understand what literary life in France is like, imagine a pond. A pond that's getting smaller and smaller, with just as many fish in it, so that the water is getting more and more crowded. You can guess what happens: each one has less and less space to evolve, to find food, and even to develop the energy required to discuss ideas. Sales of books continue to be weak in 2011, after a particularly flat year for publishers and bookshops. Apart from the usual juggernauts, such as titles from the bestselling authors Mark Lévy and Amélie Nothomb, and more sporadic successes such as the latest novel from Michel Houellebecq (winner of the Prix Goncourt in November last year), most novels and essays struggle to make any money.Yet the landscape certainly doesn't lack variety: for the past 30 years the French have benefited from a law setting a single book price, which has made it possible to preserve diversity on the publishing scene. Rather than being flattened by concentration, many small publishers still do remarkable work, alongside the larger houses. As a result, a multiplicity of tastes can happily continue to be met, with tiny publishing houses often taking on translation projects or the publication of complete works. In contrast to the early 90s, when lots of small publishers were going bankrupt, publishing today is no longer a graveyard.Some smaller enterprises have been taken over by larger ones, but without necessarily losing their identity. So Métailié and L'Olivier were bought up by Le Seuil, while POL, Verticales and Joëlle Losfeld were bought by Gallimard. At a time when publishing companies, as well as the press, are losing their independence all over the world, Gallimard is celebrating its centenary as an independent company, and is in a state of health that would make many younger houses green with envy. The fact remains that the market is tightening relentlessly. As elsewhere, one can witness an increasing polarisation in sales, with the gap widening between titles that "take off", often the most mainstream ones, and all the others, notably midlist titles, whose sales have been completely squashed.This polarisation is reflected in the way the press talks about books. In newspapers the space devoted to literature is now relatively stable after a dramatic decline over the past 10 years. As a result, critics struggle to cover the full range of books produced, caught between the need to talk about what everyone else is talking about, the need to explore types of literature that almost no one is talking about and the wish to get themselves talked about by taking up increasingly clear-cut positions.In these circumstances, what happens to the discussion of ideas? It is still alive with regard to the big questions that run through society (political, religious, social, historical, and so on). According to the philosopher and novelist Bernard-Henri Lévy, the French situation is unusual in that, instead of being permanently fixed, "intellectual groups re-form around each issue like iron filings around a magnet", a situation which has become more marked in the last 20 years. In January 2011 the "affaire Céline" shook the cultural world. The writer Louis-Ferdinand Céline, who wrote some truly great books and also some violently anti-semitic tracts, was included in the calendar of national commemorations, to mark the 50th anniversary of his death. His presence in this official brochure provoked such a furore that the minister of culture eventually backed down and removed Céline.In the purely literary domain, on the other hand, debate is less lively. The controversies that arose when autobiographical fiction, or "autofiction", began to establish itself, thanks to writers such as Serge Doubrovsky (who invented the term), then Christine Angot and Camille Laurens, have more or less subsided. The publication, in January this year, of Angot's latest novel, Les petits (Flammarion), caused hardly any debate, as if the critics had got used to this type of writing and to the dangers it can bring.Indeed, "autofiction", which introduces a character sharing the same name as the author, in situations which are more or less fictitious, has an almost incestuous relationship with the real world. As a result, this bold genre, which has given French literature some of its most interesting books in the last few years, is not neutral – and this is undoubtedly one of its strengths. However, autofiction no longer sparks the same passions as it did 10 years ago. In the case of Angot's latest, which has not had the anticipated impact on readers, it has taken a lawsuit to rouse the literary world from its torpor: one brought by the ex-girlfriend of the man Angot shares her life with, and from whom the writer drew inspiration in her book.Another lawsuit has drawn attention to a book by the prominent author Régis Jauffret a year after its publication: in Sévère, published by Seuil in January 2010, Jauffret was clearly inspired by the Stern affair (the assassination of a rich banker by his mistress, in the course of sado-masochistic games), without ever naming the real protagonists. The novel was received reasonably well by critics and had some moderate success in bookshops. But several months later, when faced with the prospect of a film adaptation, Edouard Stern's family become concerned and attacked the author. The latter found immediate support from about 20 writers and intellectuals who signed a petition on his behalf, launched at the instigation of the magazine La Règle du jeu.The new generation of writers seems not to worry unduly about these questions. Writers such as Yannick Haenel, Maylis de Kérangal and Delphine Coulin are making a name for themselves without belonging to any school: reworking plots when it suits them, using fiction or autofiction in their own ways, and inventing new forms when they can. And that's all to the good.1 Indignez vous! (Cry out!) by Stéphane Hessel (former diplomat's plea for outrage from French people at the state of their nation)2 La carte et le territoire by Michel Houellebecq (Goncourt winner)3 Les écureuils de Central Park sont tristes le lundi by Katherine Pancol (New York-based novel)4 Métronome: L'histoire de France au rythme du métro parisien by Lorant Deutsch (history)5 La méthode Dukan illustrée by Pierre Dukan (illustrated diet plan)Total 2010 book sales 464.5m