Have you been following that favourite British pastime, enthusiastically reciprocated beyond Calais, of watching the French making idiots of themselves again? It would be fun if it wasn't serious and didn't affect us too.I do not refer to the controversy over a bit of British academic research which suggested the G-spot may be a myth, the condescending French repudiation of which Lizzy Davies wittily reported in last week's Guardian. Crowdsourcing research continues.Nor even the acquittal of Dominque de Villepin in the conspiracy to stitch up Nicolas Sarkozy, his rival (past, present and future) for the French presidency by way of a very French funny-money smear campaign. (Busy Lizzy wrote up that Inspector Clouseau tale too.)No, the serious one is that vote by French MPs last week which would lead to a ban on the wearing of full Islamic covering – the niqab (face veil) as well as the burka (full body) – in official public spaces such as hospitals, post offices and buses.It's one of those compromises people think they're being smart to dream up; not a full ban, you understand, but a partial ban.As the Observer reported yesterday (that Lizzy Davies again) it must be seen in the context of France's commitment to secularism (laïcité), equality and other abstract concepts for which they are rightly famous.It underpins the notion that the French are all equal, but that people who want to be French must embrace what being French means. A Moroccan who became more devout after moving to France – surely an understandable response? – lost her bid for citizenship because she would not discard the niqab.I don't like any form of clothing or kit where one cannot see a person's mouth or eyes, both vital to reading what someone is saying, meaning or feeling at any given moment when you are trying to communicate. You have the voice to go by (as you do on the phone), but it's not always enough.So when Jack Straw expressed Jack-ish doubts about the suitability of the niqab (he asks visitors to his MP's surgery to uncover), I was on his side and added my strong dislike of sunglasses indoors (outdoor too, actually, but at least there they serve a function) to promote the view that this is not about being horrid to Muslims.That's a world away from banning people. You need a much better reason than personal discomfort to do that in a free society. I don't much care for facial piercings or tattoos either. "So you want to make yourself ugly and unemployable, do you?" I mutter to myself as I pass those who have them in the street. But we shouldn't ban them either.Yet British public opinion is almost as iffy as the French who have been suffering one of Sarko's public debates on national identity for six months or so. A ComRes poll for the Independent this morning shows that 59% support a ban on the burka in public places such as airports and banks – with 36% against.The young are more tolerant than the old, the cosmopolitan city-state of London more tolerant than the rest of Britain. No surprise there.Most people oppose a total ban, the sort of thing the BNP advocates, but think that schools should have the right to ban teachers in burkas if so minded – as the French have banned the wearing of headscarves and a daft court in Italy recently banned religious symbols such as crosses in school.One way or another we've all made mistakes. The Swiss voted the other week to ban minaret-building, not a major problem in Switzerland. Not many women wear the niqab in France – 2,000 on some estimates – and even fewer the wretched burka.In London you rarely see either outside certain neighbourhoods, rich and poor, where Muslims live in large numbers. When I'm in need of directions in such areas I make it policy always to ask the woman in the burka, a form of affirmative action. Are they pleased? I've no idea, but they sometimes know the way.But we have got muddled over religious symbolism in schools and hospitals. The Christian Legal Centre has issued a statement only this morning confirming that Olive Jones, a teacher in Weston-super-Mare, has been offered her job back.Mrs Jones (54) was sacked by North Somerset council after offering to share her faith with a sick pupil and asking other children in the class to pray for her. The parents objected, but it turned out that no one had told teachers they were sensitive about faith matters.So a mistake was made. But no one investigated the case properly before the sacking either, according to the legal centre. But the good news is surely that a respected teacher got her job back.Live and let live should be the watchword, shouldn't it? And fairness of treatment too. If we want to ban funny kit in banks or at airports on security grounds the ban might be sensibly extended to all funny kit, including sunglasses and exploding underpants.The point is the France is a great brand. It is supposed to stand for something important in human affairs: liberty, equality and fraternity. It does, even though we have just been reminded that the offspring of the French Revolution brutally squeezed savage compensation out of republican Haiti for decades after its black slaves decided to follow Paris's intellectual lead and throw off oppression.Ditto Britain. Secular democracy's enemies, who use our liberal institutions – courts and benefit systems – while busily despising us, only thrive when we let ourselves down. We are stronger for being who we say we are, not what they say we are.Tucked away in yesterday's Observer article was a remark by Kheira (her niqab is in her handbag, she explains) who said: "France is supposed to be a free country. Nowadays women have the right to take their clothes off, but not to put them on."Well said, Kheira. I'd like to think Simone de Beauvoir would applaud you, though I'm not confident. What's more you sound quite French and modern too me. Good.