This is what Angela Merkel did not want to see: markets pricing up the cost to Germany of saving the euro.That is what seemed to be happening as the cost of insuring German and French bonds against default rose sharply. The price for German insurance has doubled since the start of July – it now costs €91,000 to insure €10m of five-year German bonds, which is close to the peak price seen during the banking turmoil of early 2009.The German chancellor's view, one can guess, is that markets are barking up the wrong tree. Hasn't she made clear that Germany won't be providing endless funds to bank-roll the European Financial Stability Facility? Well, yes, she has. But the market can see that words and deeds don't exactly tally.The European Central Bank is doing the EFSF's work. It is buying Spanish and Italian bonds (and having an impact: the yields on the 10-year bond yields fell again on Tuesday) and seems to be acting politically. Italy and Spain succumbed to the ECB's detailed demands for restructuring of their economies and received a subsidy in the form of lower borrowing costs. That looks like a step towards fiscal union, a pan-euro Treasury and the issue of eurobonds.It has huge political implications. "As it becomes clear that the principle of 'joint and several liability' for eurozone debts is now being enacted in direct contradiction to the Maastricht Treaty, we may now start to see a backlash in Germany," thinks Nick Parsons, strategist at National Australia Bank.Indeed, Otmar Issing, a former member of the ECB's executive board, was stirring the pot in the FT – "to change the "no bail-out" clause ever more in the direction of a bailout regime is not a step towards a democratically legitimised political union," he thinks. Rather it's a step on "a slippery road to a regime of fiscal indiscipline drowning hitherto solid countries in the morass of over-indebtedness". That, one suspects, will be a popular line in Germany.Merkel's problems are mounting. Unfortunately for her, the market is asking legitimate questions in changing the price of bond insurance. If fiscal union becomes the only way to save the euro, Germany will have to take a hit; and if the eurozone breaks up, the cost could be even greater.