When the German public was first confronted with the anglicism “quantitative easing” around 2009, opinion makers in the media wasted no time coming up with metaphors for this abstract financial process. Soon the German press was describing governments purchasing assets via their central banks as a “cash tsunami” or “printing money”.Genuine money-printing machines haven’t been an instrument of central bank policy for decades, yet the image is part of the public discourse – and the German public will look at today’s European Central Bank (ECB) announcement in that light: Mario Draghi has switched on the money printer because he’s run out of other options.And in Germany this image will always awaken the ghosts of the past: speak of QE and from the crypt of history rise horrifying visions of handcarts full of devalued marks. Every debate about monetary policy is flavoured by the scars of the 1920s hyperinflation. The majority of politicians, economists and leader writers in Germany appear to agree that QE is a dangerous form of alchemy.What most people overlook is that the parallels between the 1920s and today are superficial at best. If in 1923 the Reichsbank literally handed over a large sum of cash to the government so it could appease striking workers, QE today is all about encouraging banks to lend more credit to businesses and individuals at a time where the willingness to invest is close to collapse.Of course there are risks involved in QE, as there are with every intervention in the market. The banks could get addicted to cheap money or throw themselves into risky deals, inflation could run out of control, the external value of the euro could collapse. In Germany these are the most commonly voiced concerns, along with warnings about speculative bubbles. But economics is an empirical science, and Germany, like the eurozone as a whole, has the advantage that it can assuage its fears with the experiences of other economic areas that have tried QE recently.Half a decade of asset purchases in America and the UK may be too short a period for a conclusive assessment, but we can surely afford to proclaim an interim result: the worst-case scenario never happened. The American Federal Reserve has purchased assets worth €3,900bn, the Bank of England around €500bn. Statistics show a price increase of less than 1%. The currency didn’t go through the roof in either country. The spectre of inflation is nowhere in sight.Let’s remember that some serious economists had prophesied a price increase of 4%-6%, and other less serious commentators had even warned of inflation in double figures.Fears about a sudden drop in the exchange rate never became a reality either. In spite of QE, the dollar and the pound are currencies that have in recent years strengthened against the euro. What about speculation bubbles? We have undoubtedly seen a tendency towards overvaluation on the stock market and in property. But a few isolated instances apart, these haven’t reached the excesses we have seen in the past.On the plus side we also see that employment has grown more in QE-practising countries than in the eurozone. Unemployment figures in southern Europe – 26% in Greece and 24% in Spain – are some of the highest in the world. For now the eurozone is still the most important market for German goods, but in the long run its export-focused economy cannot flourish when its European partners are suffering.From a German perspective, there are therefore many reasons to approve of the ECB’s asset-buying programme. From a legal perspective, the central bank can refer to its mandate of aiming for a price stability of roughly 2% and avoiding a deflation spiral that would lead to decades without growth or investment.The problem is that even if QE were a big success, it will hardly be met with euphoria in Germany. Alienated by the commentators’ rhetoric, many German citizens now blame the ECB for microscopic interest rates on their savings. Because many Germans rely on their savings to look after them in old age, they now see their pension plans under threat. Shares and bonds only play a bit role in this debate. It is above all the middle classes, who mostly haven’t invested their assets in property, who see their prosperity under threat.And QE has another uncomfortable consequence in Germany: unlike the US or the UK, the eurozone isn’t a nation state. If the whole experiment fails, who is going to shoulder the blame? Who will have to cough up if, for example, the Italian central bank were to make a loss on its investment? Will those losses stay in Italy or will the debts somehow be shared across Europe?And in that respect the ECB’s “bazooka” brings back the kind of uncomfortable questions governments prefer not to answer: what kind of union is the eurozone? Is it a union of sovereign national states with access to a single market, or a supernational community of values with limited sovereignty? Monetary policy alone cannot answer these questions. The ECB can only help to make sure that these fundamental issues are worked out from a platform of growing prosperity rather than in a time of crisis and decline.