No, we are not lazy, screamed the headline of Germany's best-selling tabloid, Bild, on Thursday. Three politicians from competing parties, from the conservative CDU to the liberal FDP, took an unusual step: please go to vote on Sunday, they begged together. They fear a record low turnout.The desperation is not completely unfounded. Germans seem to be interested in anything else, like the rescue package for carmaker Opel or rising rents in Berlin or what to do with a 100 people-strong family of Roma people, but not in the European elections. Last time, the turnout in Germany was about 42%, in Berlin it was even lower, 38.6%. This time the polls forecast worse. "What does it have to do with me?" most voters ask. Not many people actually know what the Strasbourg parliament is good at.Europe has also become a byword in Germany for bureaucracy and silly rules, such as the infamous rule on the curviness of cucumbers. It has been abolished, the three politicians cry in their advert. They add that the administration of Europe only cost €3 per citizen. "Not more than a glass of beer," they say. Europe – just another glass of beer? Is that the only thing they could come up with?This is one of the rare moments when one wishes for a politician like Helmut Kohl, the former chancellor, who really was a passionate and devoted European, who used his post-war experience to prevent another horrible division of the continent. They younger generation seems more superficial, just keen on keeping their posts.It also seems wrong that the politicians are suddenly so desperate to raise our interest in Europe, which they largely ignore outside election time. Suddenly they seem to be very keen to get their message across. Even the Chancellor, Angela Merkel, held a rally in Berlin on Thursday to support the CDU candidates. But, one wonders, where have they been for the last five years, and why do we hear so little about the work of MEPs during their tenure?There is a lack of understanding of what MEPs actually do and how effective they are. This is not only the politicians' fault – outside election times, there is little media reporting to make processes in Brussels more transparent. The main problem, though, is the national government. It has nurtured a hypocritical attitude: the national parties are quick to blame the "bureaucrats in Brussels", if it suits them. If there is something voter-friendly coming out of the EU, they claim the success for themselves. When the interior minister recently pretended to have increased refunds for delayed train travel, she was only passing on EU legislation. 