The Germans want the Greeks out. That is the clear message from the decision by Europe's finance ministers to reject the offer of a fresh package of austerity measures in return for a €130bn (£108bn) bailout. Over the past few days it has been painfully evident that Greece's coalition government was having real trouble securing agreement on the deal but it has now been told to cut some more. Berlin wants a full pound of flesh.The Germans would say that the tough approach is justified by Greece's record in making promises and then not keeping them. After the mass downgrade by Standard & Poor's of European sovereigns last month, the remaining AAA-rated countries – including Germany – are more determined than ever to show their fiscal mettle. There is visceral loathing of Greece in Germany.Mind you, the Greeks are not too keen on the Germans either. They believe that the draconian terms for financial assistance are condemning the economy to permanent recession, and by killing off growth ensuring that the country's debt problem cannot be cured. Being asked to cut further when you know it is pointless may be one humiliation too far.The question, therefore, is whether the Greeks are being forced into a position where they reject the Carthaginian peace terms presented to them by the rest of Europe and decide that, however tough life is going to be outside the single currency (and make no mistake, it would be), it can be no worse than sticking to the status quo.With one important caveat, this would be a good outcome for Angela Merkel. If Greece decided to quit the euro of its own volition, she could say she had done all she could to keep the single currency intact but, in the end, the Greeks themselves had decided it was time to go.The caveat is, of course, that a Greek departure would be orderly rather than disruptive. If the Germans, and the other hardliners, are trying to force the issue it is because they believe that the actions taken by the European Central Bank over the past couple of months have been sufficient to ensure no contagion effects from Greece to the other debt-stricken eurozone members and, just as importantly, to the fragile European banking system.That is one heck of a gamble, and don't be surprised if it fails. Ever since it became obvious in late 2009 that Greece had a whopping debt problem, the crisis has been handled ham-fistedly. Nothing has been learned along the way, obviously.