OK, it's a hard life, I know, but I'm in Berlin this week to watch the Berlin Philharmonic, a trip that will end up as one chapter of the book I'm writing on how the world's great orchestras and conductors create their performances. I've been watching how conductor Simon Rattle puts together a programme of Sibelius's last three symphonies, and talking to the players about their feelings about this music, about how they collaborate with their conductors, and about their identity as an ensemble of 128 virtuosos who somehow manage to create a coherent orchestral entity of indescribable intensity when they play together.There are a couple of concerts still to go, but last night's first performance of Sibelius 5, 6, and 7 (Rattle follows Paavo Berglund's example and plays the Sixth and Seventh without a break, creating a sort of meta-five-movement symphony) was fascinating. It's astonishing from a British perspective, but this is music that this orchestra hardly knows, apart from a handful of players who have come from UK orchestras, or the couple of musicians who happen to be Finnish. There's enormous prejudice against Sibelius in Germany after Theodor Adorno's demolition of him: "If Sibelius is good, this invalidates the standards of musical quality that have persisted from Bach to Schoenberg," an assessment followed up by generations of critics and writers including René Leibowitz, who called Sibelius "the worst composer in the world". Even the programme note writer for the concerts feels the need to apologise for Sibelius: "Next to Mahler, [Sibelius is] the most important symphonist of the early 20th century – if that doesn't sound too over the top." It wouldn't to British or American – or Finnish! – audiences, but it does to most people over here. Michael Stegemann goes on: "Is Sibelius's reputation so compromised for all time, that an unprejudiced appreciation of his music is now almost impossible?" Extraordinary. Imagine reading that in a Proms programme note.But this is the reality of Sibelius's reception in Germany, and it means that generations of German musicians don't know this music. Rattle told me that the composer Heiner Goebbels is coming to the concert on Saturday, because he has never heard these pieces. And, earlier in the season, as part of a cycle of all seven symphonies Rattle has played with the Berliners this year, Sir Simon taught his musicians the Third Symphony. Shockingly, and even shamingly, the orchestra had never played this piece in its entire 128-year history. In fact, it's testament to the strength of Rattle's relationship with his players that he persuaded them to accept the idea of a Sibelius cycle at all: he told me that when he first arrived in 2002 and outlined his plans to play all of Sibelius's symphonies to the orchestral committee, the response was derisive laughter. They suggested he wait a few years.It's been worth the wait. I'm not sure that every player in the Berlin Phil is a total Sibelius-ophile yet, but they play with their usual total commitment (the most precious of all of the Berlin Phil's musical trademarks), and in the process, transform Sibelius and these symphonies. A place like the end of the Sixth Symphony is a gigantic, melancholic hymn in their performance, music that sings with barely suppressed grief and rage. It's a completely different feeling from the gentle resignation a conductor like, say, Osmo Vänskä finds in the same music. Rattle talked of the end of the Seventh Symphony as a "scream … certainly the most depressed C major ever written, you feel it's the end of the world", and that's how it sounded last night. Using all of the "dangerous energy" of the Berlin Philharmonic, the final gigantic cadence was less a resolution of the symphony's structure and more an existential question mark, which found an inscrutable answer in the silence the music faded into in the Philharmonie.For all its power yesterday, one of the Finns in the orchestra, Janne Saksala, who leads the double-basses, said he thinks the third concert will be the best. It's pretty impressive right now, but Janne may well be right, as the orchestra learns more about how the music moves, so different from Austro-German music, and learns to love it more (you can watch that concert live on the Berlin Phil's Digital Concert Hall). Rattle is already a hugely deserving recipient of the Sibelius Medal, which was presented to him before the concert last night by the Finnish ambassador to Germany. In his time with the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, Sibelius was at the heart of Rattle's repertoire and his reputation. If he can convince his musicians and his audiences here that Sibelius really is as important as Mahler, he will deserve even greater accolades – but if anyone can do it, it's Rattle.One wee footnote to last night was a piece of inspirational concert planning from Rattle. Just after the rehearsal yesterday morning, a choir started singing in the Philharmonie. "Who are they?" Rattle asked, entranced by the sounds a dozen or so young singers were making. It turned out they were Markell's Voices, a chamber choir from Novosibirsk, Siberia, on tour in Germany – and Rattle quickly booked them to sing in the evening concert, just before the Fifth Symphony. Have a listen to them here – and don't be put off by some of the English translations, like "behold, the bridegroom comes in the middle of the night", or "four Russian underdish peasant songs"; this is a unique and affecting vocal tradition. Few other conductors or concert halls would manage to sort out an impromptu choral gig before an orchestral concert – a tribute to Rattle's spontaneity and powers of persuasion.