Claims by Germany and France in the run-up to last week's G20 meeting that big fiscal boosts were inflationary and unnecessary belied the fact that the big eurozone economies are stuck in a deflationary spiral.Growth in the German economy was worse than either Britain or the United States in the fourth quarter of last year, and last week its unemployment rate rose to 8.1%, well above Britain's 6.6% rate, although still below the US's 8.5%. Unemployment has reached 3.4 million; retail sales are falling; consumer confidence remains weak; and business confidence hit a record low last month. Meanwhile, inflation in the eurozone as a whole has fallen to its lowest level to date on the consumer price index (CPI) measure at just 0.6%, and the euro remains relatively strong against the pound and dollar.That did not stop German Chancellor Angela Merkel arguing against further fiscal stimulus on the grounds that it could prove inflationary and therefore unsustainable. France's President, Nicolas Sarkozy, made similar noises, and so renewed fiscal stimulus disappeared from the G20 agenda.However, the Japanese prime minister, Taro Aso, said fiscal stimulus was urgently needed. "Because of the experience of the past 15 years, we know what is necessary, while countries like the US and European countries may be facing this sort of situation for the first time," he said.Germany had felt relatively immune from the credit crisis, as it had not had an unsustainable boom in consumption and house prices. It was, however, far too dependent on exports, and now that world trade has collapsed, its lack of domestic demand has left it painfully exposed. Analysts think the first quarter of this year could see its worst economic performance since the second world war. France, too, is looking very sickly. Its unemployment level jumped 80,000 in February to nearly 2.4 million - well above Britain's, even though the populations are broadly similar. And its statistics office expects joblessness to rise to almost 9% in the current quarter. Rising unemployment is a big worry in France, where consumer spending is a mainstay of the economy. Consumer confidence has plunged, and spending in February fell at its fastest pace in more than a year. As in Germany, business confidence is at a record low.The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development last week forecast that the German economy would shrink by even more than the UK's and the US's this year, with France not far behind. Many economists in France and Germany are even gloomier.The European Central Bank has come to the rescue to some extent, but last week surprised analysts by cutting interest rates by only a quarter of a point, to 1.25%. In Britain rates are at 0.5% and in the US at 0.25%. Many analysts have criticised the ECB for being too slow to react to the downturn.Japan and China - the world's other big surplus, exporting countries - have grasped the importance of reflating their economies quickly. Germany, though, is in trouble, but refuses to take the necessary action, such as slashing taxes. And if it goes into an even deeper slump, as seems likely, the whole continent will suffer.