One of the main benefits of being a citizen of the European Union is supposed to be the freedom to live and work in any country within its borders with no restrictions. But when Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovenia, Slovakia, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia joined the EU in 2004, Germany and Austria opted to make use of the maximum seven-year transition period before granting the new member states' citizens full access to their labour market.That period has now expired: as of 1 May, Poles, Hungarians or Latvians can work in Germany and Austria without any restrictions whatsoever. The questions are: how many will want to? And how will the new reality affect the respective countries' economies?Estimates vary as to how many Poles will eventually leave the country, but one thing everybody agrees on is that Poles will make up the largest number of the new wave of central and eastern European economic migrants. And most of them will be heading for Germany and not Austria or Switzerland, which also opened up its labour markets to the EU8 on 1 May. The European Commission predicts about 100,000 people a year will move to Germany from the CEE countries, half of them from Poland. The Polish government itself is expecting more than 400,000 Poles to leave for Germany within the next three years.The Germans say they need the fresh blood in their thriving economy. "We really need workers. We don't lack jobs, but labour," said Ursula von der Leyen, the German labour minister, a few days before 1 May. She also promised Germans that the workers coming would be mostly young, educated and mobile.The likelihood of hundreds of thousands of Poles flocking to Germany in the next few years is doubtful. Ironically, Germany's labour restrictions, while meant to prevent an influx of low-skilled, cheap labour, were actually more of a hindrance to highly qualified professionals. Blue-collar workers who set up their own one-man businesses in trades such as bricklaying have been able to work in Germany legally for several years now: all they needed in order to register a one-man business was a German address and the German equivalent of a national insurance number. In other words, the low-skilled workers who really wanted to work in Germany are already there.White-collar workers, on the other hand, have faced harsher employment restrictions. If, for example, a German firm wanted to employ a Polish accountant, the firm had to prove there were no Germans capable of the job before it could secure a work permit. Some of these restrictions were relaxed a few years ago for particular professions where there was a real lack of workers in Germany, such as engineers or IT specialists, but restrictions remained in most professions.After the 2004 accession, skilled Polish migrants mainly went to countries that opened up their labour markets immediately, such as the UK, Sweden and Ireland. Germany largely missed the opportunity to attract such workers.Another reason Poles won't necessarily flock to Germany is that Poland in 2011 is very different from Poland in 2004. According to IMF figures its GDP per capita now stands at more than $18,000 (£11,000) as opposed to about $11,000 seven years ago. The economy has grown steadily since accession and so have wages. In fact, the World Bank now classifies Poland as a "high-income country". Of course, salaries are still much higher in Germany but they are now roughly three times higher, not six or seven times higher like in the past. And one must remember that life in Germany is decidedly more expensive than in Poland.Talking to the president of a major Polish construction company recently, I mentioned the fear that Germany would suck in all of Poland's best workers. That's what everyone said before the 2004 accession, he said: "But where are all those rich Germans today?"Will some of the Poles and other eastern Europeans currently living in the UK and Ireland leave those countries and move to the thriving Germany? An April report by the British thinktank, the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) says the lifting of barriers could drive some eastern European workers away to Germany, but the report does not expect that number to be significant.Germany sent the wrong signals to young, educated and mobile Poles immediately after the 2004 accession. The engineers, IT specialists and qualified medical personnel it now seeks left Poland for other countries years ago. And if those scattered around the continent do decide to pack up and leave the countries they are currently residing in, it is more likely they will be boarding a plane headed for Warsaw rather than for Berlin.