 11.18pm BST OK, geschwind zu Pferde, or in my case, a train.What we know: Merkel wins, as predicted, everyone else has a rather poor night, umlauts take ages to cut and paste into liveblogs.What we don't know: who she governs with, how Europe reacts, whether Greece gets its third bailout, whether Cameron has a partner for shaking down Brussels, and plenty more besides. But's that all business for another day.For now it's Feierabend. Tschüss 11.13pm BST A couple of last bits of telling data to leave you with...First of all, our own Wolfgang Blau points to some crunchy data from ARD showing how voters migrated from one party to another. I think the jaw-dropping number is the 2.2m FDP voters who drifted into the CDU camp.The result of that, and other psephological shifts (i love that word, though it's tricky to type when you've been staring at a screen for 10 hours) is that the electoral map of Germany now looks something like this, where black = Merkel 11.06pm BST  10.43pm BST Not all over for FDP - creeping closer to five percent. And so the best joke of the night might end up looking rather feeble. (What's the difference between the FDP and a Smart Car? The Smart car has two seats).Also, outright majority looking less likely for Merkel now, but I'm not sure how relevant that whole 'majority' thing was. Only about 55 constituencies to go now. To keep us going, let's have another FDP joke, this time from @chrisjcottrellUpdated at 10.54pm BST 9.57pm BST I want at this point to go off on a tangent, so if you're not up for that, go and do the washing up or something. Oh, and if you could make me a cup of tea and email it over, that would be nice.This graphic tells a pretty interesting story. Yes, it's in German, but bear with me. What it shows is that Germany is BY FAR China's largest trading partner in Europe. China is now almost as big a market for German exports as the UK. And it's catching up fast. And when it comes to imports, China is only just behind France as Germany's biggest purveyor of goods and services.What this suggests is that in her third term, Merkel will have one eye on Brussels but the other on Beijing. I'm not sure if this is even physically possible from Berlin without getting an excruciating headache. 9.49pm BST Let's have another skip through the party HQs, test the mood.Philip Oltermann is clearly having far too good a time with the victors, and like me has been unable to avoiding lapse into footballing analogy. Well, at least we know Angie is a fan.When Merkel took the stage at the CDU headquarters for one final time, shecould barely get a word in for the euphoric masses clad in orange "Angie" T-shirts shouting her name ("Ruhig bleiben, Kanzlerin waehlen", a take on the Keep Calm and Carry On slogan, was another favourite). As her ministers and advisers around her swayed and clapped in tune to the music, Merkel looked remarkably reserved. The song pumping out of the speakers was a schlager called "Schachmatt" ("Check mate"), but you could sense that for Merkel the game of coalition chess was just beginning."Tonight we can celebrate, but tomorrow we have to go back to work", she said, but her followers didn't have any of it. "The day after tomorrow", they hollered back. And then: "Oh, wie ist das schön", as if they had just watched their football team win the Champions League – which in a way, they almost had. Once the music stopped, Merkel was the first to leave the stage and head straight for the exit."Meanwhile, over at the Left party's thing, several cadres have a good look round to spot the missing discoIndebted to The Local and its own blogging antics this evening for a glimpse inside the Green party do. Not much to celebrate here, I think, though they could still end up with around 60 MPs, which is 59 more than we have in the UK. 9.12pm BST One thing is for certain: Merkel is promising to stay on for another full four years. That will take her past Margaret Thatcher as Europe's longest serving female elected head of government. Last week, we drew up some bald comparisons, slapped them on a couple of cards, and got lots of stick from readers for it. Undaunted, we hereby re-present the item and the link to the full page, certain in the knowledge that much will be written in the coming days about Merkel and her amazing political longevity. 8.46pm BST Getting plenty of analysis now as to what this all means. First up, Stefan Kornelius, Merkel biographer, Süddeutsche foreign editor and a man who once bought me a large beer in a Munich Kneipe, He just wrote me this:Merkel is basking in triumph. What a day for her. This usually distant and unemotional women is grinning and cheering all evening. Finally she gets the reward she was denied for two consecutive elections. But she knows the traps: Sitting with her challengers and all the other party chairs in the traditional TV roundup, she is not giving a hint about her next steps. Certainly her party is that close to an overall majority - the first time since Adenauer in 1957. But waking up tomorrow morning with all votes counted she might need to find a coalition partner anyway.Even if she could govern on her own, she will need the Social Democrats' vote in the second chamber, the Bundesrat, for major domestic legislation. Also, the most pressing issues in Europe require a larger consent in the Bundestag. Merkel's big goal will be a major structural reform within the EU. To achieve this she might even be forced to change the German constitution and put it to a vote to the German people.Experience tells Merkel that political success is always followed by disappointment. She doesn't believe in a linear way to triumph. So her joyful mood will quickly fade and the old, cautious Merkel will return. Don't expect too much change. Merkel might win big, but that won't change her character.Next we have Mats Persson, director of the Open Europe think tank:Whatever happens this is a massive public endorsement for Angela Merkel, who has established herself as the most powerful female politician ever. Part of her resounding victory must also be seen as a validation of her eurozone policy – expect more of the same.Whether or not the anti-euro Afd makes it into parliament, its strong showing means it could become a force to be reckoned with in the European elections.No matter the coalition outcome, there will have to be a lot of soul searching by the FDP and centre-left. In the end the leadership of these parties could well end up paying the price for their poor showing.Also more from our own Ian Traynor, whose full piece is here:There will be little quick change in her policies on Europe, unless there are major developments in a big ailing country such as Italy or France.She is under no pressure at home to change in any case. The main opposition Social Democrats and Greens might bicker and attack her policies, but where and when it matters, in the chamber of the Bundestag in Berlin, they have always voted with her on the key decisions. 7.40pm BST While we wait for dust to settle, it's time for a bite to eat. I'm indebted to Nils for sending me a picture of his electoral dinner, and would encourage others to do likewise to @markriceoxley69. I may post more in the space, depending on how mouthwatering they are.Meanwhile, Philip Oltermann is at CDU HQ. He says that if this election was just about the food, then the CDU would once again win hands down.There's rather a nice goulash here, while the food at the AfD HQ ran out within two minutesThough judging from the pix he's sent through, I'm not so sure that this can be called a culinary triumph for Merkel. An astronomical victory, but not necessarily a gastronomical one.And here, just for the record is my own meal, which I'm sort of live-scoffing while I do thisUpdated at 10.01pm BST 7.35pm BST So here's what we've got so farAngela MerkelThis is a super result. Together, we will do all we can to make the next four years successful ones for Germany.We are not obligated as conservatives to campaign for the FDP.The party leadership will discuss everything when we have a final result but we can already celebrate tonight.Asked if she would serve a full third term:Yes, I am completely certain about that.Peer Steinbrück, SPD candidateWe did not achieve the result we wanted.Philipp Rösler, FDP chairThe bitterest, saddest hour in the history of the FDP.Updated at 9.21pm BST 7.19pm BST In Athens, Helena Smith says the prospect of a grand coalition (CDU+SPD=GOVT) has met with a certain amount of relief, und zwar:Tassos Telloglou, veteran interpreter of German affairs:“The most likely scenario, that of a grand coalition between the CDU and the Social Democrats, is also the most positive scenario for Greece. The SDP has put much more emphasis on the policies of growth.”Jorgo Chatzimarkakis, Greek-German MEP“There are two pieces of good news from this election for Greece. The first is that it looks very likely that the alliance with the FDP won’t continue. The other is that the SDP, which has the best views regarding policies of austerity and has even talked of a Marshall plan will likely join forces to form a government and if that is the case I would not expect austerity to continue as we have seen it. A grand coalition would be good for Greece. The bad news is that the anti-Greek Alternative fuer Deutschland party may enter parliament and if that is the case it will add to the pressure on Merkel to take a tough stance on the question of helping out the south and especially Greece.” 6.59pm BST Here's some lively footage of scenes inside the various campaign HQs. The voiceover is in German, but then I think that's allowable as this is after all a German election. You get the idea: CDU chanting like a football crowd, SPD scratching heads, FDP wondering where it all went wrong.Updated at 7.21pm BST 6.46pm BST France eagerly wanted to be the first to congratulate Merkel on her victory, et voilà...Angelique Chrisafis in Paris writes:Francois Hollande, whose advisors had hinted he was likely to be the first world leader to congratulate Angela Merkel, has called her and invited her to Paris for talks as soon as the new government is formed. The Elysee said the two leaders vowed to work “tirelessly” to pursue “close cooperation” on the “new challenges for European construction.”The political relationship between the Socialist Hollande and conservative Merkel has often been fraught – far from the “Merkozy” common front of Nicolas Sarkozy's presidency. But while Merkel actively pledged her support for the right-wing Sarkozy in the 2012 French presidential campaign - which Hollande went on to win - Hollande pointedly did not campaign for the centre left's Peer Steinbrück of the SPD during this election.French media said Merkel's solid victory confirmed her status as the leader of Europe. French Socialists will be eagerly watching the final results to see whether Merkel has won an absolute majority or whether she will need a coalition and what form that might take. Before the result, French Socialists had hoped that if the centre-left took part in a German coalition, it could mark a move closer to Hollande's positions on Europe and social policies versus one-size-fits-all austerity. I don't know if the response from Spanish or Greek socialists will be quite as effusive... watch this spaceFirst reaction coming through from Greece's main opposition radical left Syriza party, says Helena SmithI just caught Panos Skourletis, Syriza's spokesman, going into a television studio. Rather breathlessly he told me that Angela Merkel's strong performance diluted the prospect of a grand coalition being "particularly positive" for Greece. "The only thing that will make a difference is if there is a different government in Greece and by that I mean a Syriza government," he said. Syriza, now leading in polls, says Greece will only revive economically is if its debt load is forgiven and austerity is replaced by growth enhancing measures. Tellingly, Syriza's leader, Alexis Tsipras, was in Germany throwing his weight behind the lelftist Die Linke party in the run-up to today's election, to drive that message home. Updated at 7.50pm BST 6.32pm BST Have just got off the phone with Frauke Petry, one of the leaders of the Alternative fur Deutschland (excuse missing umlaut - no time for accents now). Again I recorded our conversation, but because I am a technoramus, my shrewd incisive questions did not record. So here's what was said:Me: What's the mood like?FP: It's very exciting and we're still waiting to see if we get above the 5% markMe: You've only been around six months and have a shoestring budget, so how have you managed to make the breakthrough? FP: We have been out on the streets talking about the topics that many Germans regard as important topics. And the big parties have tried to exclude these issues from the election campaign, and so they have pushed people towards the AfD.Me: What's your big idea?FP: We have to rethink the euro crisis. We have to allow weaker countries like Greece and Spain and Portugal to leave the euro and rebuild their economies and then maybe return. We don't think we should pay for debts that have been accumulated by these countriesMe: I don't want to take the wind out of your sails or anything, but even if you do get into parliament, you won't be numerous enough to affect policy.FP: We are not so sure. We think we will be able to push CDU and SPD towards new positions. Many members of the CDU quite agree with us but haven't said so in publicMe: What's happening now?FP: Of course people hope for 5pc and still wait for the 5pc to appear on the screens, but are still very proud of what we have achieved over the past six months 6.22pm BST As the night proceeds and the votes are counted, those percentages above will nibble around a bit. And the CDU projection is going up as we speak, such that some are beginning to wonder about whether Merkel could secure an absolute majority.If she did, it would be the first in Germany since the days of Konrad Adenauer. And if you've no idea who he is, read in hereFor now, all that Merkel is saying is "It's a super result", and that she'll do everything to make the next four years successful for Germany. But what about Europe? 5.58pm BST Ian Traynor, our Europe editor, offers the following view of Merkel's win:More than three years into the European Union’s worst ever nightmare, Merkel, uniquely in the Eurozone, has been hugely rewarded for her handling of the currency and sovereign debt crisis. Everywhere else voters have punished governments.Her victory demonstrates the gulf between Germany and the rest of the EU and the Eurozone, although it is not clear what impact her third term will have on the direction of the crisis.Her victory, with an increased share of the vote for her Christian democrats than in 2009 no less, will vindicate her confidence in the way she has dealt with the euro challenge. She will be encouraged to carry on as before, not least since she is confident that the heat is going out of the crisis and that her emphasis on savings, cuts, and structural reforms in the stricken eurozone economies is beginning to pay off. 5.52pm BST I've just got off the phone to Anna-Catherina Muller, a rank and file FDPer, who describes the fear and loathing at the Berlin HQ, and tries to figure out what went wrong. For some reason my questions don't come through, but they were pretty poor anyway, so don't worry about that 5.28pm BST Let's get some rapid-fire reaction to those exit pollsHere's AP scooping up the initial response from the big guns:Volker Kauder, the leader of her party's parliamentary group:We have a clear mandate from voters to form a government. (The outcome shows that) voters want Angela Merkel to remain chancellor.Senior Social Democrat Thomas Oppermann:The ball is in Merkel's court.Updated at 5.48pm BST 5.03pm BST Right then, according to ARD:CDU 42.0 %; SPD 26.0%; FDP 4.7%; Greens 8.0%; Linke 8.5%; AfD 4.9%, Piraten 2.5%Kate Connolly's snap judgement on that:A fantastic result for the CDU, but the SPD's second worst result of all time. We could end up with just four parties in the Bundestag, making coalition building interesting. At the moment it looks like it has to be a grand coalition.ARD TV showing grim-faced FDP cadres: could this be the first time they fall out of national parliament in 60 years? AfD by contrast overjoyed, some brandishing rather withered looking sunflowers. Not sure of significance of that...Updated at 5.08pm BST 4.32pm BST Now before we get to results, here's a quick briefing on how it all works. Kate Connolly says the rules of voting in Germany are as complicated as the rules of cricket. While I find myself wondering what the psephological equivalent of LBW is, Kate saysGermany's system is best described as a combination of the first past the post system (as used in Britain) and the proportional representation model. Voters are given two choices. On the left (black) side of their ballot paper they vote for an individual from their local constituency (there are 299 districts in Germany). On the right (blue) side, they vote for a party (34 are running this year). Added up, the second votes allow the parties to fill up a further 299 seats from the lists. Each of the parties receives a share of the 598 Bundestag seats proportionate to the number of second votes it has secured.Sometimes, a party wins more seats through the direct vote than it would get under the second vote. In the past, it has been allowed to keep these "overhang" seats. But now, under new rules ALL parties are rewarded if the direct votes for any party exceed their second vote quotient so that the Bundestag ratios reflect precisely the second votes cast.But under this system, the Bundestag could swell to an even greater size than before. In theory to as high as 700 seats. The party that is likely to lose out most of all is Merkel's CDU, which gained most from the old system.Another crucial factor is that Germany also exercises a 5 per cent threshold rule, (to prevent an extreme amount of political fragmentation, as happened during the Weimar era) by which no party that secures less than 5 per cent can enter parliament. This is of particular interest this time round because Merkel's junior coalition partners, the Free Democrats (FDP) have been polling dangerously close to the threshold, as have the anti-Euro newcomers, the Alternative fur (umlaut over u) Deutschland.Got that? 4.14pm BST Only an hour to go til exit polls. I know you can't wait. But there are hefty fines for anyone who breathes a word about results before the witching hour. So we'll have to get a sense of winners and losers by skedaddling quickly around the party HQs.At the FDP shindig, @josieleblond reportsNow I don't know about you, but tense and nervous is not where I want to be on election night.Meanwhile, over at the AfD headquarters, a sense of anticipation and expectation. Hugh Bronson, candidate for Charlottenburg in Berlin and 4th on the party, told us:We've done all we could. The party doesn't have great funds but I'm very confident that we've got above the 5pc threshold.If it gets into parliament, the AfD would immediately table debates on the euro bailouts that Germany has sanctioned.It has to be discussed in public and in parliament. We want to show how dangerous this rescue policy isUpdated at 4.48pm BST 4.00pm BST Philip Oltermann writes:Peer Steinbrück cast his vote in Bonn early this morning, claiming that he had had a good night's sleep. Merkel went to vote at 1.30pm at Humboldt University, close to her flat in Berlin Mitte. Steinbrück wore a red tie and a black jacket, Merkel a copper-red jacket and black trousers, triggering plenty of jokes about the two politicians getting in the mood for a black-red “grand” coalition (black being the traditional colour of Merkel's CDU). 61.8m Germans are eligible to vote, 400,000 fewer than in 2009. There are 3m first-time voters. 3.50pm BST Meanwhile, the Germans are not the only Europeans casting votes today. Across the Schwarzwald, the Swiss are deciding whether to scrap military conscription, like so many other European countries before them (including Germany http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/16/conscription-germany-army.)The Swiss are great for their Sunday referendums. Last year they even voted on whether to have longer holidays. For some reason they rejected this. Turnout was low. Too many people on holiday, probably. I'm not sure the conscription thing will pass either: they've rejected it twice before. But I digress... 3.39pm BST A snap from Berlin, where the early indications are that turnout is pretty strong. This, Philip Oltermann tells me, would favour the SPD, who always seem to do well when more people turn out.Bundeswahlleiter - Bis 14.00 Uhr betrug die Wahlbeteiligung 41,4% (ohne Briefwähler). 2009 waren es 36,1%. #btw13The tweet, from the federal stats office, says that the turnout rate was five percentage points higher by 2pm that it was at the same time four years ago.Which leads me to wonder: much is written about apathy in western democracies, and how we don't vote in the number we used to. But perhaps the last three years of crisis have galvanised electorates somewhat. Thoughts people?Updated at 3.41pm BST 3.23pm BST First things first: the pecking order. Merkel's CDU have won the past two elections and are likely to get around two in five votes tonight, putting her in pole position to form another government. The SPD, a centre left party, is predicted to get around 25% - but it's what happens after that that gets interesting.The lefter left Linke group could well end up as the third largest party, ahead of the Greens and FDP, a liberal party, which have both endured miserable campaigns.The biggest imponderable is perhaps whether the AfD, an anti-euro party, makes it into parliament. Read what Josie Le Blond discovered about this maverick new group on the German scene. The other question we'll be looking to answer soon after 6pm CET (1600 GMT) is whether the FDP get more than 5% of the votes, which would enable Merkel to persist with the current coalition. More of the same would be greeted with relief on financial markets - but hefty sighs from Mediterranean countries tired of Berlin-inflicted austerity. An epic fail by the FDP would probably mean the SPD joining Merkel in a grand coalition. And that could have intriguing implications, as Philip Oltermann argued at the end of last week in this piece. 3.03pm BST Don't you just love election night? There is nothing quite like it for drama, upset and late-night suspense. Apart from perhaps an England-Germany semifinal that ends in a penalty shootout. But let's not go there. Tonight there will be German winners again, I can confidently report, but also some German losers too, so it might be worth staying tuned for that. Schadenfreude and Weltschmerz in equal measure.As for outcomes, this is both a foregone conclusion and gloriously unpredictable. Angela Merkel's CDU-CSU grouping will win. There are few doubts about that. But with enough margin? And who will she try to partner with in government? That, and not to be or not to be, is the question tonight.Now then, a confession: I'm actually 1,000 miles away from the action, but don't let that deter you. I did once work on a building site in West Germany and also spent a dismal night sleeping rough in Berlin in 1989, so I know a thing or two about Teutonic triumph and disaster. Well disaster at least. And we have our correspondents, Kate Connolly and Philip Oltermann, ready to feed us their election night nuggets of wisdom. There's a fancy vote counter coming soon, if I can manage to embed the thing, and lots of reaction from around the party HQs in Berlin.Updated at 3.24pm BST