World Cup Final 1966, WembleyA late German goal levelled the scores 2-2 and took the match into extra time. Geoff Hurst, was awarded a goal in the first half of extra time after match officials judged his shot on goal that bounced down from the crossbar had gone over the line, prompting a furore among German fans. The goal to seal the match England 4, Germany 2 – part of Hurst's hat-trick – came after fans began to spill on to the field, thinking the game was over. BBC Television commentator Kenneth Wolstenholme earned a place in broadcasting history when he shouted: "They think it's all over... it is now!".World Cup Quarter Final 1970, Mexico. England were 2-0 up, but Franz Beckenbauer and Uwe Seeler equalised in the second half. Gerd Müller scored in extra time to give the Germans a 3-2 win. Many pundits believed England had been severely weakened by losing goalkeeper, Gordon Banks to illness before the match. Conspiracy theorists say he was poisoned.Semi final World Cup 1990, ItalyGary Lineker equalised for England in the 80th minute and the match remained 1-1 until the end of extra time meaning a penalty shoot-out, England's first encounter with the misery of spot kicks. West Germany won 4-3 after misses from Stuart Pearce and Chris Waddle, above.Semi Final European Championship 1996, WembleyEngland had taken the lead against a unified German team through the tournament's top scorer, Alan Shearer. Stefan Kuntz equalised for Germany and the score remained at 1-1 until the end of extra time. In another penalty shoot-out, all five England penalty-takers and all their German counterparts were successful. In the "sudden death" shoot-out Gareth Southgate missed for England and Andreas Möller scored for Germany. Germany went on to win the tournam ent.World Cup qualifying match 2001, Munich Under their first foreign coach, Sven-Göran Eriksson, England were not expected to perform well, but a Michael Owen hat-trick ensured they won 5-1 and eventually qualify for the World Cup as group winners. Karl-Heinz Rummenigge said: "This is a new Waterloo for us."