Does Angela Merkel know more about La France profonde than the rest of us? Or is she simply being her usual shrewd, canny self, a hedger of bets when it comes to Europe's election of the year?Merkel has, of course, already pinned her colours firmly to Sarkozy's mast, controversially offering to campaign for him and then feeling miffed when Sarkozy said thanks but no thanks after going all eurosceptic in the hunt for votes.But Der Spiegel today shows the Merkel camp discreetly putting out feelers to the people around François Hollande, the first signs from Berlin of fence-mending with the man who might be president."There are no official links, just messages being exchanged between aides," Jean-Marc Ayrault, the French Socialists' parliamentary leader who is close to Hollande, is quoted as saying.It looks like the beginnings of a thaw in what for the past few weeks has been a frosty climate. There remain acute policy differences, but the likelihood is strong that, in terms of personal chemistry at least, a President Hollande and Chancellor Merkel will rub along fine.The intensity of the postwar Franco-German relationship tends to prevail despite, rather than because, of who happens to be in office on either side of the Rhine. There is no love lost between Merkel and Sarkozy, the one methodical, the other mercurial. They irritate one another. But they bury their distaste for what they see as the greater European good.That's very much in the tradition of French and German leaders condemned to get along in public while privately often loathing one another.Jacques Chirac and Gerhard Schröder had infamous middle-of-the-night screaming matches at EU summits. François Mitterrand (like Margaret Thatcher) tried to sabotage Helmut Köhl's German reunification.But the deeply embedded alignment of the French and German states rumbles on regardless of who's in power and whether the leaders like one another.That alignment is currently embodied by Merkel's close aide and EU adviser, Nikolaus Meyer-Landrut (uncle of the eponymous Eurovision song winner Lena). He is a serious francophile. As Der Spiegel points out, he is married to a Frenchwoman, completed his academic thesis on France and German unification, and worked as spokesman for Valery Giscard D'Estaing, the former French president when he was heading the doomed attempt to write a constitution for Europe.And if the Merkel-Sarkozy relationship is one of pure expediency, on the surface and at the personal level she might like Hollande much more. In the WikiLeaks files, US diplomats in Berlin characterised Merkel as "risk-averse". Aides to Ed Miliband, following a recent lunch with Hollande in London, use exactly the same term to describe the presidential contender.