I was delighted to see that Germany continued to block the insane US effort to speed up the process by which Georgia and the Ukraine could be brought into NATO.This is a terrible idea for numerous reasons, which I outlined in this space during the Russian incursion (or Georgian incursion, or Georgian fake incursion, or whatever precisely it was). The only thing Barack Obama did throughout the whole campaign that I really disliked -- and I recall saying so pretty plainly at the time, for those of you who continue to comment that I think the guy is Jesus and Buddha and Jimi Hendrix rolled into one – was that he joined in the neocon-led pity party for Georgia and paid lip service to the idea that it and Ukraine should be considered for NATO membership.I continue to be a defiant outlier on the whole question: I think Russia should be groomed for NATO membership. Yes, it's a notorious thugocracy. But, without making the fatal miscalculation that von Hindenburg and von Papen made in January 1933 (they thought they'd tame Hitler by bringing him into the government), I think that the way to bring Russia toward a more democratic posture is to offer to work with it. I don't see that Russia has the power base to disrupt the entire Western alliance too dramatically, and therefore, if enticed with the benefits of NATO membership, it just might open up a little. But, you say, NATO was founded to fight Russia in the first place? It was. But that was then. So just change the nature of NATO. It was a Cold War outfit. Newsflash: the Cold War ended! Now it needs to be a concert of nations dedicated not so much to mutual defense/defence (because that, too, was a Cold War concept, i.e., it was all about warning the Soviets against rolling their tanks into West Germany) but to democratic values and leading the fight against those terrible non-state actors everyone is so concerned about, and against anti-democratic tyranny within its own borders. The points of NATO today ought to be 1) work together to fight terrorists and other non-state baddies, from unified police-type work against cells within member nations to possible military action where necessary, and 2) to prevent the rise of the next Milosevic. It must be updated accordingly.As you can see, if these become the raisons d'etre of NATO, then what's so important about Georgia and Ukraine? Not much. Of course I know that what I'm proposing could happen only after years or decades of bickering in many languages, but I still say it's absurd not to update it. Now that Obama has actually been elected and doesn't have to pander to anti-Russia hard-liners for fear of being attacked on the campaign trail, maybe he can point NATO in some new directions and end this Georgia business.