When it came to the crunch, Chancellor Angela Merkel and her foreign minister, Guido Westerwelle, decided that Germany should side with China and Russia. These three members of the UN security council abstained from Thursday's vote on a resolution to impose a no-fly zone over Libya, along with Brazil and India. It is a curious political development, to say the least.The three make for strange bedfellows. There is Germany, a democracy which puts great store in the rule of law and human rights, siding with a communist, one-party dictatorship and a country with a dubious track record on political freedoms. On the other side are Germany's traditional allies – the US, France and Britain – not to mention parts of the Arab and African world. Lebanon had been one of the countries presenting the resolution, which was backed by the Arab League. Qatar and the UAE have already said they would take part in a military operation, according to UN diplomats.And despite the Libyan regime's move on Friday afternoon to declare a ceasefire – at least for now – and inviting international observers into the country, Berlin's move could have lasting repercussions. Although Berlin has not blocked military action by abstaining, the German government has marginalised itself. It is effectively telling its allies: You will have to deal with this one alone – we're not going to help you.The German position, which had been agreed between Merkel and Westerwelle, had been clear for days. As a concession to its allies, Berlin will now beef up its mission in Afghanistan. There is talk of Germany taking part in AWACS surveillance flights over the country, which would take pressure off Germany's allies and free up their aircraft for operations over Libya. But is it enough?Some politicians within Merkel's centre-right coalition are already warning that Germany could be drifting even further away from France, Britain and the US. Attitudes toward Germany will change as a result of the vote, says Ruprecht Polenz, a member of parliament for Merkel's conservatives who heads up the Bundestag's foreign affairs committee. "I don't think we've heard the last word on this," he said, pointing out that the EU had already announced its support for the resolution. Germany will also participate in a discussion about the resolution within the EU and Nato, Polenz said.It's clear that Westerwelle enjoys playing the role of Germany's pacifist-in-chief. Speaking in his office in Berlin on Friday morning, he justified his scepticism about a military intervention yet again. The German government sees "significant dangers and risks", he said, meaning that it could not support the whole resolution.Westerwelle has been striking exactly that tone for weeks now. At first, his stance earned him praise, even from the opposition. But now, given the risk that Libyan rebels could be massacred by Gaddafi's troops if they do not receive military help, Westerwelle's position seems oddly out of touch with reality. Merkel and Westerwelle apparently hope that the German "nein" will go down well with the electorate. That may well be the case. But within Nato, Berlin's abstention is likely to be perceived as showing a lack of solidarity with Germany's allies.Indeed, it seems as if the Merkel-Westerwelle duo have become trapped by their own position.When the insurgency against Gaddafi broke out, Westerwelle promptly stated his support for the repressed opposition. Earlier, he had initially been cautious before making any pronouncements about Tunisia and Egypt, but in the case of Libya, he quickly called out Gaddafi as a dictator, and argued in favour of EU-level sanctions against the regime in Tripoli.But when Gaddafi proved hard to topple, and his troops began a counteroffensive, retaking one city after another, Westerwelle didn't prove any more flexible in his stance. Over time, his scepticism about a no-fly zone grew into a firm "no". And as Britain and France lobbied for military action, a resurgent Gaddafi praised Germany's position. That fact alone should have been deeply embarrassing for Berlin.By then, at the very latest, Westerwelle and Merkel ought to have shifted their positions. Besides, by that point, the Arab states had already said they would actively participate in a no-fly zone – one of the main pre-conditions Westerwelle himself had stipulated for any UN mandate.Nevertheless, Merkel and Westerwelle stuck to their positions. In recent days, Westerwelle even intensified the tenor of his rhetoric. However, his target was not Gaddafi but, indirectly, London and Paris. Washington, for its part, had long remained undecided. Speaking on Friday morning, Westerwelle also reiterated a statement he has oft repeated in recent days: "German soldiers will not participate in a military mission in Libya."It's exactly the kind of sentence that former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of the centre-left Social Democratic party (SPD) might have used. During the last Iraq war, he adopted early on the position that Germany would not participate – right in the middle of a national election campaign in 2002.Westerwelle surely had similar considerations on his mind. After all, there is considerable scepticism regarding overseas military operations among the German population, and particularly amid the members of the upper-middle class who tend to vote for his business-friendly Free Democratic party. At the beginning of the year, Westerwelle's position as FDP leader looked shaky amid internal opposition. But he managed to stabilise his situation after the FDP's decent performance in elections in the city-state of Hamburg. Now the FDP faces elections this weekend in the eastern state of Saxony-Anhalt. A week later, pivotal votes take place in Baden-Württemberg and Rhineland-Palatinate in western Germany that could have implications for Merkel's and Westerwelle's coalition government.Now Westerwelle is taking his cue from Schröder, and he clearly thinks this is a recipe for domestic political success. But Schröder was better positioned in 2002 – he also had the French on his side within the UN security council. This time around, though, France opposes Westerwelle's position, and that is a crucial difference. The Berlin-Paris axis, which is also very important for the EU, has been damaged by the split.