The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and clarifications column, Wednesday 30 September 2009In the article below analysing the German election result we noted that the CDU-CSU parnership gained 33.8% of the vote, but went astray in saying this compared with 40.8% of the vote four years ago. In the 2005 election this pairing won 35.2%. There have been four general elections in the elite group of the world's most powerful economies since the global financial crisis first erupted. Two of them, in the US and Japan, have produced decisive moves to the left in favour of change. The two others, in Canada and the weekend federal election in Germany, have produced much less radical outcomes, keeping competent centre-right governments in power.The most important feature of the German election result is that Angela Merkel's CDU-CSU has been returned to office in a new coalition with the liberal FDP. But the most striking aspect of Sunday's poll is that the two previously dominant parties have been cut down to size. Four years ago, the CDU-CSU took 40.8% of the vote and was forced into a centrist "grand" coalition with the centre-left SPD. This time, Mrs Merkel's vote fell to 33.8%. She has been helped in retaining power by the rise in the FDP vote, which went from 9.8% in 2005 to 14.6% today. This was the liberals' year. Their success means a narrow majority for tax cuts and renewed public service reforms, and for nuclear power; whether the new coalition will be able to put either policy into practice will be the key domestic test for Germany.Much of that will depend on what happens to the now seriously weakened and divided German left. It is 11 years since the SPD ousted Helmut Kohl and formed a majority coalition with the Greens. Now, however, the SPD's vote has hit its lowest-ever mark of 23% and the CDU-FDP coalition is back. (By coincidence, a ComRes poll in yesterday's Independent showed Labour on 23% in this country too; times are tough for social democrats in many parts of Europe.) The strength of the Left party, which polled 12% and gets its most concentrated support in the old East Germany, is a challenge to which the SPD has failed to respond.All in all, however, the two big parties which have headed every German government since the second world war are now down to less than 57% of the vote. All the minor parties polled strongly and increased their shares. For the first time in modern Germany, all the parties in the new Bundestag have polled more than 10% but less than 40%. Multi-party politics has never been more deeply entrenched in Germany than it is now. Germans have nevertheless rewarded Mrs Merkel for steering a coalition with the SPD through turbulent economic times, without presiding over economic disaster or abandoning popular social programmes. Germans have not voted for radical change. They have given a vote of confidence to their tried and tested social market model, but in a very different way from before.• This article was amended on 1 October 2009. The original said that the FDP took only 4.7% of the vote in 2005. It also said that the 2009 election result cut the two major parties down to size in an unprecedented way. These errors have been corrected.