

9.20pm GMT
21:20

Greece’s drive to exit its bailout programme has taken a dramatic twist tonight, putting the country’s political stability back in the spotlight.  The drama began this evening when Eurozone finance ministers decided to allow Athens a two-month extension to its current loans programme, which was due to run out at the end of December. This is designed to give Greece time to meet the outstanding demands of the Troika, and means it will not exit part of its four-year bailout by the new year, as it hoped.The extension will also allow the lenders more time to assess if a black hole is lurking in Greece’s 2015 budget.And shortly afterwards, Greeks were stunned to learn that the upcoming presidential election will be brought forward. This ballot, involving members of parliament, is on a knife-edge, given the coalition’s thin majority in parliament.The first ballot takes place on December 17. With barely a week to go, we don’t know who any of the candidates are, but PM Antonis Samaras is due to reveal his choice on Tuesday.Meanwhile in #Greece, fact that Presidential Election date is set without a candidate name (!) shows hasty nature of govt's decisionA spokesman said the move will:“prevent the opposition from undermining Greece’s economy and directing messages of political uncertainty to financial markets”.If Samaras cannot secure the support of three fifths of MPs by a third vote, on December 27th or 29th (reports vary), then he could be forced to call early elections. Given he has 155 seats in the 300-strong parliament, the vote could be close....Economists and analysts say the next few weeks will be dramatic. It could result in the left-wing Syriza party taking power. Syriza, indeed, has already predicted that Samaras simply doesn’t have the votes to win the presidential ballot.Syriza wants a debt restructuring to put Greece on a firmer footing, which could create another chapter in the ongoing eurozone crisis.Hello 1Q Eurozone crisis MT “@graemewearden: Greece brings forward presidential poll. http://t.co/V67YnW0bgA”Do scroll back through the blog for more expert reaction and early analysis.I’ll be back tomorrow morning to cover full reaction to the latest developments. Goodnight! GWUpdated
at 9.37pm GMT


8.47pm GMT
20:47

Here’s a photo from inside the eurogroup meeting of finance ministers today:And here’s the press conference, where we learned Greece has been given two more months to tie up the outstanding measures demanded by its lenders:

8.34pm GMT
20:34

A couple more names in the mix for the presidential race that dramatically opened up tonight.EU Commissioner @Avramopoulos, former EU Commr Dimas, former EU Ombudsman Diamandouros r thought to b on the short list for Greek Presidency

8.33pm GMT
20:33

Another possible presidential candidate, apparently, is former prime minister Kostas Karamanlis.My money is on ex-PM Kostas Karamanlis being named as presidential candidate https://t.co/hXWFT7OVnM #GreeceKaramanlis was Greek PM in a New Democracy (ND) government until autumn 2009, when he called an snap election after the full scale of Greece’s debt crisis began to emerge. He lost to the left-wing Pasok party, which went on to agree two bailout packages and deep austerity, before being replaced by a technocratic leader in 2011. Samaras’s ND party then won power, in a coalition, the next June.

8.18pm GMT
20:18

It’s not immediately clear who might take on the heady role of being Greece’s next president.Which is remarkable, given the first poll is just nine days away!Antonis Samaras’s spokeswoman Sofia Voultepsi has apparently told local media that no candidates have been named yet; the PM’s speech tomorrow should shed some light.Greece is holding presidential elections in a week and there are no candidates yet http://t.co/pb0s1rNWv6Brussels insiders are suggesting commissioner Dimitris Avramopoulos, according to the FT’s ever-well-informed Peter Spiegel:@mvanhulten Smart money in Brussels focusing on @Avramopoulos as likely New Democracy candidate. @YanniKouts

7.59pm GMT
19:59

Megan Greene, chief economist at Manulife Asset Management, has just discussed the Greek developments on Al Jazeera (you can hear it here).She explains that a bailout extension was “inevitable” (as Greece had not satisfied its lenders that it had hit the targets agreed under its bailout). Greece still has work to do, she added:I think a number of structural reforms still need to be implemented. A lot of have been legislated, but not implementedMegan also predicted that Greece probably need a precautionary credit line even if it does exit its bailout in late February 2015. That would be a line of credit in case it couldn’t borrow in the money markets.Reax to news in #Greece from @economistmeg on Al Jazeera Listen: http://t.co/RsYdl69aGk pic.twitter.com/CGGvCs9aqc

7.46pm GMT
19:46

Things are moving fast:#Greece PM Samaras to give a televised speech tomorrow and announce the govt's pick for the President.

7.38pm GMT
19:38

The opposition Syriza party, which is leading the Greek opinion polls, has reportedly predicted snap elections in Greece:#Greece opposition party #Syriza says presidential vote on Dec 17 will trigger snap elections...about time we had another Eurozone crisisFor that to happen, the government would have to fail three times to get a presidential candidate endorsed by parliament, on votes on December 17, 22, and 27th (although some reports say 29th)....They need the support of three-fifths of MPs, so 180 of the 300 members of parliament. Currently, the coalition government only holds 155 seats....Updated
at 9.33pm GMT


7.30pm GMT
19:30

Financial analyst Jens Bastian predicts a dramatic run-up to Christmas.A highly charged political Christmas forthcoming in #Greece. The outcome of presidential elections will then define the New Year's party.

7.24pm GMT
19:24

Greece has brought forward the Presidential vote to December 17th. Potentiality big news for the Eurozone if it leads to fresh elections.

7.23pm GMT
19:23

The BBC’s Mark Lowen, who covered the 2012 Greek debt crisis from Athens, agrees that Greece is back in the spotlight:First shot fired in what could be #Greece's leap into the political unknown. If you thought EU's problem child had gone quiet, think againUpdated
at 7.23pm GMT


7.20pm GMT
19:20

Bringing forward the Greek presidential elections to the end of December (they were due in February) is a “gamble” by prime minister Samaras, says Associated Press.Here’s their early take:Greece’s conservative-led government has called for a vote in parliament for the country’s new president late this month - in a surprise move that will determine its survival in the recession-weary country.Government spokesman Sofia Voultepsi said late Monday the vote would be held Dec. 17, with possible later rounds held through Dec. 22. The vote had not been expected to be held until late February.The government needs support from opposition lawmakers to avoid a stalemate and a snap general election, but is trailing in opinion polls to the anti-bailout Syriza party and facing widespread public discontent after a six-year recession.Earlier Monday, Eurozone bailout lenders backed a Greek request to extend the rescue lending program for another two months.

7.08pm GMT
19:08

Did eurozone finance ministers know that Greece was bringing forward its presidential elections, when they agreed to give Athens another two months to deliver the reforms demanded by its Troika of lenders?Eurozone crisis expert Yannis Koutsomitis wonders what happened behind the scenes.....Legit Q: Did #Greece's FinMin Hardouvelis inform the Eurogroup on govt's decision to hold early presidential election? /cc @pierremoscoviciUpdated
at 7.12pm GMT


7.06pm GMT
19:06

Nick Malkoutzis of the Kathimerini newspaper explains that the December presidential vote will decide whether prime minister Antonis Samaras will conclude negotiations with the Troika, during the two-month bailout extension agreed tonight:By moving president vote fwd to Dec 17, gov't turns it into ballot on whether MPs prefer coalition or SYRIZA to finish troika talks #GreeceMore reaction:Presidential Election in #Greece to kick off on Dec 17. Whatever the outcome, process will be over before New Year's.#Greece to Start Presidential Election Process Dec. 17. pic.twitter.com/n3icrNBeERUpdated
at 7.09pm GMT


7.00pm GMT
19:00

Reuters reports that Greece will formally ask for a two-month bailout extension tomorrow -- which is a formality now that eurogroup officials have said they’d accept it.Here’s Reuters’ take: Euro zone finance ministers are in favour of granting Greece a two-month extension of its bailout program, which Athens will ask for on Tuesday, Eurogroup chief Jeroen Dijsselbloem said on Monday.The EU had considered extending the current bailout by six months to mid-2015, a document obtained by Reuters showed last week. But Athens had said it was only willing to consider extending the unpopular programme by a few weeks.“We need an extension,” Dijsselbloem said after euro zonefinance ministers discussed the bailout plan, pointing out that it would not be possible to conclude a review of the program before year-end.“Let’s do this as quickly as we can, and in our mind that is two months,” he added. “Two months is long enough to complete review and not too long to leave questions open for the future.”

6.43pm GMT
18:43

Hello again. Some late news breaking involving Greece. Over in Brussels, eurogroup ministers have agreed to give the Greek government a two-month extension to its bailout.That gives Greece until the end of February to reach agreement with its troika of lenders over the outstanding parts of its loan deal, which was due to expire at the end of December.Eurogroup chief Jeroen Dijsselbloem explained (via the FT).“Despite its progress, there’s not enough [done] at this point to conclude this review now or by the end of the year.”A formal request from Athens will come on Tuesday morning, according to Reuters.And a few minutes later, Athens announced that it is bringing forward elections to choose its next president. They will begin on December 17, with a second poll on December 22 and a third on December 27.This is a key test for prime minister Antonis Samaras, given his small majority in parliament. If he can’t gather enough support to win the third ballot (a majority of three-fifths of MPs is needed), Greece would presumably head to the polls for an general election. And currently, the radical left-wing Syriza party is leading in the opinion polls. It argues that Greece needs debt relief; a prospect that has alarmed some investors in recent days.Government calls key presidential vote Dec. 17-27, after gaining 2 month extension on bailout review #GreeceAfter some calm months, the Greek crisis is back on the agenda. Here’s some instant reaction from experts on twitter: GW#Greece - If parliament fails to elect a new President, early elections will be called for January 25 or February 1.Forget Christmas in #Greece this year as the festive season. It will all be about presidential elections and possible early elections.#Samaras gambles: early presidential elex in #Greece Dec17. If no agreed candidate, new elex in Jan. "Tear up bailout" #Tsipras looks strongMore reaction to follow.....Updated
at 9.26pm GMT


5.46pm GMT
17:46

Weak Chinese trade data and news that Japan had fallen into a deeper recession than expected, not to mention continued weakness in the eurozone has sent shares sharply lower. Commodity companies in particular have come under pressure, with Brent crude falling around 4% to a new five year low of $66.35 a barrel on fears of falling demand and oversupply. The final scores showed:On Wall Street the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently down around 60 points or 0.33%.And on that note, it’s time to close up for the evening. Thanks for all your comments, and we’ll be back again tomorrow.