A British antiquities dealer who faces being deported to Greece and imprisoned over claims that he sold stolen ancient artefacts to an Athens dealer is expected to learn his fate within the next fortnight.Malcolm Hay, 60, an Oxford-educated trader who has sold antiquities to museums worldwide, was arrested in 2007 – eight years after he sold broken pottery pieces to the dealer.He claims the trader, who bought hundreds of shards from him, used his invoice falsely as "whitewashing" for valuable unprovenanced items that were later found in her shop by Greek police.The items seized from the trader in 2000 were worth nearly £200,000. They included unbroken pots and figurines from around 6BC, which under Greek law belong to the state. She was later acquitted after claiming that she bought them from Hay, a charge he disputes.Hay maintains that the only evidence is the word of the Greek dealer, which "the Crown Prosecution Service wouldn't regard as evidence". He says that he sold her the shards for £1,880 in 1999, invoicing them as "550 pieces of terracotta".Having previously sold to the Athens dealer, Hay was surprised when in 2000 Interpol requested an interview with him as a witness.He heard nothing more until he was arrested by British armed police in 2007, based on a European arrest warrant (EAW) issued by Athens. He said: "I had never been notified, accused or summoned by the Greek courts in the intervening years, and this came like a blow."His plight has shocked the antiquities world and has led dealers to attach photographs to invoices.Hay faces being jailed for four years if he is extradited under EAW legislation, which no longer requires foreign prosecutors to provide evidence of guilt to British courts. Lawyers say the advent of the EAW has sparked hundreds of extradition requests from member states – some, such as a request from Poland, for offences as minor as the theft of firewood.A respected British antiquities dealer who says he was framed for a crime involving unprovenanced ancient artefacts is facing deportation to Greece under European extradition laws condemned by British lawyers.Sentenced in Greece over an illicit trade in Classical artefacts, only on the word of a Greek dealer, he faces four years in jail under a European Arrest Warrant (EAW). The EU legislation no longer requires foreign prosecutors to provide evidence of guilt to British courts. Lawyers say that it has sparked hundreds of extradition requests from member states — some for offences as minor as firewood stolen in Poland.Malcolm Hay, 60, an Oxford-educated connoisseur who has sold antiquities to museums worldwide, claims that an Athens dealer who bought bona fide shards from him, used his invoice falsely as "whitewashing" for valuable, unprovenanced items.He maintains that the only evidence is the word of the Greek dealer which "the Crown Prosecution Service wouldn't regard as evidence".Fellow antiquities experts believe that he is the victim of a miscarriage of justice, his only previous encounter with the law a parking ticket.His world fell apart after he sold the Greek dealer shards for only £1,880 in 1999, invoicing it as "550 pieces of terracotta". He claims she used his invoice to give provenance to 550 other objects, including ancient Greek pottery and figurines. He was unable to prove that he did not sell the items seized from her by Greek police in 2000 as state property worth nearly £200,000. She claimed she had bought the items from Hay and was acquitted.Speaking to The Guardian, Hay said he felt Britain had let him down. "An asylum seeker has more rights than someone arrested under extradition. It's a travesty of human rights ," he said.James Lewis QC, a barrister who represented Hay in 2007, said: "The difficulty with the system is that it's essentially based on mutual trust between EU countries, but … many of those countries have completely different systems than we have." He added that people were being extradited on the "say-so of a local magistrate", even for "trivial" offences.The case of the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, has stirred fresh controversy about the EAW legislation, under which Sweden is seeking his extradition.Martin Rackstraw, a criminal extradition partner at Bindmans, said an EAW had even been served for the theft of a light bulb in Romania, among other trivial offences.He added: "The EAW was designed to save money by making the procedure much quicker, which it's probably done. But ... the courts are now getting clogged up."Hay, who read classics at Oxford, is a leading expert on ancient coins and has sold to institutions such as the British Museum and the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris. A British Museum spokeswoman confirmed yesterday that its coins and medals department had acquired Greek, Roman and Oriental coins from Hay, and that its prehistory and Europe section purchased a brooch, among other artefacts, from him.Richard Falkiner, of the government's treasure valuation panel, described Hay as a "reputable and responsible" dealer, while James Ede, a former chairman of the International Association of Dealers in Ancient Art, called him "a trustworthy individual".The Greek Ministry of Culture was not available for comment.