There is no Greek myth more appropriate to describe the task facing whoever wins the upcoming 4 October Greek election than the one of Scylla and Charybdis, which appears in Homer's Odyssey.I quote from Wikipedia: "Scylla and Charybdis are two sea monsters of Greek mythology who were situated on opposite sides of the Strait of Messina between Sicily and Calabria, in Italy. They were located in close enough proximity to each other that they posed an inescapable threat to passing sailors; avoiding Charybdis meant passing too closely to Scylla and vice versa." Ulysses, when passing between the two beasts on his legendary return voyage to Ithaca, chose to pass closer to Scylla and sacrificed a few sailors, who were her meal of choice. Charybdis would have sunk his ship and taken all on it to a wet grave.In two weeks' time the Greek electorate will have to pick between Kostas Karamanlis, the prime minister, and George Papandreou, the opposition leader, to steer the country between these two economic monsters: growing social discontent and mounting internal problems, and the European Commission breathing down the Greeks' neck to rein in a soaring deficit, among other things.The Greek economy is currently contracting at a rate of 0.3%, for the first time since 1993. Karamanlis's Nea Dimokratia conservative government inherited a debt of ¤168bn in 2004 and is handing over one of ¤262bn. This is the EU's second largest debt after Italy's. In January, the budget predicted borrowing of ¤42bn. Currently borrowing has topped ¤55bn. Economy and finance minister Yiannis Papathanasiou admitted, while talking to Bloomberg this week, that he now predicted the deficit would stand at 6% of the GDP, up from his original prediction of 3.7%. Greece is currently in the EU's Excessive Deficit Procedure for violating the Stability and Growth Pact that requires members to keep their deficits under 3% of GDP.The country's standing in the World Economic Forum's global competitiveness table dropped from 39th in 2003 to 67th in 2008. The industrial production, consumption and investment indices have been declining since before the onset of the global economic downturn. Notorious Greek bureaucracy and high barriers to entry stifle entrepreneurship.On the social front, it is estimated that 20-21% of the Greek population live below the poverty line, taking society back to 1996 levels. Unemployment was measured in August to be 8.9%. This figure is modest when compared with, say, the Spanish 17%, but conceals the fact that the critical age group of 15-29 is out of work at a rate of 17.7%.Karamanlis's answer to the above is basically endorsing the EC and International Monetary Fund recommendations. Insisting that he is speaking the "language of truth" and "seeing eye to eye" with the Greek people, he has vowed to freeze public-sector pay and pensions for two years in order to curb public expenditure. He intends to continue taxing dividends lower than incomes and keep taxation low for large inheritance too, opening himself to criticism that he is having the more vulnerable social strata foot the bill for the economy's ailing condition.Papandreou, on the other hand, is running his campaign on an Obama-esque platform of "hope". He is proposing a change in the Greek growth model that will be based on "green economy" paradigms, promoting public and private investment in the development of renewable energy sources and innovation. He insists that freezing pay and pensions would dry up the market of cash and the state of taxes, and vows to keep them rising in line with inflation, currently at 1%.On the taxation front, Papandreou is proposing the reinstitution of a progressive, redistributive scale and has also hinted that he intends to tax the Greek Orthodox Church's vast real-estate property. He claims he can curb tax evasion by going after freelancers and businesses that are the major culprits. He has also promised to raise education expenditure to 5% of GDP and restructure the public health and pension systems. He claims all this will cost ¤2.5bn-¤3bn. Karamanlis insists it will cost more than ¤10bn.Papandreou's pledges to the electorate and Nea Dimokratia's state of disarray have him set to win this election by a large margin. Papandreou's party, Pasok (the Panhellenic Socialist Movement), is polling 6-8% ahead of Nea Dimokratia and is now considered likely to immediately form a majority government.European economic and monetary commissioner, Joaquin Almunia, sternly stressed last week that he will be meeting with the new Greek prime minister on 24 October to discuss plans to control the deficit and consider whether Greece will be granted an extension for this, or face sanctions.The politics of hope may be an election-winner in dire economic times. However, reality is inescapable. Pasok will have to fulfil its pledges to the Greek people while tidying up Greece's macroeconomic mess. Papandreou will have to promptly adjust his sail to find that narrow passing between Scylla and Charybdis, but it is no secret that he bares little resemblance to Ulysses. The Greeks can only hope that neither beast will have too much of them.