In a few weeks, Greece will commemorate the "December events", which began last year when a police officer killed a young boy in Exarhia, an area that's been described as a semi-ghetto of leftist dissidents and anarchists in the centre of Athens. Following this event, weeks of protests ensued and from there began a trajectory of decline on many levels of society, which ended with the fall of the undoubtedly inadequate government. Then, just three weeks on from the victorious election of a new government, and a wave of grassroots terrorism was making headlines. This was, apparently, unprecedented: it is said that never before had there been a substantial wave of terrorist activities during the honeymoon of a new government.And, yet, there is nothing really surprising about it. For, despite their – quite substantial – differences, the terrorists, smaller parties, a large number of political analysts, and an even larger number of intellectuals, all agree: nothing has really changed. Neo-liberalism and capitalism are here to stay. The only promise that the new government seems to bring is that it will have a human face. Far from being a bombastic cliche, this, of course, translates into policies: a larger welfare state, more justice, less privileges for the privileged, fairer distribution of wealth etc. But instead of a friendly version of an explicitly exploitative and fundamentally unjust system, the radical left wants to negotiate the system itself.Terrorism, of course, can hardly be called a negotiation. And, in this respect, the recent terrorist attacks, such as the gunning of a police station two weeks ago, expose the ideological vacuum of the factions that carry them out. Additionally, whereas past terrorist organisations attempted to be (and often succeeded in being) appealing to the middle classes, the new ones exhibit a profound hatred for them: "What followed was the creation of a petit-bourgeoisie, namely, the perfect recipe for advancing capitalism. [These people] worship a mortgaged home, a successful career, glamorous entertainment; these are the dreams of every modern Greek petit-bourgeois wanker" (from the declaration of Sect of Revolutionaries).When the mourning subsides and the repudiations wear off, it is an opportune moment to reflect on how much of this violence and its ideological void is inscribed into the logic of "our way of life" itself. This does not, in any way, imply capitulation to senseless violence. What it, rather, calls for is understanding the systemic origins of terrorism and other expressions of political hatred.What is certain is that the last 20 years have exposed, as has very articulately been analysed over the past two weeks in numerous articles in newspapers and journals, the inability of capitalism to live up to the expectations that the then (and now) ardent defenders of it invested it with.But, equally, what the past two weeks have exposed is the inability of the left to articulate a possible alternative course. Slavoj Žižek has wisely asked us to be alert and suspicious of the empty rhetorical questions of liberal demagogues: "Freedom of expression, equality of sexes and races, tolerance, self-realisation, against repression … Of course! Who could be against these ideas?" But, we could invert this to apply to the ideas of the left: "Against exploitation, against the fake gestures of charity, against the hypocrisy of 'ethical' consumerism, against a system that creates unprecedented inequality and poverty while pretending to care for its victims … Also, of course!"For those who want "capitalism with a human face", this is their time. From Obama to ethical coffee, there is plenty of opportunity to redeem one's capitalist sins with fake gestures of benevolence. What remains for those who are deeply dissatisfied and offended by the current economic, political and social organisation of the west is to resort either to intellectual exercises in dissent or impotent grassroots action. For those for whom neither is a satisfactory option, there remains only one alternative: senseless, nihilistic violence.The question is at our door again. We should shift our attention from narcissistically ridding ourselves of these phenomena by inventing even more sophisticated and imaginative mechanisms of oppression, to working towards a society that does not produce them in the first place. This can only be achieved through a reliable, concrete and coherent structure that can turn mindless anger into an organised, effective, collective activity. This is a call for the left, in Greece and abroad.