With European elections set for Sunday and temperatures forecasted to climb up to 32C throughout the weekend, it remains to be seen whether Greek voters will opt for the beach or the ballot box. Escapism towards the coast will only be exacerbated by a national holiday on Monday. Election turnout is predicted to be in the realm of 60%, not at all shabby in comparison to other EU member states but pretty pathetic by Greek standards.The sun and clear waters, however, will not be the only distractions from the pinnacle of the European democratic process. These elections are being held in the midst of severe political turbulence in Athens. Greeks have become highly disenchanted by the political process over the last few years, especially because of the frequency and nature of various scandals riddling the once-dominant conservative New Democracy government. The prime minister, Costas Karamanlis, has, by all accounts, failed to steer Greek political life away from its notoriously corrupt ways, a promise on which he was first elected to office over five years ago. Polls show a 2-3% lead for the social democratic Pasok opposition, yet many remain uncertain that its leader, George Papandreou, is capable of carrying his party to victory.The stakes for this electoral battle are high. Both New Democracy and Pasok regard the elections as a referendum on domestic politics, rather than an opportunity to send the best people to Brussels and push a particular agenda within the EU. More importantly, they are sure to trigger changes within the two parties. Karamanlis has been leader of New Democracy for 12 years and other ambitious – and ageing – members of the party are waiting for him to slip up so they can get in line to take his place. Papandreou, on the other hand, has lost four elections since becoming leader of Pasok. Many view the Sunday elections as his last chance to finally win, or else step down. Amid this highly charged atmosphere, European issues have been almost entirely disregarded.While New Democracy and Pasok exchange vicious accusations, the smaller parties are competing for the votes of disillusioned Greeks who feel this is an opportunity to punish the big fish. The Greek Communist party (consistently third in electoral battles) is predicted to get its usual 8% of the popular vote, while Syriza, a leftist-environmentalist joint venture, is looking at 5-6%. Concerns are raised by the fact that Laos, an extreme-right party that has cleverly adopted common-sense rhetoric, is predicted to increase its share of the vote, mainly by exploiting problems caused by the mounting levels of illegal migration into the country. Finally, a newcomer on the Greek political scene, the ecologist-green party, is tipped to be the big electoral surprise, as polls indicate that it might get up to 6.5% of the vote.Voter apathy towards European issues, encouraged by excellent weather, may lead to surprises for all Greek political parties. As for me, I will be boarding a plane to the beautiful island of Mykonos on Friday, with a return ticket for Sunday noon, just in time to be back in Athens to vote. Tanning and voting are not necessarily mutually exclusive. But then again, I probably care about politics more than the average Greek.