Europe. Emerging markets. Earnings. Equality. And the election. Look out, because 2015 is going to be the year of the five Es. In the UK, it will be the election that dominates the economic and business scene, particularly in the first half of the year and for much longer if the result is inconclusive. The prospect of a minority government living from hand to mouth would certainly unsettle the markets.But the election result will be influenced by the four other Es, starting with Europe, where the first crunch moment comes tomorrow in Greece with the third and final chance for the government of Antonis Samaras to get its choice of a new president through parliament. If he fails to secure 180 votes, there will be a snap election that the anti-austerity Syriza party is currently favourite to win. That would prompt fears of a fresh leg to Europe’s debt crisis, which began in Greece more than six years ago.This is something Europe can ill afford. The eurozone economy is barely growing; the German locomotive is slowing; and falling oil prices bring with them the threat of deflation. The issue for the European Central Bank in 2015 is whether to take the plunge with a quantitative easing programme, something the Germans have resisted up until now.Berlin’s hardline stance has, however, softened in recent months as the situation in Russia – the key emerging market to watch – has deteriorated. Europe’s trade links with Russia are not all that important, but there are two big concerns. The first is of heightened geopolitical risk. Russia is being squeezed by western sanctions and now faces the inevitability of a deep recession in 2015. This might make Vladimir Putin more willing to come to terms over Ukraine, but it might not.The second risk is that the collapse of the rouble puts intolerable strain on Russian companies and Russian banks, with corporate losses ricocheting through the entire global financial system through the sort of highly leveraged derivatives trades that caused the 2007 meltdown.With so much cheap money sloshing around the global markets, a second financial crisis cannot be ruled out.The third E is equality, brought to prominence in the past year not just by the bestselling book Capital by the French economist Thomas Piketty, but by evidence from the International Monetary Fund and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development that inequality is bad for growth. Standing trickle-down economics on its head, the OECD said recently that UK growth in the two decades from 1990 to 2010 would have been nine percentage points higher had it not been for widening inequality.Given that the trend towards greater inequality has been evident for the past three decades, it is worth asking why it has become a political issue now. The answer is simple. In the years leading up to the financial crisis, incomes were rising across the board. People on low and middle incomes didn’t mind all that much that the bankers and hedge fund owners were earning stratospheric sums when their own pay packets were going up.But the squeeze on real incomes during the crash and in its aftermath has been brutal. That’s why the fourth E – earnings – will be such a big issue at the general election. Research out today by the Resolution Foundation shows there is both good and bad news for George Osborne.The good news is that real earnings are rising. Falling unemployment, lower inflation and a higher minimum wage have all helped to make workers better off. The bad news is that it will take until the end of the decade to recoup all the lost ground. The election may hinge on the answer to two questions. Labour’s will be: are you better off than you were five years ago? The Conservatives’ will be: do you think you will be better off under Labour?One of the big UK corporate stories of the year has not quite been resolved. We don’t know if US pharmaceutical group Pfizer will return in 2015, or thereafter, to have another go at hustling British rival AstraZeneca into a takeover. It’s a shame, then, that the debate about the UK’s easy takeover regime was also left unresolved. When Pfizer departed – defeated by the AstraZeneca board’s demand for a higher price – the politicians lost interest. That is unfortunate since it is hard, and probably misguided, to make policy on the hoof.But let’s not forget what nearly happened. A successful UK-based pharmaceutical company came close to being swallowed by a US rival with a record, over many years and over many acquisitions, of putting cost-cutting before investment in original scientific research. David Cameron extracted a few pledges from Pfizer about its commitment to the UK. But it was unconvincing stuff.If the government is serious about protecting the UK’s scientific base, it would be sensible to make provision now for such takeovers to be blocked. Calls for a national-interest test tend to provoke screams of outrage from business lobbyists. Politicians will end up repeating doomed experiments from the 1970s in picking winners, they argue.Nonsense. A thriving scientific base is central to how the UK earns its living in the 21st century. It could be woefully counterproductive to allow a company like AstraZeneca, accounting for 9% of R&D spending in the UK, to fall into foreign ownership.Not all foreign owners are alike, of course, and it would be absurd to argue that all takeover bids from overseas are unwelcome. But there ought to be a mechanism for blocking those that, like Pfizer’s, lack commercial logic. Ministers could distance themselves by appointing a council of wise heads to provide advice.Ed Miliband, as he casts around for a coherent approach to business, ought to get a formal policy in place now. Pfizer may never return, and the Labour leader may never make it to Downing Street. But best to be prepared.Among football purists it is a well-established gripe that wWhile the multibillion-pound Premier League franchise brings glitz and big names to the national sport, it has produced victims too: the neglect of the grassroots game and the underperformance of the national team. Next year Sky could be added to the list, if the latest TV rights sale reduces the satellite broadcaster to a marginal figure in the game. BT dented Sky by taking two of the seven Premier League packages last time around  and then inflicted a sharp commercial blow by winning exclusive broadcast rights to the Champions League. Should BT win the lion’s share of Premier League rights this time, Sky will lose a key factor in recruiting subscribers just when it faces the rising threat of Virgin Media and BT with their “quad play” offering of home phone, mobile, internet and TV. Next year could be the toughest in Sky’s 25-year history.