Greece's prime minister has vowed that his country will not go bankrupt, but warned that European leaders will have to take decisive action if its worst ever debt crisis is to be contained.Before an emergency summit of eurozone heads convened to stop debt-stricken Athens slipping into default and threatening Europe's financial stability, George Papandreou denounced the climate of fear being created by those "banking on" Greece's inability to stave off economic collapse."We have ensured that Greece has not gone bankrupt and nor will it go bankrupt. On the contrary, we are in the process of reaching a long-term debt breather," Papandreou told the Sunday Kathimerini newspaper, referring to a second rescue package that EU leaders have signalled they will agree for Greece when they meet on Thursday. That meeting is widely seen as a last-ditch effort to stop the sovereign debt crisis engulfing other parts of the continent.His words came as Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, arrived in Athens to show support for Papandreou's austerity programme designed to shore up Greece's public finances. Clinton likened the package to chemotherapy."I am not here to in any way downplay the immediate challenges because they are real. But I am here to say that we believe strongly that this will give Greece a very strong economy going forward," Clinton said.Agreement on a new bailout for Greece has been stymied by wrangling over how to involve the private sector – a consideration deemed essential if it is to be palatable to EU taxpayers."At this difficult and complex stage of negotiation there is no room for the irresponsible voices that cultivate fear and bank on failure," said Papandreou, alluding to financial markets and credit ratings agencies that have consistently downgraded Greece and other debt-laden European economies.Papandreou has frequently accused conservative-led Europe of fuelling the debt crisis by failing to come up with a comprehensive solution. The dithering, say aides, has made it harder to implement painful belt-tightening measures."As a country we have made an unprecedented effort … we have taken the necessary decisions no matter how difficult," he said in the interview. "For one and a half years I have been repeatedly urged my colleagues to make brave decisions. Not just for the future of Greece but for all of Europe. It's time for Europe to wake up."Locked out of international markets and unable to borrow, Athens' debt load, estimated at €330bn (£290bn) six months ago, exceeded €355bn last month and is climbing. Last week the IMF warned it would reach 172% of GDP in 2012.Yesterday, the IMF director in charge of the mission to Greece warned that without hard-hitting structural reforms to make the economy competitive, the debt was on a "knife's edge"."The Greek debt is sustainable, but it is, as we say, on a knife's edge," Poul Thomsen told the Greek Ethnos daily. "Policies must be applied as planned or the sustainability of the debt will be placed in doubt. The programme will not continue to deliver the desired results without a real invigoration of structural reforms in the public sector to ensure a further deficit reduction … and to get economic recovery going next year."EU officials have said that Greece's second emergency package of loans may well exceed its first, €110bn bailout.