With the help of an emergency law usually used at times of war, the Greek government has finally cracked a strike by subway workers that had brought Athens to a standstill for a week.After a fierce showdown that had seen the political temperature rise, employees gradually returned to work in the wake of the ruling coalition's high-risk decision to forcibly mobilise them under threat of arrest. "The workers didn't have an option," said Manthos Tsakos, a prominent unionist representing metro workers. "We are exploring legal options."With the strike seen as a test of the government's resolve to take on unions opposed to austerity measures demanded by the European Union and International Monetary Fund, the move by the prime minister, Antonis Samaras, brought a storm of protest, with politicians and unions condemning it as resonant of authoritarian rule.Transport workers in other sectors walked off the job in solidarity when the conservative leader announced the draconian measure. Samaras said commuters could no longer be held hostage to unions who had caused traffic chaos."The Greek people have made enormous sacrifices and I will not allow exceptions," he insisted, referring to the unpopular cuts demanded by international creditors of debt-stricken Greece in return for rescue funds to keep bankruptcy at bay. "Transport does not belong to the unions – it belongs to the people and they have the right to use it."Earlier on Friday in a pre-dawn raid, riot police stormed the metro's main depot to remove protesting employees who had vowed to intensify the strike. State-run television showed police handing strikers civil mobilisation papers. The workers, who had defied court rulings labelling the action illegal and abusive, were told they would face immediate arrest and loss of jobs if they refused to return to work within 24 hours.Under immense pressure to enforce the reforms, Samaras's fragile three-party alliance had found itself with almost no room for manoeuvre on policies that will see metro workers' pay cut by about 20%.It was the first time that the government, which has been in power for less than nine months, had resorted to the emergency legislation in a nation where industrial action is regarded as a hallowed right. The small Democratic Left party, among the three parties supporting the conservative-dominated administration, had described it as an "extreme choice" and called for further dialogue.Emboldened by the support they had received from parties vehemently opposed to the exacting terms of the bailouts, unionists had stepped up the rhetoric. "The mobilisation order is tantamount to dictatorship. Let them [the government] come and collect dead bodies. Let them send in the army," Antonis Stamatopoulos, who heads the union of transport workers, had declared. "With its decision, the government has proved its inability to reach a solution. Everyone has to assume their responsibility. We won't leave. Others are going to lose their posts."Late on Friday unions vowed to keep up the fight. In a sixth year of recession amid record levels of poverty and unemployment, many insisted the strike would be the prelude to much wider social unrest."The workers' struggle will continue until justice is had," said Nikos Kioutsoukis, general secretary at GSEE, Greece's biggest private-sector union.