5.10pm: And with that we will close the blog for the day. Thanks for all your comments.5.03pm: News in from Greece where Helena Smith says the three leaders supporting Athens' coalition government are conducting talks over demands the debt-stricken country could make when Greek officials meet Troika inspectors later this week. Helena writes:On his first full day back in office following emergency eye surgery, the new Greek prime minister Antonis Samaras has held talks with the heads of the two left-wing parties supporting his coalition government. The discussions, which will continue tomorrow, have focused solely on how Greece can ease the conditions of the rescue package it has signed up to in return for emergency loans from the EU, ECB and IMF. As Greece sinks ever deeper into recession, aides say it is vital the leaders come up with a "cogent set of negotiation arguments" that will convince creditors of the need to relax the fiscal adjustment program. Senior monitors representing the Troika are due to meet Samaras and Yiannis Stournaras, the newly installed economy minister on Thursday. Already, Greek officials are saying the data they will present the auditors with will be "alarming." "We will present information that is astounding. It is alarming in terms of the recession and unemployment, and it shows beyond any doubt that the current policy does not bring results. It brings the opposite results," the government spokesman Simos Kedikoglou told a television station earlier today.The Deputy Finance Minister Christos Staikouras joined other Greek officials who today insisted the program needs to be relaxed. Speaking at the Economist Business conference this afternoon he said measures mandated by the EU and IMF were not only counter-productive they had created a situation which "has reached an untenable point."Instead of improving Greece's economic indicators, the pursuit of "growth through austerity" had exacerbated the woeful state of public finances with the recession, now in a fifth straight year, expected to deepen further by the end of 2012. "The economy is in turmoil and the situation has reached an untenable point" he said, adding that the government's aim was to "amend" the bailout package so that it would be more "viable and effective.""Our goal is to achieve the fiscal targets, along with growth," he told the conference. "The climate [in Europe] is becoming more favourable for changes so long as we are consistent in implementing goals of the program." At the very least, Greek officials want to extend the economic adjustment program – a big ask, as that is likely to mean that creditors will have to come up with an extra €20bn in rescue loans for the debt-stricken country.4.55pm: Back to David Cameron, who is saying that the UK has measures to restrict migration to respond to possible stresses and strains from the eurozone crisis.4.44pm: The FTSE 100 has closed up 0.8% or 47 points at 5688 after a day of mixed news. US factory orders came in higher than expected, but the IMF cut its growth forecasts for the US economy. Barclays shares rallied in the morning on hopes that chief executive Bob Diamond's resignation would clear the air following the Libor-fixing scandal, but they dropped back again after an inconclusive press conference, eventually closing down 0.8% at 167p. In the rest of Europe, shares closed higher. Germany DAX: up 1.3% at 6496 pointsFrance CAC: up 1% at 3240 pointsSpain IBEX: up 1% at 7199 pointsItaly FTSE MIB: up 1.3% at 14494 points4.16pm: Back to the UK, where prime minister David Cameron has said that a banking union in the eurozone would not be a fundamental change for Britain. Speaking at the liaison committee, he said:If the countries of the eurozone bring about a banking union for themselves, which I think frankly they need to do... and if we can get proper safeguards in place then that wouldn't be a fundamental change for us. Eurozone leaders agreed at a summit last week that a new eurozone banking supervisory system should be established as a matter of urgency, by the end of the year.Follow the latest developments at the liaison committee on our politics live blog.4.01pm: Former president Sarkozy is facing charges of receiving illegal cash donations from cosmetics heiress Liliane Bettencourt and her since deceased husband, André.Several former employees of the Bettencourts have told a judge investigating the illegal funding claims that Sarkozy turned up to the cosmetics billionaires' home in person at least twice before his election in February and April 2007.In June, Sarkozy lost his presidential immunity from prosecution and there has been speculation he will be called in for questioning either as a witness or potentially as a suspect in the case. Today France Inter is reporting that police, sent by Bordeaux magistrates in charge of the Bettencourt case, have searched Sarkozy's Parisian offices, home and lawyer's office.3.59pm: Former French president Nicolas Sarkozy has had his home, Paris offices and his lawyer's office raided by police, as part of the Bettencourt scandal.3.38pm: Taking a closer look at the IMF report on the US (see 3.06pm), the fund notes that its revised growth forecasts may slip further still as a result of the eurozone crisis. The fund's authors cited the following risks: The United States remains vulnerable to contagion from an intensification of the euro area debt crisis.On the domestic front, failure to reach an agreement on near-term tax and spending policies would trigger a severe fiscal tightening in 2013, threatening the recovery.However, they note that they may have to revise growth forecasts up if capital investment turns out stronger than expected, or the country enjoys a faster-than-expected recovery in the housing market. That may happen as a result of pent-up demand, or if policy measures aimed at a faster resolution of the housing crisis gain traction, they write.3.23pm: Back to Ian Traynor, our Europe editor, who has the full text from Jose Manuel Barroso, who was today "putting the facts straight" at parliament in Strasbourg. The president of the European commission said:It is very important that political parties don't say one thing in Strasbourg and a different thing in their capitals. One important and interesting point was made by the British Conservatives today and it was in fact expressing some kind of a satisfaction with the situation in the Euro area. Let me tell you that it is puzzling that you seem to delight in the difficulties of the Euro area. This is in stark contrast with the position taken by your leader, Prime Minister Cameron. So, a good effort would be, in terms of accountability to your public, to say the same thing here that you say in London.It will be a complete mistake to try to divide now the Euro area from the rest of the European Union. I am also by the way very puzzled with the ease with which some of you are recommending some Member States to leave the euro. This once again is in complete contrast with the positions taken by the Prime Minister of Britain, that for instance in the G8 Summit in Camp David was saying explicitly that it is in his national interest that Greece stays in the Euro area. So, it is very important that we agree on a common approach for the European Union, including countries in the Euro area and outside of the Euro area. And when some of you are suggesting that the problems of the economic situation in Europe now are the result of the Euro area and that for instance you disapprove of the big bail out programmes in the banking sector in the Euro area, let me just put the facts straight. By far, the country that has been spending money with the banking sector is Britain – more than any country in the European Union. ...So, this is not a Euro area problem. This is a problem of the European Union as a whole.3.13pm: Sticking with the markets, stocks across Europe are up slightly as gloomy economic data fuels hopes that central banks will move to stimulate their economies. It's seems it has got so bad, it is now good. UK FTSE: up 0.45%, or 25 points, at 5665France CAC 40: up 0.55%Germany DAX: up 0.81%Spain IBEX: up 0.78%Italy FTSE MIB: up 1.3%3.06pm: To counter that small piece of good news from the US (see 3.02pm for better-than-expected factory orders), the IMF has cut its forecast for how much the US economy will grow this year from 2.1% to 2%, and next from 2.4% to 2.25%.The Dow Jones Index, which is only open for half a day today because of Independence day tomorrow, has picked up 0.2% in early trade.3.02pm: US factory orders ticked up 0.7% in May, beating expectations of no change. The report from the commerce department showed broad gains across industries making everything from machinery and appliances to cars and planes.2.54pm: Over in Paris, French prime minister Jean-Marc Ayrault has said France will have a new tax rate of 45% for the wealthy. It will also tax income of more than €1m a year at 75%. He cut France's economic growth forecasts, saying GDP was likely to grow 0.3% this year, rather than a budgeted 0.7%, and 1.2% in 2013, rather than previous estimates of 1.75%. In a speech detailing the new Socialist government's five-year plan, he said the country would hire more teachers and police, create 150,000 state-aided jobs and promote more competitive industry. He said a public investment bank would be created by the end of the year and the government would announce a plan shortly to address the problems in the auto sector.2.46pm: Our Europe editor Ian Traynor reports that down in Strasbourg at the European parliament, Jose Manuel Barroso, the commission president, has earned himself an unusually rousing ovation by taking a pop at what he sees as British doublespeak on the euro and banking crisis.Barroso said Tory MEPs "delighted in the difficulties" of the eurozone and the current attempts to get to grips with the dismal condition of some of the eurozone's banks, while reporting on the results of last week's EU summit. This was quite misguided, he said, rattling off a barrage of statistics to charge that when it came to taxpayer-funded bailouts of banks, Britain was in a league of its own in the EU. Punchline – this proved that the bank recapitalisation dilemmas that dominated last week's summit were not a problem for the 17 countries of the EU, but one for all 27 countries in the EU.The Brits in Brussels tend to view Barroso as a bit of an ally as he has to look after the interests of all 27 just as the euro crisis is forcing the eurozone to integrate much more radically in ways that will inevitably alter the balance of power in Europe. But he's clearly fed up with the gloating from across the channel, although he exempted David Cameron from his criticism of Conservative MEPs.MEPs, from Greens to christian democrats, loved it. Elmar Brok, the veteran German christian democrat, asked Barroso to make his figures on British bank bailouts available so the parliament could make better use of them.The UK-out contingent, led by Daniel Hannan, affected outrage. "In the chamber just now, Barroso turned a point about bailouts into a gratuitous attack on Britain. MEPs applauded thunderously," Hannan tweeted.2.35pm: The German economy will grow by 1% this year and 1.4% next, the IMF has said, tweaking its previous estimates. In April, the IMF predicted that the German economy would grow by 0.6% this year and 1.5% in 2013. In a report out today, it said:Several conditions are in place in Germany for a domestic demand-led recovery following the downturn at end-2011. The drag from last year's decline in external demand is receding, while domestic labour market conditions have continued to strengthen.Underpinned by healthy corporate and household balance sheets, higher wages, well-anchored inflation expectations and low borrowing costs, growth is poised to reach potential in the second half of 2012.But the fund warned that the forecasts could be scuppered by an intensification of the eurozone crisis and lower global growth prospects.2.08pm: While we're on the subject of breaking up the eurozone (see 1.54pm), Capital Economics has put out a note encouraging Greece to leave the currency bloc. First off, they estimate that Greece's financing needs would reach the drachma equivalent of about €50bn over the next year and a half. They write:Needless to say, the Government would not be able to tinker with its tax and spending plans to cover this €50bn shortfall – income tax revenues in 2012 are expected to be less than €15bn, while wage and pension payments will probably total just over €20bn. One alternative would be to get the central bank to print money to purchase government debt. It is often assumed that were Greece to adopt such a strategy, it would inevitably result in galloping or even hyperinflation, prompting an economic disaster. But we are not convinced by this argument.Not all of the €50bn would filter through to the real economy, they explain, as about half of it would be used to cover losses. In other words, the central bank bond purchases would only provide a monetary stimulus of about €25bn (12% of GDP). That is less than the UK and and US have already pumped into their economies via QE, 15% and 22% of GDP respectively. They accept there are risks associated with such a strategy:Admittedly, there is clearly a risk that a large proportion of the money that was created by the central bank would flow abroad, prompting the exchange rate to fall far below its fair value. This in turn could lead inflation and inflation expectations to rise. But the Government could reduce the chances of this happening if it established an independent inflation-targeting central bank and adopted and stuck to strict fiscal rules.Even if the central bank did not print all the money to cover Greece's financing needs, the analysts argue that it might be able to borrow enough money to cover the remainder. After the wave of developing world government defaults in the late 1990s, it took an average of just three and a half months before defaulting governments could borrow again in the financial markets. Even if the Government was unable to access international capital markets for a prolonged period, it could force domestic banks and financial institutions to buy its bonds. Meanwhile, some euro-zone policymakers have signalled that they might provide Greece with emergency loans if it left.1.54pm: Over in the Hague, far-right politician Geert Wilders has said the next Dutch elections will be "a big referendum over everything that has to do with the EU".Speaking at the launch of his election campaign called "Their Brussels, our Netherlands", Wilders said that his PVV party wants to get out of the EU and eurozone. A majority of PVV supporters would like to ditch the euro and return to the guilder. The PVV is expected to come third in the elections to be held on September 12.Separately, the Dutch senate has approved the introduction of the eurozone's permanent bailout fund, the ESM, with a two-thirds majority, as expected.1.43pm: Over in Germany, cracks are starting to widen in Angela Merkel's government. In the magazine Stern (in German), Horst Seehofer – who is head of the CSU, the Bavarian partner of Merkel's CDU party – sharply criticised decisions taken at the recent eurozone summit and threatened to break the coalition if further financial commitments were made to crisis-hit countries.12.08pm: Greek Socialist Pasok leader Evangelos Venizelos said today that he hoped Greece would be able to benefit from a European Union concession – already extended to Spain, Ireland and possibly Italy – allowing the use of EU rescue funding for the direct recapitalisation of banks. (Thanks to reader gpap for the comment.) Venizelos said:I would like to hope that this will apply to Cyprus, Portugal and Greece. This would help reduce (Greek) debt.If it were to apply to Greece, it would reduce the country's debt, now somewhere above €330bn, by as much as €50bn, which has been earmarked for the country's banks as part of an earlier debt restructuring deal.The Pasok chief also presented a 10-point plan for Greece, which includes honouring the country's commitment to the country's creditors but extending the adjustment period by three years.11.39am: Over to Athens, where Horst Reichenbach, the head of the EU taskforce created to speed up Greece's recovery using EU support funds, said Greece must prioritise paying out arrears it has racked up with suppliers to get funds flowing again to cash-strapped businesses. The EU taskforce, which is working to help Greece reform its bloated public sector, said the lack of financing risked undermining any progress achieved through reforms. Elsewhere ekathimerini.com reports that the government is ready to negotiate with the troika of the ECB, the EU and the IMF. It cites a government spokesman who said:We will present data that cannot be doubted, which will prove the dead-end we have been led to by the current policies, especially with regard to the recession and unemployment. Using this data as our weapon and presenting our alternative proposals, we believe that we will succeed in a new path being approved.We are making every effort to ensure there won't be any more sacrifices or job losses.The Greek government is expected to present its policy program in parliament on Thursday or Friday.Separately, the labour institute has warned that the actual number of unemployed Greeks, including the long-term jobless, will reach 1.6m, or close to 30% by the end of the year, rather than the 1.48m originally expected. The gloomy forecast comes a day after eurozone data showed that more than one in two Greek young people are already out of work.11.34am: Sticking with the debt markets, borrowing costs for the EFSF bailout fund have come down. It has sold €1.91bn of 91-day bills with a yield – essentially the interest rate – of 0.1184%, compared with 0.137% at an auction in June.11.27am: Irish bonds rallied on the news that Ireland is returning to the capital markets (see 11.16am), with the 9-year yield hitting its lowest point since October 2010 at 6.24%.11.16am: Back to Dublin, where there are reports that Ireland will return to the debt markets for the first time since September 2010. It quit the capital markets before seeking an €85bn bailout from the EU and IMF. Ireland will auction €500m of treasury bills with a three-month maturity on Thursday. The country's debt management agency had planned to restart debt auctions this summer but brought it forward to take advantage of a sharp rise in market confidence.10.59am: The European Central Bank is "not fit for purpose", concludes Louise Cooper of BGC Partners in a brilliant comment comparing the current financial crisis to the Great Depression of the 1930s. She writes:"If you steal $25 you're a thief, if you steal $250,000 you're an embezzler and if you steal $2.5mn, you're a financier". This comment could have been written in the press currently given the wave of recent bank disasters - mis selling interest rate swaps, manipulation of LIBOR, JP Morgan's "whale like loss" (and that's just in the UK and in the last few months). But the piece was actually written in The Nation magazine during America's banking crisis. Just as today, Bankers were increasingly viewed as rogues and crooks and "banksters" were criticised for leading America into the Great Depression, as they are now. How does this relate to the ECB? Cooper points out that in the 1930s, it was only when the Federal Reserve was given the power to print money and become the Lender of Last Resort (LLR) to banks did the banking system finally stabilise and the economy rebound. She writes:Due to political reasons the ECB was never given the right to print money or given the right to step in and backstop banks - the LLR status. Without these two key powers, the ECB is seriously constrained it is ability to step in to rescue the European banking system. This is a serious weakness. It is all credit to Mario Draghi that he creatively used the ECB's remit for "transmission of monetary policy" to provide half a trillion euro of funding to Europe's banks via the LTRO (which averted the kind of banking crisis that America experienced in the 30s). However he is still operating with one arm tied behind his back. After the latest summit it appears the ECB is to be given new powers (greater role in banking supervision, some oversight of Spain's banking rescue) but they do not go far enough.Her verdict:The European banking industry is teetering on the brink of disaster but the ECB has never been given the right tools to deal with such a crisis - it is not fit for purpose. It does not have the ability to print money neither has it the ability to save failing banks.10.56am: Over to Dublin, where Henry McDonald is reporting that thousands of customers of the RBS-owned Ulster Bank have made complaints about disruption to their account payments.Further pressure will be heaped on the RBS today as 48,000 monthly Irish social welfare payments are due to be paid to Ulster Bank customers in the Republic.The bank faces further scrutiny and on Thursday in Ireland when senior members of the Ulster Bank will be up before a joint Irish parliamentary sub committee to discuss the latest banking crisis that impact on both sides of the Irish Sea.The Consumers' Association of Ireland said today it has received thousands of complaints from Ulster Bank customers, who are very frustrated at the poor quality of information they are receiving from the bank.Chief Executive Dermot Jewell said: "Many, many consumers out there and bank customers were not ready for this. They found themselves on a back foot."And now they are struggling to figure out what are they going to do ... It is chaotic for them, because they are completely at a loss."10.53am: Ooops, corrected the bailout figure. Reader authurn is indeed right, Greece's bailout is worth €130bn not €173bn as we originally had it.10.35am: Analysts say the UK construction PMI (see 10.12am) data was hugely disappointing and suggests the UK may not come out of recession in the second quarter. Howard Archer of IHS Global Insight writes:Until recently, construction survey evidence had been appreciably stronger than the hard data which had fuelled hopes that the sector was doing appreciably better than officially reported by the Office for National Statistics. Unfortunately though, it is the survey evidence that is deteriorating rather than the hard data improving!So there is now a very real danger that construction output contracted again in the second quarter after plunging 4.9% quarter-on-quarter in the first quarter, when it contributed 0.4 percentage point to overall GDP contraction of 0.3% quarter-on-quarter. This is a further blow to hopes that the overall economy avoided further contraction in the second quarter.@scottybarber of Reuters has come up with another helpful chart showing the relation between UK construction PMI and UK GDP. Simon Rubinsohn, RICS Chief Economist, said the data show the government's infrastructure strategy is not working:The dramatic turnaround in sentiment in the construction sector signalled by today's number brings the CIPS indicator closer to the trend signalled by official data and is indicative of the failure of government policy to match rhetoric on infrastructure and other development with action. Relying on funding from institutions to deliver the necessary finance to support the programmes set out in the national infrastructure strategy is clearly not working and needs to be backed up by public monies if construction really is going to be a centrepiece of the recovery strategy.10.28am: Very tardy agenda for the day...• French finance minister speaks: 11.15am • IMF chief Christine Lagarde speaks on the US economy• US factory orders for May: 3pm• Sweden central bank holds monetary policy meeting • French prime minister Jean-Marc Ayrault speaks to parliamentIn the debt markets, the Netherlands is selling €4bn of five-year debt. Belgium is selling three and six-month treasury certificates. The UK is selling £1.75bn of 4.75% treasury gilts. The US treasury is holding a weekly sale of 4-week bills.10.19am: Eurozone factory prices fell more than expected in May as the cost of energy dropped sharply. The drop in prices will increase calls for an interest rate cut as early as this week to help the region's stagnant economy. Prices at factory gates in the eurozone slid 0.5% since April, compared with expectations of a 0.3% fall. Price pressures have eased mainly because of a drop in the price of oil, which was trading above $120 a barrel earlier this year and is now below $100.10.12am: British construction activity fell at its fastest pace in two and a half years in June, as underlying business conditions worsened and an extra public holiday hit output. The Markit/CIPS construction PMI sank to 48.2 to 54.4 in May, its lowest reading since December 2009. Analysts were expecting the index to drop back to 53. A reading below 50 shows the sector is shrinking. Markit said cost pressures had eased markedly, as increased costs for energy and raw materials were offset by lower fuel prices. That eases the way for the Bank of England to top up its quantitative easing programme when it meets on Thursday, as one of the big fears around boosting the stimulus programme is that it will fuel inflation.9.38am: Good morning and welcome back to our rolling coverage of the eurozone debt crisis. Apologies for the late start. Barclays chief executive Bob Diamond quit this morning in a shock U-turn. My colleague Graeme Wearden has all the latest developments on that story on our Barclays live blog here. Over in the eurozone, the troika of the EU, IMF and ECB are arriving in Greece today to check how Greece is doing in implementing its latest €173bn bailout program. Prime minister Antonis Samaras will be pushing for a better bailout agreement, despite warnings from a ECB member Jörg Asmussen yesterday that the country must press ahead with its reform program and not dally further in meeting its commitments.Separately, Spanish newspaper El Pais has news that Spain will carry out more spending cuts (article in Spanish) by central and regional governments to bring down the deficit.