Will Greece follow Dubai World into financial turmoil? Is the question itself unnecessarily alarmist? And will eurozone membership protect Greece from itself and the attacks of currency speculators?Recent developments have muddied the waters further. The governor of the Bank of Greece, George Provopoulos, suggested to a parliamentary committee that the European Central Bank (ECB) might refuse to lend money to Greek banks using bonds as collateral if the economy's sovereign rating was again downgraded by international agencies, as happened in mid-January. After Provopoulos's comments and Dubai World's announcement that it would reschedule its debt, the benchmark general index on the Athens stock exchange slumped 6.21% on 26 November, with financial sector stocks particularly hard hit. Both government officials and the CEO of the largest commercial bank, National Bank of Greece, Takis Arapoglou, were quick to point out that while severe problems existed and solutions must be identified quickly, the mild hysteria in the Greek and international press was overblown.The ECB lowered the requirements for collateral from an A rating to BBB- in 2008. This downward adjustment benefited the entire European financial sector. Commercial banks from Athens to Berlin and Paris were dealt a very favourable hand from Frankfurt to use the various liquidity options provided by the ECB.This window of opportunity is still in effect. It implies that under the current adverse conditions, Greek government sovereign debt would have to be downgraded four notches by the international rating agency S&P and six notches by Moody's for it to lose its position as worthy collateral. Such a drastic downgrade has never been inflicted on a member of the eurozone. While Greece's macro-economic risk is still worrying, it is difficult to see how Greece would be allowed to fail while the ECB supports it. This does not mean, of course, that Greece can get away without major structural reforms to the economy and society in general.The current Pasok (Panhellenic Socialist Movement) government of prime minister George Papandreou is in a better position than his predecessor from the centre-right New Democracy. For one thing, Papandreou commands a large majority in parliament, which gives him a stronger political mandate for bolder reform. Second, throughout Greek policymaking circles there is a recognition that crunch time is fast approaching. In short, muddling through as on previous occasions is just not an option.The popular mood is torn between the desire for reform and impatience to see what each side will put on the table. But if the government fails to take the necessary steps, decision-making may well be taken out of its hands. Time is running out. Either the authorities in Athens meet a number of stringent fiscal conditions set by the EU and the ECB, or international capital markets will take matters into their own hands by aggressively betting against Greece.No one in Athens is under the illusion that there will be another escape route. Cool minds are required, who are willing to take bold action – and avoid the economic ruination that some predict.