The story of Antigone has always been my favourite of the Greek myths, maybe because the story was so simple, but the themes – power, family love, defiance – were so complex. I’d had an itching to do an adaptation of a Greek play for quite some time. Not long after our version of The Loneliness of The Lost Distance Runner had opened at York Theatre Royal, I met up with Pilot Theatre’s artistic director Marcus Romer for a pint – and Antigone was first on my mind. Luckily Marcus was as excited as I was. I’m known for contemporary urban stories dealing with young people, most of whom are lured into the life of crime. I was curious to see if it was possible to set Antigone in that world, but do so in a way to challenge myself as a dramatist. The gangster culture is too often the life of a lot of young people today, and straight away I had a strong sense of making Creon not a king, as in the Sophocles play, but a fearsome gang leader. The city of Thebes would be his endz.When I hear young people talk about being in a gang, some refer to themselves as soldiers. Like the original text, the soldiers do the bidding of their king. And again, the language of war, revenge and defiance is used on most streets in the UK today. Disturbing but such a powerful image for the play. The biggest theme for me about Antigone is that power corrupts. Creon begins the piece laying down the law as the new king. In my world he is running things. Without even realising, Creon is putting aside other feeings that somehow make us all human: love insecurity, fear, happiness. They give it up all for the ridiculous dream, to live fast and die young. These are themes I have explored before in pieces such as Fallout and Little Sweet Thing. Very quickly, I decided that as far as the characters are concerned, the world that they are living in is ancient Greece, except that their accents and clothing resemble the here and now. At first it was my attempt to show the story of Antigone is still relevant, but it was my way to honour the original story. In a funny way I wanted to give myself some limitations which I felt might help me write a better play. Creon is at an age where he is certainly living high on the hog as a major gang leader – until his “facety niece” comes into his life and brings it crashing down around him. Here, my Creon (or as I have renamed him, Creo) faces a multitude of human emotions and he begins to pay for the life he chose.And so he should. I do not just hate this life-fast life, I absolutely loathe it. Because it is no life at all. Not if stops you these young people from being human, which I feel it does. Creon learns this lesson but at great cost. It is a dominant male culture, in which girls are seen as accessories for their boyfriends and often exploited. Antigone – or in my version, Tig – seeks to challenge that stereotype but only indirectly. Her only wish from the very start of the piece is to give her brother a proper burial. Tig does not go along with the pack and do what is expected of her. See won’t be treated like a “yat”, and allow herself to be sexed up by the boys. She has seen this life up close and personal. She has seen what it has done to her family. The years of violence (turf wars) inflicted on them as well as by them. And she is well and truly sick of it. Her brother’s death, and the refusal of Creo to let him be buried, is her opportunity to challenge this rotten life. She is trying to say, whether we like it or not, that we are all human, we all feel something. The Creons of this world are only kidding themselves if they think they can avoid it because it will catch up with all of them. Of course, Creon and others like him will not have some “yat” telling them what is what. Pride will certainly come before a fall.• Antigone is at Derby theatre until 4 October 2014 and then tours the UK. It runs at Theatre Royal Stratford East from 19 February to 14 October 2015