Sunday's local elections in Greece were an unusual affair. Important as they are for the running of local authorities, council elections have never been seen as critical to the survival of a government. But on this occasion, the Greek prime minister issued a rather strange ultimatum to the electorate: vote for Pasok regional and mayoral candidates or I will resign, call general elections and as a result people will lose their hard-earned faith in Greece with dire consequences for ordinary people.Was this extraordinary gambit a genuine request for a renewed democratic mandate or the desperate bluff of a gambler down on his chips? George Papandreou's gesture indicates the febrile nature of Greek politics in the wake of the austerity and restructuring measures imposed upon the country by the IMF and the EU in return for a €110bn (£95bn) loan. Reductions in civil service salaries and pensions of up to 30%, and the increase of direct taxes and VAT, have led the fragile economy to a deep depression. Youth unemployment at around 30% will only increase as the private sector uses the measures as a model to shed jobs and further undermine long-standing labour protections.Papandreou's gambit can be explained by the country's unprecedented economic and political volatility. The Greeks have been bombarded over the past two months with optimistic messages that the measures are succeeding in reducing the deficit, increasing tax revenues, changing decades of civil service under-performance and releasing private initiative. The support offered by the print and electronic media has been so unstinting as to make Silvio Berlusconi envious. Papandreou has taken his penitent message to major capitals while a bunch of IMF-EU emissaries have been installed in Athens, behaving in every respect as administrators of a mandated territory.But the reality is very different from the projected rosy image. Over the past month the spreads between German and Greek sovereign bonds have increased to levels not seen since before the IMF-EU loan was approved. The hike in the price of insuring Greek bonds means that the markets expect the country to default. The idea of defaulting, restructuring the debt, even leaving the eurozone was until recently denounced as extremist and catastrophic. But after Angela Merkel's amendments to the support mechanism, debt restructuring seems more likely, and senior government ministers have started preparing the public for the eventuality.The intense demonstrations and strikes of this spring subsided over the summer holidays. But the climate has been hotting up again since September as people start feeling the effect of the measures on their pay packets. Opinion polls consistently show large majorities opposed to the measures and wide disenchantment with the alternating centre-left and centre-right parties that have ruled the country since 1974 and have led to the spiralling deficits and debt. While the decimation of the public sector has reduced the deficit, tax revenues are lagging behind IMF demands and the expected upwards recalculation of the 2009 deficit means that even more stringent austerity measures will have to be imposed next year. Behind the trumpeted "success", the economy is faltering, social problems mushrooming and the political elite unable to manage the crisis. The postwar social contract has been declared dead and the country's sovereignty is not doing much better.Against this background, Papandreou's ultimatum can be understood. His government was elected in October 2009 on a social democratic platform and had no mandate to impose the most extensive neoliberal measures seen in Europe. Whether Greece defaults and asks for a severe "haircut" of the debt or whether it imposes new and more severe measures, Papandreou's soothing statements will be seen again as not worth the paper they are written on. This is why the government turned the local elections into a referendum, blackmailing the electorate and seeking a carte blanche for further cuts and privatisation of the country's silver (energy, communications and transport) as the IMF demands. But yesterday's elections decidedly failed to give such a mandate.In a country where the turnout is usually up to 80%, some 45% of the electorate abstained and another 10% spoilt their ballots. Pasok received approximately 34% of the vote, the opposition New Democracy 32% and the Communists 11%. The three radical left parties that had not managed to field common candidates polled about 12%. If the wider left had created a united front against the measures, it would have emerged as the hegemonic bloc confronting the neoliberal logic of the ruling elites. In view of these results, Papandreou, looking gaunt and exhausted, announced that he will not call an election but continue with the implementation of these measures.How can we explain the unprecedented low turnout and the spoilt ballots? They bring to mind Nobel winner José Saramago's wonderful political parable Seeing. Citizens of an unnamed capital city cast massively blank ballots in two consecutive national elections. The rightwing government considers this an act of high treason and declares a state of emergency. Eventually the government leaves the capital expecting that the resulting disorder will make voters see sense. Life, however, continues peacefully.In Greece, too, ordinary citizens resisted the measures by staying away. Abstaining or spoiling the ballot in a highly politicised country is a political act of great consequence which leaves the government with no mandate to continue with its measures. It is the Greek equivalent to the Argentinian chant "que sa vayan todos" ("you should all go") addressed to the elites that had led the country to bankruptcy in December 2001.The IMF-EU authored chronicle of an economic death foretold will move to its end game with the banks' plenipotentiaries signing the death certificate of the welfare state, but popular resistance is now likely to move up a gear. Strikes, demonstrations and social unrest will decide the future of the country in the coming months. The Greeks have a proud record of resistance against foreign and local dominations. They now need new ideas, people and convergences, if a new politics is to rise from the current debacle. In this direction the wider left, the only political group not involved in the debt and corruption crises, has a major role to play.