It may have been the warmest and dryest UK summer since 2006, but August's stock market performance was rather more unsettled.The FTSE 100 fell more than 3% over the month, hit by continuing concerns that the US Federal Reserve could soon turn off the money taps and, latterly, fears of a military strike on Syria. On top of that, the eurozone crisis was still bubbling away, with talk that Greece might need a third bailout and worries about the outlook once the German elections are out of the way.The leading index closed at 6412.9 yesterday, down 70 points or 1% on the day; also down 1% on the bank holiday week. Michael Hewson, senior analyst at CMC Markets, said: "Why would any investor want to buy the current dips when the level of uncertainty remains so high?"Oil rose to a high of $116 a barrel during the month on concerns about supply disruptions if the Middle East erupts into more violence, putting pressure on airlines, which could face higher jet fuel costs as a result. British Airways owner International Airlines Group fell 2% to 286.3p yesterday, while easyJet also dropped 2% to £12.33. But analysts at Jefferies were unconcerned: "Geopolitical uncertainties are an investment hazard in the airline industry and the current situation presents an interesting opportunity to invest on attractive valuations. Fuel accounts for 30%-45% of total costs, depending on the airline. But hedging can (and is at the moment) providing near-term protection from volatile, rising prices."It said IAG, for example, was 85% hedged for the second half of 2013: "Clearly the current position of political uncertainty is not helpful to investors. Historically, we have seen before how stocks hit by geopolitical threats (like the volcanic ash cloud and the Arab spring) can bounce back quickly too."The market's fall would have been worse if not for support from Vodafone. The mobile phone group added another 1.5p to 206p following confirmation on Thursday that it had restarted talks over the disposal of its 45% stake in its US joint venture, Verizon Wireless. Some analysts believe the stake could be worth $130bn.Outsourcing groups had a volatile week. Serco recovered more than 1.5% to 547.5p yesterday after an 11% fall on Thursday in the wake of news that justice secretary Chris Grayling had called in police to investigate alleged fraud by the company's staff working on a £285m prisoner escorting contract. Serco said it had discovered misreporting on the contract but found no evidence that management knew about the problem. It will repay £2m of profit on the contract and forgo any future benefits. Chief executive Chris Hyman said he was "deeply saddened and appalled" and would instititute a programme of change.Rival G4S, which, along with Serco, was accused of having charged the government for tagging criminals who were dead or in prison, took steps to rebuild its balance sheet during the week. The company's new chief executive, Ashley Almanza, unveiled a £348m cash call at 247p a share. It plans to sell assets and concentrate on developing its emerging market business. It closed up more than 3% at 260p yesterday.A consortium bid for Severn Trent may have failed recently, but that might not be the end of takeover attempts in the sector, according to analysts at JP Morgan, who said:"We would not rule out M&A in the sector with debt costs low and no immediate risk of the regulator moving to a company specific cost of capital."Leaving any takeover speculation aside, JP Morgan was particularly keen on Pennon, mainly due to its non-water business.Elsewhere, online gaming group bwin.party plunged 13.5% to 110p after it warned full year revenue would fall by up to 17% as it focuses on fewer markets. Half-year earnings fell a third to €60.7m, hit by a turnover tax on sports betting in Germany. James Hollins at Investec kept a buy recommendation but said: "Bwin.party has developed an unfortunate reputation of missing expectations, with the first-half results confirming the fears of bulls like us that this issue has yet to be consigned to history. With soft current trading (third quarter down 21% year on year) across all products, our forecasts are too high for 2013, with the upside of the cost-saving programme offset by a weak top line. We continue to believe that the turnaround programme and US upside represent tangible positives from 2014, although 2013 is disappointing and our faith takes another knock."Lower down the market, life insurer Chesnara has added nearly 3% to 267.5p following a 134% rise in half-year profits to £21.8m and an increase of 8.5% in embedded value.The company owns closed life fund Countrywide Assured and Swedish group Movestic. Its UK business was stable and it also benefited from a turnaround in Sweden after a series of system problems were resolved.Chesnara is on the lookout for acquisitions of between £50m and £200m. Nothing is believed to be imminent, but it is concentrating on open and closed funds in the UK, Sweden, Ireland, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. Any deal could be funded by cash, debt or issuing equity, depending on its size.Chief executive Graham Kettleborough said: "We are disciplined in what we look at. We are not desperate to do a deal, the priority is to do what is right for shareholders."