Four years on from the bailout, the reverberations of economic collapse and austerity are still widely felt throughout Greece. At its peak, debt ballooned to 175% of GDP, with unemployment reaching 27.6% last May. Greece assumed presidency of the EU in January and – with promoting growth, employment and "civil and society engagement" at the forefront of Prime Minister Samaras' agenda – the moment lends itself to reinvention and an ambitious vision for the nation's economic future.The rise of social enterprise in Greece is, in this respect, a kind of success story. Once an unfamiliar term to most citizens, the concept is earning validation and building momentum, particularly in the capital of Athens where educated young adults are looking to turn their passion, frustration, and political energy towards the issues around them.Many young Greeks see businesses with social value as one of the few refreshing solutions for joblessness, social exclusion and cramped public services, but feel they lack the knowledge and resources to kick-start their ambitions. As a result of this deficit, The British Council launched Think Social. Act Business, a series of workshops hosted in partnership with Athens-based social enterprise and event hub Loft2Work and 180o. Now two years old, the initiative – which is supported by the European Union National Institutes of Culture (EUNIC) – aims to elevate the role of social entrepreneurship within the local and national economy, to link Greeks with their UK counterparts, and to develop capacity and new approaches. Most participants are young, educated, and engaged in social and volunteer work. Many have lived or studied abroad. Over half are women."Our key objective is to provide creative opportunities for these young people to share ideas, views and challenges," says Anastasia Andritsou, Head of Partnerships & Programmes with British Council Greece. "The problems we face are so big and so global; there is no way for young people or local policy makers to tackle them on their own."Two years ago, Andritsou explains, the concept of 'social enterprise' was new in Greece – so raising awareness of its role in a local growth agenda, and more widely as a tool for achieving a fairer economy, is at the heart of the programme.Social enterprises offer benefits to excluded groups of people – the elderly, children, those with disabilities or health issues. They can positively contribute to education and the environment, or empower Greek culture and traditions. And while the term may be new, the concept of a cooperative business model geared towards collective good has been around for a while, she elaborates:"The social economy is not new in Greece – we have long had agricultural cooperatives which work very successfully, for instance. However, many people find it uncomfortable that something with a significant social impact could also be a business. NGOs and charities are seen as the ones who tackle social issues, and the third sector struggles from a lack of transparency. A cultural change is needed so that social enterprises can differentiate themselves."Social enterprises were in fact unrecognised by legislation until 2011, when a landmark piece of policy officialised the social economy and identified the organisations which characterise it. Since then, opening the dialogue between social entrepreneurs and policy makers has become an immediate concern.As part of Think Social. Act Business, a two-day conference was held in early December 2013 to bring together such policy influencers, social organisations and social entrepreneurs to share their pan-Euro experience. Delegates from the UK, Germany, Poland, Croatia, Austria and Greece took part in sessions and workshops organised by theme, including the development of support structures that enable social enterprise to flourish, the need and methods for evidencing social impact, and sources of finance and investment.An urgency for start-up capital emerged as a primary talking point between the social entrepreneurs and funders present. "We had social entrepreneurs saying they wanted more funding tools, while on the other hand policy makers said funding should not be the first objective," Andritsou summarized. "Focus on a business plan that is sustainable, and the funding and support will come."Georg Schoen of Ashoka Austria, an international social entrepreneurship support body, reiterated the importance to investors of good impact reporting, saying: "we look for systematic change."Models for effective impact measurement is an area of "real need" says Andristou, particularly as many funders or commissioning bodies require detailed reports and clear performance indicators. From the perspective of entrepreneurs, capacity is a barrier – how to measure impact with a slim budget and a handful of staff? "The issue of flexibility was critical for small groups," she said. "It is these kinds of struggles that are so important for policy makers and social entrepreneurs to share with each other if we are going to find solutions."The majority of young Greeks today are "confused" and "anxious about their future", and it is here that Andritsou sees the value of leveraging international expertise to create opportunity and hope."In Greece we cannot afford to reinvent the wheel," she says. "We don't have the luxury of time. But we can build on existing practices, bring in experiences and reengineer some of those practices to work in a new context. The momentum is here to do this. It is a difficult time in Greece but it is also a great time to inspire people and create a culture of collaboration, rather than contribute to the wider depression."Contact the British Council at social.enterprise@britishcouncil.org More from the British Council partnerzone:• Canada draws on UK experience to scale up social investment • Slovenia, the UK, and the future of social enterprise in Europe • Social Investment in Germany: context and contestationContent on this page is paid for and provided by the British Council, sponsor of the International hub