This summer, a lift at Athens’s largest public hospital broke down. When a repair technician arrived he couldn’t believe his eyes: knee-deep at the bottom of the shaft were hundreds of envelopes, the vessels for bribes to doctors who then dispensed with the telltale fakelakia.“Corruption in Greece is alive and well,” said Aliki Mouriki, a sociologist at the National Centre for Social Research. “In fact, if anything, people are now so squeezed they have fewer inhibitions about taking bribes than before the crisis.” The practice of fakelakia, or little envelopes, changing hands was supposed to have been consigned to the dustbin of history when creditors demanded a root-and-branch cleanup of a public system seen as the source of much of the country’s financial ills.In return for the biggest bailout in global financial history – rescue funds from the EU and IMF amounting to €240bn (£188bn) – it was hoped that old mentalities would change and a nation humbled by near-bankruptcy would finally dump its culture of deceit.Neither has happened. Instead, with rising poverty and runaway unemployment, malfeasance and mistrust remain widespread. Anti-corruption officials continue to be on the take while the self-employed, not least shopkeepers on popular tourist isles, fail to declare their true income.Transparency International said on Wednesday that Greece’s ranking on perceived levels of public corruption was still the worst in the EU – albeit on a par with Italy – even if it had improved from 94th place at the height of the debt crisis in 2012 to 69th this year.Five years on, Greeks are still cheating, bribing and evading their taxes – spurred on by the lack of punishment meted out to offenders.Since the financial meltdown, only one senior politician, the former defence minister, Akis Tsochatzopoulos, has been imprisoned partly because the scale of his avarice made his ill-gotten gains difficult to hide. Last month, the erstwhile finance minister Yiannos Papantoniou was given a suspended four-year jail term for producing a false declaration of assets and revenues. But with the exception of Thessaloniki’s ex-mayor, who was found guilty of embezzlement and imprisoned for life, they are the only high-ranking officials to have paid the price of breach of duty.According to Costas Bakouris, who heads the watchdog’s Greek chapter, the debt-stricken country remains entrenched in a crisis of values.“There are two wars that Greece has to win and the first is to become a society that respects law and order,” he told the Guardian.“In a perfect society, a civilised society, people behave. Since our conscience ensures that this is not the case, the law has to do it for us. Our second fight is the long-term one of instilling individuals with values, turning them into good citizens, and that will take a generation at least.”Chronic bureaucracy is part of the problem. In the realm of red tape, corruption flourishes, impeding business and entrepreneurship. New laws and regulations have given crooked officials more paperwork to hide behind.Although the conservative-dominated coalition has made headway in purging the state sector since it assumed power in June 2012, sceptical attitudes have been hard to erase.“It’s a vicious circle. Nothing gets done any more because it’s so much more difficult to bribe civil servants,” complained one octogenarian, who admitted he found himself hankering for the bad old days. “In the past, bribes ensured a degree of efficiency. Now nothing works.”Corruption is said to be particularly rampant among local authorities and state-controlled organisations. A dysfunctional judiciary has resulted in few suspects being brought to trial.“Even agencies like Okana, dealing with the very sensitive issue of drug addiction, have been found to have abused funds on a massive scale,” said Harry Tzalas, former president of Kethea, the largest rehabilitation network for addicts in Greece. “Institutions where you would never expect to find corruption have fallen victim to it.”Meanwhile the inevitable chaos that has come with the cash-strapped public sector’s decline has spurred growing numbers to ask why they should pay taxes when the state so very often fails to deliver. Since the crisis erupted in late 2009, the public health, welfare and education systems have been devastated by cuts.Kevin Featherstone, professor of contemporary Greek studies at the London School of Economics, said: “World Bank indices of good governance have shown Greek scores declining and converging with other Balkan states and increasingly diverging from the rest of Europe.“The optimism that the crisis would clean Greek politics was always fanciful because in a crisis people struggle to get any economic security by any means.” In Greece, the very structure of the economy also facilitates corruption. “It’s an economy dominated by a few very large firms which means there is no natural constituency for liberal economics and plenty of room for cosy relations between the government and big business,” said Featherstone. “The attitude to the state is: what can we get from the state? In such circumstances, corruption can only do well.”