Robin Gauldie, author of Thomas Cook guides to Mainland Greece and Greek Islands; Charles Arnold, author of Mediterranean Islands; Chris Deliso, co-author of Lonely Planet's Greece guidebook; Andy Bostock, author of the Bradt Guide to the Greek Peloponnese (out early 2010); Jane Foster, freelance writer based in Athens; Katerina Panayotopoulou, Athens resident; Susie Hilton, Greek Islands head of product, CV Travel; Dudley der Parthog, director, Sunvil Greece; Noel Josephides, managing director, Sunvil; Annabel Lawson, director, Andante Travels; Louise Killner, sales & operations manager, Pure Crete; Kimon Riefenstahl, managing director, Danai Beach Resort & Villas, Halkidiki; Andrew Duncan, Greece manager, Vintage Travel; David Watrous, director, Greek Islands Club; Nick McKenna, managing director, SunIsle; Kay D'Souza, regional manager, Inntravel; Andrew Lee, managing director, Exclusive EscapesKynthos, Western CycladesKythnos is usually ignored by tourists, partly because it is very barren and partly because it's not very easy to reach (three hours by ferry from Piraeus on the mainland). It's the very opposite of fashionable, but is a wonderful place to relax. Most visitors are Greeks, who come to soak in the mineral-rich thermal springs in the north of the island, but you feel as if you have the place to yourself most of the time. There are more than 30 small beaches, many of them more often than not deserted, and five villages. The capital, Kythnos, and the former capital, Dryopida, are old and delightful. Kanala in the south-east has an ancient monastery and more trees than anywhere else on the island. Like many of the Cyclades, Kythnos has great food. You need a car to get the most out of the island, and you can hire one in the port, Merichas, which has daily ferries from Piraeus.Where to stay: Loutra, a village on a bay in north-eastern Kythnos. The Porto Klaras apartments are particularly recommended (00 30 22810 31276). Studios for two from €71.Getting there: fly to Athens with Aegean Airlines (aegeanair.com) from Stansted or Manchester; British Airways (ba.com) from Heathrow; Easyjet (easyjet.com) from Gatwick. The port of Piraeus is about an hour from Athens airport by taxi. See ferries.gr/gaferries for timetables. CAKastellorizo, DodecaneseKastellorizo, perhaps Greece's loneliest island, is way off the map - east of Rhodes and close to the coast of Turkey. Why go? For great food, super places to stay and a real feeling of discovery. As you enter Kastellorizo's hidden harbour, one of the prettiest island villages in Greece is revealed. Called Kastellorizo, or just "Chora", which means "village", its quayside is lined with brightly coloured houses, and the ruins of a Venetian castle stand guard above an abandoned mosque. Visitors can walk on the deserted plateau above the village and take a boat trip to the Blue Grotto (a luminous sea cavern), nearby desert islands for beach picnics and snorkelling, or Kas in Turkey, which is just a couple of miles away. Try a harbourside taverna for bright orange sea urchin roe and freshly caught grouper, sea bass, bream and lobster, then loll on a sunbed on the terrace of the Megisti Hotel, and swim in the glass-clear water of the fjord-like harbour. Where to stay: the pick of the bunch is Mediterraneo (00 30 22460 49007; mediterraneo-megisti.com) on the waterfront. Twins/doubles from around €80 B&B.Getting there: fly to Rhodes with Thomson (flights.thomson.co.uk) from Gatwick, Manchester and Cardiff; Easyjet (as before) from Gatwick. Visit gtp.gr for ferry timetables from Rhodes. RGIkaria, Eastern AegeanThe quirkiest Greek island has to be Ikaria. Its remoteness (Samos, the nearest island of any size, is two-and-a-half hours away by ferry) has ensured a self-sufficient, resilient population. Panayiri - religious festivals - occur almost every summer weekend, involving plenty of local organic wine and roasted goat, and can last up to three days each. Magnificently mountainous, Ikaria is one of the most scenic and untouched islands in the Aegean - its interior, wonderful for walking, hides forests, lakes, chapels hewn from the rock, and lunar landscapes. Ikarian quirks include a "vampire village" (Christos Raches), which sleeps for most of the day and comes to life after sundown. Until recently even the schools didn't open until late afternoon, and the baker left his freshly baked bread outside his shop with an honesty box so as not be woken. The best person to show visitors around is the personable Rania Mitikas, who runs Dolichi Tours (00 30 22750 23230) in the pretty fishing village of Armenistis. Where to stay: in an agro-tourist unit on the Karamalis family's organic farm and winery in the centre of the island. Book through Responsible Travel (01273 600030; responsibletravel.com), from €250 per villa per night (sleeps up to four), including transfers from the port, all meals and wine.Getting there: fly to Samos from Gatwick or Manchester with Thomas Cook (flythomascook.com), or from Stansted or Manchester with Aegean Airlines (as before), and then take the ferry (two hours) to Ikaria. DDP Antopaxos, Ionian SeaFew British tourists know about Antipaxos, a tiny, vineyard island with Caribbean-like beaches, four tavernas and just 30 inhabitants. You do get day trippers from Paxos, but staying on the island is virtually undiscovered. The Beretouli family, who run a daily caïque [wooden fishing boat] service to Paxos, are the key keepers of the church of St Emilianos - you can ask to have a look inside if you are interested. The clear blue waters are some of the best in the Greek islands for snorkelling. For excellent Greek fare, head to Voutoumi taverna, on Voutoumi beach, run by the Vlahopouli family. Where to stay: Bacchus House, a secluded stone cottage for two, is on the north-eastern tip of Antipaxos and boasts dramatic sea views. The property is named after the Greek god of wine and overlooks its own vineyard. There is also a lovely pool and a sheltered garden with almond, fig and grapefruit trees and a barbecue area. Voutoumi, with sandy beach and the aforementioned taverna, is a 15-minute walk away. Iglu Villas (020 8544 6435; igluvillas.com) has seven nights' self-catering from £762 per person (two sharing), including flights to Corfu and ferry transfers.Getting there: fly from a range of UK airports with Thomas Cook (as before) or Thomson (as before) to Corfu, then catch the hydrofoil to Paxos (three hours 15 mins), before catching a short ferry to Antipaxos. Visit gtp.gr for timetables. DWMilos, Southern CycladesMilos is the best kept secret on the Cyclades. It is visited mostly by Greeks, who come to enjoy its stunning beaches, of which there are over 50. Along the north coast, the sea has eroded long narrow channels between intricately sculpted white rocks, producing the beaches of Sarakiniko, Kapros and, more dramatically, the sea caves of Papafragas, where you can sunbathe on a tiny strip of beach and swim in a crystal clear fjord almost enclosed by sheer white cliffs. The island is refreshingly untouristy, although it's not "picture book". It's a real, working island, that profits more from the mining of its extraordinary geology than tourism.Where to stay: the Konstantakis Apartments, in Pollonia in the north-east, are part of a farm where the owners cultivate vegetables and fruit and produce a unique wine, Kostantakis, which is fermented in the natural caves of the island. Guests are welcome to visit the farm and try the produce. Islands of Greece (0845 675 2600; islands-of-greece.co.uk) offers seven nights' self catering from £689, including flights and transfers. Getting there: fly to Santorini with Easyjet (as before) from Gatwick, then catch the high speed ferry to Milos (two hours). Visit gtp.gr for timetables. A LawsonMilia Settlement, CreteAlthough overrun by mass tourism in places, Greece's largest island still has vast wild areas, especially in the west. The Milia Settlement is built on the side of a valley near the village of Vlatos, south of Chania. Once a deserted village, it is now a faithfully restored traditional community, where the electricity is all solar, and the food is provided by the settlement's organic farm. However, Milia is not a hippie commune; you're likely to find writers, artists and city folk getting away from it all. The menu changes seasonally, and you can take long walks in olive groves or bird-watch, while beaches are a short drive away. Doubles from €65 B&B (00 30 28210 46774; milia.gr). Getting there: fly to Heraklion from Stansted with Aegean Airlines (as before) or from Gatwick with Easyjet (as before). Hire a car from the airport through Alamo (alamo.co.uk). CDFisherman's Cottage/Sea Horse Cottage, AlonissosStay on the wooded island of Alonissos, in one of two cottages converted from fishermen's boat houses. It's rare to be able to stay this close to the sea - there is a rule in Greece that you can't built too near the shore - so these cottages are a real find. Fisherman's Cottage has one double bedroom and a wonderful verandah looking towards the island of Peristera. Smaller Sea Horse Cottage, which also has one double bedroom, has steps that lead directly to the beach. Ten minutes away is the small port of Steni Vala, with shops, bars and four waterfront tavernas. Kalamakia village can be reached in two minutes by boat, and here you can buy fresh fish every morning from the fishermen. A seven-night self-catering stay in Fisherman's Cottage with Greek Islands Club (020 8232 9780; greekislandsclub.com) costs from £999, based on two sharing, including flights, transfers and car hire. Seahorse cottage costs from £953.Getting there: fly from Gatwick or Manchester to Skiathos with Thomas Cook (as before) or Monarch Airlines (monarch.co.uk) then catch high speed ferry to Alonissos (one hour 20 mins). NJArhontiko Dilofo, Mainland GreeceThe mountainous north-west of Greece features some of the country's most stunning landscapes. Just 30 minutes north of the city of Ioannina lie 46 stone-and-slate traditional villages. This area, known as the Zagorohoria, is marked by centuries-old stone bridges, zig-zag ascents, exquisite Byzantine-influenced churches and great mountain hiking. Larger villages like Megalo Papingo and Monodendri see many visitors, but smaller ones such as Dilofo remain more serene. Here, there is no better place to stay than at the 475-year-old Arhontiko Dilofo, a guesthouse near the mouth of the Vikos Gorge - reportedly the world's deepest. With just 10 rooms (exposed stone walls, thick rugs, painted shutters), it makes for a romantic and relaxing getaway. Doubles from €65 B&B (00 30 2653 022 455; dilofo.com).Getting there: with the near-completion of the Egnatia Odos highway, the region is now only a three-hour drive from Thessaloniki. Fly from Gatwick with British Airways (as before). Cars can be hired through Auto Europe (auto-europe.co.uk). CDArgiroupolis, CreteSome 27km south-west of the town of Rethymnon, Argiroupolis, in the foothills of the White Mountains, has to be one of the most beautiful places to have lunch in western Crete. In the lower half of the village, a handful of tavernas are surrounded by babbling springs and shaded by huge chestnut trees. Many of the tavernas serve delicious Cretan salad - a slight variation on the normal Greek salad, with barley rusks soaked in oil and tomato and sprinkled with oregano. After lunch, buy a map from the shop in the square and explore the upper part of the village and surrounding area, which is rich in history - Argiroupolis was built on the ancient Roman city of Lappa. There's a Roman mosaic from around 1BC, a 2000-year-old plane tree and an ancient necropolis. Where to stay: travellers looking for a traditional inn with great views will love Elia, an enchanting 200-year-old property tastefully converted into a nine-bedroom inn on the north-west tip of Crete, a five-minute drive from the quiet seaside village of Kolymbari, which has a lovely beach. Prestige Holidays (01425 480400; prestigeholidays.co.uk) offers seven nights' B&B from £754, including flights and car hire.Getting there: fly to Heraklion from Stansted with Aegean Airlines (as before) or from Gatwick with Easyjet (as before). Hire a car from the airport through Alamo (alamo.co.uk). LKYannis Taverna, CorfuYannis Taverna, in Garitsa Bay near Corfu Town (head along the promenade past the Corfu Palace Hotel, swing left towards Anenomylos) has been in existence for many years and is a real gem. It has a warm and welcoming Greek-bistro atmosphere; inside the walls are decorated with photos of Old Corfu and various antique artefacts, but if it's warm I'd recommend grabbing a seat outside on the large terrace under an awning. Forget typical Greek menus - here you will find tzigarelli (wild greens sautéed with lots of chilli), spit roasted wild boar from the mainland, stifado with hare, sofrito (a Corfiot speciality of beef or veal stewed with wine and garlic), stuffed cabbage leaves in egg and lemon sauce and many other local dishes. Cheap and enormously cheerful, it's dominated by a proprietor/chef with a big Corfiot personality.Where to stay: try the Paradise Hotel in Gouvia, just up the coast from Garitsa and situated between two thickly wooded hills covered with olive and cypress trees. Sunvil Holidays (020 8758 4758; sunvil.co.uk) offers seven nights' B&B at Paradise Hotel from £512, including flights and transfers.Getting there: fly to Corfu from nine UK airports with Thomas Cook (as before) or from 14 UK airports with Thomson (as before). SHRafina, Mainland GreeceKilling time in Rafina - 20 minutes by taxi or half an hour by bus from Athens airport - is no hardship, thanks to its superb fish restaurants. Ferries, hydrofoils and high-speed catamarans sail from this little port to the Cyclades and Evia but even if you're not going anywhere, Rafina is a congenial place to spend a night or just an evening - many Athenians come out from the city to do just that. Outside each psarotaverna, the day's catch (sometimes still twitching) is displayed on beds of ice. Try Ioakeim, where you can expect to pay €25 a head for a memorable dinner. Two huge open-air bars above the harbour bustle until well after midnight. Where to stay: try Camping Kokkino Limanaki (00 30 22940 31604; athenscampings.com), on the beach about a mile north of the centre, with cabins sleeping up to three from €26 and rental tents for €9.Getting there: fly to Athens with Aegean Airlines (as before) from Stansted or Manchester; British Airways (as before) from Heathrow or Easyjet (as before) from Gatwick. RGLela's Kardamili, Mainland GreeceChoose a table on the sea-facing terrace at Lela's Taverna in the pretty town of Kardamili in the Mani, the southernmost peninsula of the Peloponnese, and you could be in the Greece of many decades ago. Set in a gorgeous stone house on the harbour, the taverna is a favourite with locals keen to tuck into Lela's delicious cooking made with home grown produce. Dishes range from the ubiquitous Greek salad to a deliciously light moussaka, all with lots of herbs gathered from the nearby hills. Just leave room for one of the homemade cakes.Where to stay: Notos Hotel Apartments are traditionally styled, well-equipped one- and two-bedroom stone cottages overlooking Kardamili village - a perfect base for exploring the Mani coastline. Inntravel (01653 617906; inntravel.co.uk) has seven nights' self-catering at Notos from £675, based on two sharing, including car hire. Flights to Kalamata arranged on request.Getting there: Athens is a three hour drive away. Easyjet (as before) flies to Athens from Gatwick, Luton and Manchester. For car hire try Hertz (hertz.co.uk). In the summer, charter flights go to nearby Kalamata (try Thomas Cook, as before). KDVourvourou Lagoon, ThessalonikiAround two hours' drive from the northern city of Thessaloniki, on the east coast of the Sithonia peninsula, Vourvourou lagoon sits on a long curve of yellow sand fringing a mirror-calm, shallow bay sheltered by a little uninhabited island. Walk to the east end of the bay and over a rocky headland covered with juniper and wild thyme to discover a chain of sandy coves. If you have time, hire a boat to visit the turquoise bays and desert islands just offshore. Further down the coast you'll find secret coves beneath steep pine-covered slopes, accessible only from the sea.Where to stay: Ekies is one of the friendliest and prettiest hotels in Halkidiki, with stylish rooms beside the beach. Doubles from around €80 (00 30 23750 91000; ekies.gr).Getting there: fly to Thessaloniki with Thomson (as before) from Gatwick, Manchester, Birmingham, Luton and Bristol, or Easyjet (as before) from Gatwick. Car hire available through Auto Europe (as before). RGBoating, KefaloniaKefalonia is one of the best places to hire a small boat for pootling around many wonderful little bays inaccessible by road or foot. From Fiscardo, you can head to Ithaca to visit the mountain village of Stavros and have lunch at the Polyphemus restaurant (polifimos.com) - it's like being in a secret garden.Where to stay: Skala Beach Villas on the beach in Skala - 6km of sand and shingle against pine trees and mountains - sleep up to four and have a pool. SunIsle (08000 911 601; sunisle.co.uk) offers seven nights' self-catering from £679. Flights arranged on request.Getting there: fly to Kefalonia from Gatwick, Birmingham, Manchester and Newscastle with Thomas Cook (as before). A LeeRock climbing, Kalymnos The island of Kalymnos, close to Turkey, has become a magnet for rock climbing enthusiasts. There are some 200 bolt-protected pitches on 20 crags, but aficionados say only 5% of the island's potential routes have been opened up. Some cliffs are still completely untouched, so there's plenty of opportunity for pioneers. Where to stay: if it's rock climbing tips you're after there's no better base than Hotel Elies, where expert Tiia Porri is based. Doubles from €50 B&B (00 30 22430 47890; all-about.gr/hotel-elies). Olympic Holidays (0800 093 3322; olympicholidays.com) offers seven nights' B&B from £371, including flights to Kos and ferry transfers to Kalymnos. Getting there: fly to Kos from seven UK airports with Thomas Cook (as before), or from six UK airports with Thomson (as before), and catch the ferry to Kalymnos (approximately 45 minutes). RGWalking in Halikouna, CorfuHalikouna is a sleepy, unspoilt corner of Corfu and taking centre stage is the captivating Lake Korission. Home to a vast array of wildlife including turtles, terrapins, butterflies and lizards, the lake is fringed on one side by a magnificent, 8km golden sand beach, and on the other by footpaths leading to a delightful array of coves. Stroll along the beach, pausing at the pretty beachfront taverna of Alonaki Bay. Where to stay: off an unmade track close to Halikouna beach, Korission is a restored three-bedroom house with private pool, terraces and extensive gardens. Vintage Travel (0845 344 0460; vintagetravel.co.uk) offers seven nights' self catering from £995. Flights can be arranged on request. Getting there: fly to Corfu from nine UK airports with Thomas Cook (as before) or from 14 UK airports with Thomson (as before). ADMount Athos Cruise, HalkidikiDuring a visit to Halkidiki don't miss a boat cruise down the Mount Athos peninsula. It's especially useful for women, who are not allowed to visit the male-only semi-autonomous theocratic state. Depart from the ports of Ormos Panagias or Ouranoupolis. After a day exploring the coastline, treat yourself to supper at the Boukadoura in Akti Elias, or Antigoni in Nikiti - both are popular Greek haunts but little known to tourists. Where to stay: in Skites, a collection of 21 rooms and studios (some self-catering) in pretty cottages, with excellent food, a pool and access to a pebbly beach, in Ouranoupolis. It's just far enough outside the village to escape the coach tours but in walking distance of restaurants and shops. Doubles from €114 B&B (00 30 23770 71140; skites.gr).Getting there: fly to Thessaloniki from Gatwick with British Airways (as before). KREgremni, LefkadaOn the isolated south-west coast of Lefkada, in the Ionian Sea, Egremni is a 1km stretch of fine pebbles and milky-turquoise sea backed by limestone cliffs. There's a makeshift beach bar and a handful of blue-and-white umbrellas; otherwise it's unexploited. Turn off the main road from Athani to Porto Katsiki, follow a 3km unsurfaced track to a small car park, then climb down 350 steps to the beach. Arrive in the late afternoon and stay to watch the sunset, when the bar plays classic rock. Where to stay: Meli Traditional House, 6km from Egremni, is a 19th-century stone villa sleeping six on a hillside overlooking the sea. From €200 a night (00 30 69452 62123; meli-lefkada.com).Getting there: Thomson (as before) and Monarch Airlines (as before) fly to Preveza (Lefkada's airport) from Gatwick and Manchester. JFPsathta, near AthensPsatha is an hour and a half from Athens on the road to Corinth. It's secluded and framed by thick pine forest, reflected in the turquoise water. There's a little taverna at the end of the beach selling fresh fish and salads.Where to stay: Pentelikon is a family-owned gem in the leafy Kifissia district of Athens. It has superb service, renowned restaurants and is within walking distance of the boutiques of Kifissia. Doubles from €150 per night, B&B (00 30 210 6230650; pentelikon.gr). Getting there: fly to Athens with Aegean Airlines (as before) from Stansted or Manchester; British Airways (as before) from Heathrow; Easyjet (as before) from Gatwick. KPLevadia, IkariaLevadia, next to Armenistis village, is a huge crescent of coarse white sand. There's a tiny islet about 50 yards offshore which attracts shoals of fish - great for snorkelling. You can rent loungers and umbrellas, and there's a shack selling cold drinks. Behind the beach is a "Greek bamboo" forest and a freshwater lagoon where terrapins sunbathe and will eat from your hand. Where to stay: The village of Armenistis, on the north coast, was a well-kept secret until the 1990s. The Cavos Bay was the first proper hotel in this tiny, funky village and although it now has competition it still has an unbeatable location and offers excellent value for money. Most of the rooms have sea-facing terraces. Sunvil Holidays (as before) offers seven nights' B&B at Cavos Bay from £605, including flights to Samos and ferry transfers.Getting there: fly to Samos from Gatwick or Manchester with Thomas Cook (as before), or from Stansted or Manchester with Aegean Airlines (as before), then catch two hour ferry to Ikaria. RGBalos and Vai, CreteBalos beach is on a peninsula of the same name, with views of Gramvousa island (which you can reach by wading through the water). It lies on the northwest coast and is accessible by boat from Kasteli or by car (along a bumpy dirt track) followed by a 3km walk. Vai, on the remote east coast, is also stunning, backed by palm trees. It's popular with excursion buses, but if you stay overnight nearby you will have the beach to yourself from dusk till dawn. Where to stay: in the small traditional settlement of Metohi Vai, a 10-minute walk from Vai beach, old stone buildings have been restored into seven lovely apartments, furnished with antiques. There's an excellent adjoining taverna. Studios for two from €45 (00 30 697 3211 051; palaikastro.com).Getting there: fly to Heraklion from Stansted with Aegean Airlines (as before) or Gatwick with Easyjet (as before). JFSteam train ride, Pilion PeninsulaLike all proper steam locomotives, the little train that hauls two wooden carriages between Ano Lehonia and Milies has a nickname. It's called Moutzouris - "Smudgy". On summer weekends, "Smudgy" chuffs along the narrow-gauge track, crossing a steep gorge by a remarkable bridge (90 minutes each way). Eat lunch at the former railway station at Milies, now a restaurant. For departures, contact Adventure Travel on 00 30 24230 22035; peliontravel.com.Where to stay: Damouchari Hotel, in the eastern Pilion, is a set of traditional stone houses with rambling gardens and a small pool. There are serviced maisonettes plus a couple of en suite rooms with wooden rafters, antiques and terracotta floors. The high-ceilinged bar is decorated with eccentric paraphernalia. If you're lucky you'll be treated to impromptu jazz from Apostoli, the owner. Sunvil (as before) offers seven nights' B&B at Damouchari Hotel from £685, including flights and transfers.Getting there: fly to Volos from Gatwick or Manchester with Monarch Airlines (as before), then hire a car to drive to the Pilion (average two hours) through carrentals.co.uk. RGVolimes market, ZanteVolimes, on the Ionian island of Zante, is a village that specialises in handicrafts; be amazed by the variety of small shops, stands, street-side stalls (even washing lines) selling hand-made rugs, lace and other local crafts of the highest quality. The locals expect you to barter; along with a rug, I left with great memories of being welcomed into their homes (both before and after I made my purchase) and offered food, drink and an introduction to other family members.Where to stay: the Nobelos in Agios Nikolaos (known locally as Cape Skinari) is an extraordinary mansion that has been converted into four of the classiest suites in the Greek Islands. Prices from €180pp B&B (00 30 26950 27632; nobelos.gr).Getting there: Thomson (as before) and Thomas Cook Airlines (as before) offer flights from across the UK to Zante. NMPrehistoric Museum, SantoriniThe new spacious and airy Prehistoric Museum in Fira on Santorini is my current favourite. The finds there are mostly from the Minoan town of Akrotiri, which is closed at the moment, so the museum is the next best thing. Admire the reconstructions of the wall paintings, the carved furniture and the everyday items whose shapes were cast in the volcanic eruption, leaving minute details.Where to stay: in the boutique Perivolas Houses, perched on the edge of a cliff in Oia. They are converted from old wineries and stables, and have a spa, hammam and sauna. Book through Islands of Greece (as before), from £1,269 per person for seven nights.Getting there: Easyjet flies from Gatwick to Santorini. A LawsonAncient Messene, mainland GreeceAncient Messene, in the southern Peloponnese, is the remains of an entire classical city, and the site is bigger than Olympia. It's off the main tourist trail, and you could find yourself wandering alone past its theatre and stadium. Most striking are the city walls and watch towers. The small road still passes through them; there aren't many places you can drive through a 2,000-year-old gateway. Where to stay: simple rooms in the nearest village, Mavromati, cost €35-40 in summer (try Taverna Ithomi on 00 30 27210 51298). Boutique hotels are cropping up in the Mani region to the south. The Elies in the village of Kardamyli is lovely. Doubles from €90 B&B (0030 27210 73140; elieshotel.gr).Getting there: Athens is a four and half hour drive away. Easyjet (as before) flies to Athens from Gatwick, Luton and Manchester. For car hire try Hertz (hertz.co.uk). In the summer, charter flights go to nearby Kalamata (try Thomas Cook, as before). AB