A British holidaymaker has been killed and four of his friends injured on the Greek island of Zakynthos in an altercation with a Greek taxi driver, who had allegedly been taunted by the tourists.The 19-year-old, from Basingstoke, was stabbed to death at 3am in Laganas, the island's infamous party resort. Local police said the brawl broke out after the local cabbies were harassed by the holidaymakers as they ate at a fast-food restaurant within minutes of emerging from a nightclub."The Greek driver got angry when the Britons, who were obviously drunk, started shining lasers at him outside the restaurant. He and another driver got into a heated argument [with them] and then it seems he just lost it and went on the attack with a knife," said Athanasios Nistas, the duty officer at the island's main police station."It's unprecedented, totally unbelievable. He will spend years in prison for this. I am at a loss for words. "The deceased is believed to have died almost instantly from stab wounds to the chest. Four other British teenagers were also wounded in the attack. They are also thought to be from Basingstoke."Most of them sustained back wounds and are now recovering at the hospital," Nistas said. "But they are out of danger."Other police officers said witnesses had reported the Britons hurling stones at the drivers. They painted a picture of a man who was impossible to restrain when fellow cabbies attempted to intervene.The local, who has not been named, co-operated with police after confessing to the stabbing at his home a few hours later. "His line of defence seem to be that he was provoked," said Dimitris Angeloudis, the duty officer at Laganas. "Nothing like this has ever happened before. People are in a state of shock."Laganas is notorious for the alcohol-fuelled antics of the thousands of young Britons who visit it every year. A number of deaths involving holidaymakers have occurred at the resort in recent years. "A lot of police officers are frightened to drive through the town at night, because inevitably they become the target of young, drunken tourists throwing bottles at cars," said Nistas. "But I can tell you that this has really shocked us all."A Foreign Office spokesman said: "We can confirm that five British nationals were involved in a serious incident in Zakynthos, Greece. "Sadly, this resulted in the death of one British national and the hospitalisation of four others, one in a serious condition. We are in regular contact with the families of those involved, and are providing consular assistance."