After weeks of wild speculation about Greece defaulting or leaving the euro, and dogged assaults on the common currency by pundits and amateur economists alike, the Greek prime minister has chosen to cut the Gordian knot – or at least to announce that he will.In one of the most significant speeches of his political career, George Papandreou addressed the nation last week to outline the harshest economic measures the country has faced in its recent history. He has since been offered support from the European commission and the European Central Bank. The markets have been less convinced, leading a global wave of suspicion and turning their attention to Spain and Portugal's similar economic malaise. While speculation on the region's fate and its effect on the euro rages on, Greek government officials try to square the circle: cut expenditures, boost revenues, implement institutional and structural economic reforms, and convince all the naysayers that the country will not go bust.It goes without saying that the make or break of Papandreou's plan is going to be implementation. The Greek prime minister intends to go ahead with quintessentially unpopular measures that have been recommended for years but have always been met with high political costs. Until a couple of months ago, the mere mention of any one of the items on Papandreou's list – pay freeze in the public sector, cuts in public sector benefits, an increase in pension age in line with EU legislation, a rise in fuel and property tax – would have brought the country to a halt for days.Currently, despite trade union pre-emptive strikes and discontent among public sector employees, an unlikely consensus to back Papandreou seems to be building. In polls published in the Sunday papers, up to 68% of the population appears prepared to dig deep to help get the country out of the crisis. As the painful reforms begin being implemented, however, Papandreou will need to solidify his alliance with as large a part of the Greek public as possible.This task is doomed to failure unless the austere measures are seen as fair. The only way to achieve this is by relentlessly going after those who have made their fortunes by avoiding taxation and have enjoyed provocative amnesty from state intervention while doing so. There are dozens of cases in Greek business circles; they are well known to the publicand it is high time the government made them pay their dues. It's impossible to imagine the large, middle-class core of the population consenting to pay higher taxes and suffer a deterioration of its living standards while the mega-haves remain untouched.Related to this is the war on tax evasion. Employees in the public and private sectors who can't conceal their incomes, as well as honest businesspeople, have been bearing the brunt of every tax hike for decades. Greek governments have consistently failed to crack down on tax evasion and capture revenues from freelancers, private practitioners and businesses, which consistently and successfully lie about their incomes.Another minefield in Papandreou's plan is corruption in the political sphere. The previous government was disgraced by a series of scandals involving some of its highest-ranking members. There can be no doubt that the Greeks will show zero tolerance to anything resembling this kind of behaviour, to which Papandreou's party, Pasok, is no stranger.Finally, the Greek prime minister is yet to mention a concrete strategy that will put the country back on the path of economic growth, nor has his government put forward a plan to boost competitiveness, which lies at the heart of its future performance.The Greek government can find the tools to build the necessary conditions for its rescue plan to work. Appealing to national unity alone will not cut it. If tax evasion is demonstrably combated, justice is fully served in the cases of the criminally irresponsible uber-rich, the weaker social strata are protected and the political elite becomes modest and transparent, this might actually work. It's a big "if". What makes the challenge even bigger is that Papandreou will only have one go at it; Greeks have lost patience and watching their incomes dwindle and quality of life decline will not make them any more stoical. Moreover, the EU and the markets don't appear prepared to wait too long for Greece to get its act together. If Papandreou does pull it off, however, it will be an achievement of huge proportions and one for the macroeconomics and politics textbooks of the years to come.