Anais Mitchell was living in her car, an aspiring folk singer driving from town to town looking for gigs, when a fragment of song arrived in her head unbidden. She can't recall many details of the day – she was on a highway in Virginia, and this was some time in 2004, maybe 2005 – but she remembers the words and melody exactly. "Wait for me, I'm coming," she sings across a cafe table half a decade later, in a girlish, flutelike voice. It seems like nothing, but slowly this tiny germ of a song blossomed into an entire folk-opera, not to mention one of the best albums of 2010.Hadestown is quite unlike the spare and rather earnest acoustic folk Mitchell had previously released on Ani DiFranco's Righteous Babe label. Based on the Greek myth of Orpheus and Eurydice, its score draws on jazz, country and gospel, while Mitchell's libretto shifts the setting to Depression-era America, with the lovers torn apart not by death but Eurydice's desire to escape poverty by moving to Hadestown, an underground goldmining community overseen by the merciless Mr Hades.Mitchell isn't being fanciful calling Hadestown an opera: she conceived it as a stage show, and it was first performed in a village hall "on a total shoestring" near her home in Vermont. But the wider world might never have heard of it had she not decided to release it as an album. And the cast of singers who appear on the album heighten its wit and haunting melancholy immeasurably. The fathomless baritone of veteran folk singer Greg Brown gives Hades a dangerous, bored grandeur; he is the perfect counterpoint to Ani DiFranco's sassy yet solicitous Persephone. Better still is Justin Vernon, aka Bon Iver, as Orpheus: when he sings "Wait for me, I'm coming," he distills all the anguish that made his album For Emma, Forever Ago so achingly beautiful.Eurydice is sung by Mitchell herself, who still marvels that she was able to align these stars long enough for the album to be made. "It's almost like a portal opened, I got them on the record – then it closed again," she says. When she plays Hadestown live, she either sings alone, accompanied by composer and musician Michael Chorney, the man responsible for its vibrant arrangements, or else musters a temporary cast of local folk singers on a gig-by-gig basis. She's delighted that DiFranco and the Low Anthem's Ben Knox-Miller will reprise their roles of Persephone and Hermes when Hadestown is performed in concert in Glasgow later this month – but neither are confirmed to join the cast for the London show a few days later.That Hadestown can transcend the vagaries of its casting is testament to its atmospheric power, which has its roots in three distinct sources. The work of Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill informs its conflict of romantic idealism and amoral pragmatism, while the Portuguese film Black Orpheus, whose "strange, beautiful imagery" left a strong impression on Mitchell, influenced her vision of the Underworld as "a sort of bureaucracy". Then there was the presidency of George W Bush, from which Mitchell recoils: "I felt so alienated by what was going on – and the legacy is still there." Hadestown allowed her to explore a modern America that was "dark and getting darker all the time" in subtle, figurative ways.That Mitchell should address politics in her music was inevitable: her mother is a social worker who started a centre for pregnant teenagers in Vermont, and joined the cabinet of Democrat governor Howard Dean. But her parents were also back-to-the-land hippies: when her father Don Mitchell, a writer and professor of English and cinema, successfully turned his 1969 novel Thumb Tripping into a film in the early 1970s, he used the proceeds to buy a sheep farm in Vermont. From then on, says Mitchell, "farming wasn't their occupation – but it was a pretty big hobby. They had a lot of sheep."Although Mitchell started writing songs in high school, she decided to study politics at college, and for a while thought she might become a journalist "because it sounded legit". But watching other female folk singers, such as DiFranco and Dar Williams, persuaded her that a career in music could be just as worthwhile."I came of age in a time when independent music was really flourishing. I never thought you have to get discovered by somebody who's going to make or break your career. It was always, write 10 songs and make a record, then write another 10 and make a better record, and keep going."Folk music attracted her for other reasons: "I really love storytelling, so I love the attention to storytelling in that world. It's a place where poetry really matters. The lyrics are important and the listening is important: it's less about the production and the packaging, and more about the song." That appealed to Mitchell because her high, fluttery voice is, by her own admission, an acquired taste. "As a young songwriter, I felt folk was a world where I could be heard, even if my voice was weird or my guitar sounded out of tune."Her earlier albums, including 2004's Hymns for the Exiled and 2007's The Brightness, tackled everything from the war in Iraq to Hurricane Katrina, via mining disasters and young women's debt to elder feminists. "I was really into the early Bob Dylan records, songs like The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll and Ballad of Hollis Brown: the way he was able to speak about politics by way of telling a story, and never seemed like he was up on a platform, was really inspiring to me." You can feel her attempting to emulate Dylan in her own early songs – but today she finds her youthful lyrics too direct, and says: "I wouldn't write like that now."You get the impression that Mitchell is at a transition point both in life – she turns 30 this year – and in her career. One of the things she most appreciated about Hadestown was the ancientness of the myth. "I love it when you get the feeling as a writer that you're just tapping into what already exists," she says. "There are only so many words, there are only 12 notes in the scale: all you can do is find a new way to rearrange them, and be an echo, a reverberation, of something that has existed for ever. That's freeing, because you don't have to dredge this up out of your own heart."So where next for her own music? Mitchell has turned for inspiration to something more recent: the British folk songs anthologised as the Child Ballads in the late 19th century. "That music is kind of exotic to me: a lot of American folk is very square rhythmically, but with the British stuff, you never know where you are. And the language is so beautiful, I love the pure-heartedness of the storytelling."She is in the midst of recording a collection of these ballads, but meanwhile has been quietly writing a new solo album, in which, she says, the influence of the Child Ballads will definitely be discernible. And percolating away behind all of this is an idea for another opera – "but I shouldn't talk about it," she flusters, "because I'm not working on it".She attributes much of her success in pulling off Hadestown to the fact that she lives not in a heaving metropolis, but "in an old house on a long dirt road, with chickens and two cats", in a quiet corner of Vermont, within a community of "really creative people who are living in the woods and no one would know that they're there". Michael Chorney is one of her neighbours: originally she asked him to score her Hadestown songs for his band of the time, a Sun Ra tribute act called Magic City. The show's director, Ben T Matchstick, is another: he ran community theatre projects in the collective cafe that Mitchell's husband helped to found.Working with these people wasn't necessarily easy for an unassuming singer accustomed to performing alone (or if not, alongside her husband in a 1980s covers band). "It's so challenging to get on board with other people creatively: you've got to be really patient, and give yourself up to a bigger plan. But I'm so aware that's really the way to make something greater than yourself," says Mitchell. "Hadestown was a real lesson in that."Hadestown is performed at the Old Fruit Market, Glasgow (0141-353 8000), on 21 January, and the Union Chapel, London N1 (08444 771 000), on 25 January. The album is out now on Righteous Babe.