For some old foreign policy hands in New Delhi, steeped in the politics of the cold war, there was an easy formula for sizing up the policies of US presidents. Republican, good for India. Democrat, bad.But that no longer holds after the attacks in Mumbai that Indians see as their own 9/11. Whether it's George Bush or Barack Obama in the White House, the attacks look set to further cement the alliance between New Delhi and Washington and deepen counter-terrorism and security cooperation between them.The future promise of that alliance is one of the most powerful tools of persuasion available to Washington to prevent India from retaliating and putting the region at risk of a full-scale war between two nuclear-armed neighbours.Bush saw India as an emerging world power and allowed it to buy US nuclear energy technology. The basis for the next stage of the relationship is evidence of a Pakistani connection to the gunmen who carried out the Mumbai attacks. New Delhi and Washington are assuming that it was carried out by Lashkar-e-Taiba, a militant group based near Lahore in Pakistan. India has complained for years about the involvement of Lashkar-e-Taiba in attacks on Indian-held Kashmir from bases in the Pakistani-ruled sector. It has also accused Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence agency of training and supporting the group.Now – because of concerns about a wider conflict – there are signs Washington is listening and has put Pakistan on notice it must act against the group. The rationale is that the best way of preventing a wider war would be to show India that the US can get Pakistan to make an effective crackdown on militants. In addition, America is concerned that, if Pakistan perceives there to be a real threat of war with India, it will move its troops away from the Afghan frontier, giving more room for the militants to operate.Condoleezza Rice, after her visit to the region last week, made it clear that Washington expected the government of Asif Ali Zardari to take swift action against Lashkar-e-Taiba and other Islamist groups. She told CNN: "We are awaiting action, and that action needs to take place soon." Such statements are intended to ease the domestic political pressure on the Indian government for harsh retaliation against Pakistan, possibly bombing the training camps of Lashkar-e-Taiba.Obama has gone a step further than Rice, endorsing India's right to catch the perpetrators of the attack and bring them to justice. "If a country is attacked, it has the right to defend itself," Obama told NBC television. But he stopped short of backing India's right to "hot pursuit" of militants into Pakistani territory.The tough talk from Democrat and Republican alike comes amid widespread recognition of the failure of the last seven years of US policy towards Pakistan. America has channelled some $10bn in military aid to Pakistan since 2001. The funds were to be used to hunt down militant groups and prevent the Taliban's re-emergence in Afghanistan. Instead the Bush administration has been forced to acknowledge that its investment in Pakistan has been largely wasted. It failed to stop the war from spilling over from Afghanistan into Pakistan. Worse, the borderlands became a staging post for the Taliban and Islamist militants.Bush administration officials have tacitly acknowledged the failure. Earlier this year US military forces began stepping up cross-border operations from Afghanistan into Pakistan with an aim of pacifying the tribal areas that provide a refuge for Taliban and Islamist fighters. Until the attacks, that failure of Bush policy was the main issue that concerned Obama. India, and the prospect of war with Pakistan, barely figured on his map. He was focused instead on how to bring quiet to Afghanistan. He said a year ago that he would back US military strikes against Pakistan-based militants if Islamabad failed to act. Now Obama has signalled that he intends to bring India into the mix. "We can't continue to look at Afghanistan in isolation. We have to see it as part of a regional problem that includes Pakistan, includes India, includes Kashmir, includes Iran," he said in the interview with NBC.For some observers, the tilt towards India has been embodied in Obama's selection of Hillary Clinton as secretary of state. Bill Clinton elevated the US relationship with India during his presidency and persisted after India tested a nuclear device in 1998. Hillary carried on the tradition as first lady and senator, visiting India and cultivating ties with Indian immigrants in America. The community responded. In 2007 she raised $2m in one night at a fundraiser for Indians living in New York.During the primaries, the Obama camp attacked Clinton for her closeness to the Indian community, calling her the Democratic senator from Punjab. Obama is not making those jokes now.