Who? Bournemouth-born artist William Doyle creates strange, structurally indefinable songs that are entirely self-produced. His first semi-public venture into music was in the post-Bluetones indie band Doyle & the Fourfathers, in which he honed his skills as a performer. After the band disintegrated, he started making music on his computer, music so impressive that John Doran of the Quietus started a label just so it could put out Doyle’s early songs. His ideas for the album were born out of “a long year of isolation” on the edges of north London in his late teens, and it was his debut as a coming-of-age record that, rather than blossoming with the buoyancy of youth, revitalises the boredom and monotony of a lonely life the end of the Central line. As Tim Jonze pointed out in a review, he may well be the first artist in the history of music to have used a Foals pun as an album title. The album: Total Strife ForeverPrevious releases to date: 2013 – Hostel EPWhat we said: “Perhaps surprisingly, Doyle is at his most affecting when he’s vocal-free: songs such as Glitter Recession counterpoint their melodic beauty with a subtle, unsettling undertow. On Heaven How Long, however – which features a euphoric chorus that dissolves into a driving motorik rhythm – Doyle proves he’s capable of pulling off both his tricks at the same time.”What he said: “It was pressure that made this record what it is. Social, financial, all of that. And I didn’t want to do what was expected of me: to make a ‘song record’ after I’d been a songwriter for the last three years.”Notable Mercury-friendly accolades: John Doran said he would have “remortgaged my soul to get this music out there”. Hopefully that kind of combative human connection should – as opposed to a big marketing push and extensive tours ahead of the awards – be enough to convince the judges he deserves the win. Brian Eno, the inventor of ambience, has also been known to turn up at Doye’s gigs, probably because the album applies an otherworldly ambience to Krautrock, skewed electronics, techno and classical.Likelihood to win: All of the right components are there, but they were arguably there last year too, when similarly sombre solo electronic artist James Blake took the prize. Hopefully those comparisons won’t work against him. At the moment, Ladbroke’s has him pegged at 8/1 to win. Stream album: