The white dome of the Taj Mahal glows pale orange at dawn as hundreds of tourists scuffle towards the great mausoleum. My wife, son, mother and I arrive early to witness the sunrise, to beat the heat and the exhausting crowds, and to touch the marble walls while they are still cool. Like countless visitors before us, we have our photograph taken in front of the Taj with postcard precision. Our smiles suggest a joy in our own adventures.Later that day we fly home to Bangalore in the south, where my family and I have been living. When the sun rises the following day, we find my mother lying dead on the floor of our flat.With the help of our extraordinary neighbours, a colonel in the Indian army and his wife, the panic of not knowing what steps to take with a dead relative in India is stilled, and within minutes friends and neighbours offer us solace. They knew we’d been travelling with my mother and, to a person, their first words to us are, “She had a good death.”I’d lost loved ones before, most after long, painful illnesses with lingering spells in hospitals draining them of spirit and vigour. I didn’t believe there was such a thing as a good death. But if I’d known my mother was going to die on that sunny Sunday morning in February, I’d probably have hoped it turned out exactly like it did.My mother, Kristine, had never had any desire to see India. She lived in Toronto, Canada, and the thought of visiting the dusty, crowded chaos of the Asian sub-continent was about as appealing to her as eating a five-alarm prawn curry for breakfast every morning. But as soon as I told her we planned to live for two years in India, she asked when it would be convenient for her to visit.She first travelled to Bangalore to see us in January, 2014, and we took her to Kerala for a backwater houseboat cruise, a delightful beach holiday on the Arabian Sea and a few days in ancient Kochi. Like so many other westerners, my mother was changed by India – she wrote in her journal that she was no longer afraid, feeling perfectly capable of flagging down an auto-rickshaw by herself and wishing she could share her new love of the country with those who would never get to see it – shedding her earlier apprehensions and anxious to return.For her second visit a year later, we planned a thrilling two weeks through Rajasthan, home of Mughal empires, distinctive art and architecture. This time she arrived excited and eager.On her last morning, she saw the Taj Mahal at sunrise.While many senior citizens scramble to meet the demands of their bucket list, Kristine crossed off items that she didn’t even know were on a list, her joy greater for the surprises.I knew my mother wanted to be cremated. There are better ways of using precious earth, she’d told me, than burying people in it. And though she might have been happy to have her ashes left in India, it seemed only right that I take them home to Canada to scatter with all of her family present. Besides, it’s easier to transport a small urn than a complete body.A cremation, it turns out, is easy to arrange in India where just obtaining a sim card requires a thick sheaf of paperwork, photo ID and the patience of a saint. It’s also far more rewarding.At the crematorium, I sat with my mother’s body in a quiet tiled room as we waited our turn – it was a busy day for cremations. Outside the window I heard crying and shouting and singing. The sounds of sadness were mixed with the unmistakable bustle of a collective, accompanied by the floral aromas of burning incense and garlands blanketing the white-bearded man’s body, which was being washed by loved ones. This group was sad and happy, joyously celebrating a life while offering their shared grief to whomever was listening.Looking back at my mother lying there, covered discreetly with a plain white sheet, I thought something was missing. The Indian mourners outside grieved openly under the bright sun, celebrating despite their sorrow. Inside, it was solemn and melancholy. We found some flowers to place over and around her, allowing Kristine to end her bodily existence in a way that she surely would have appreciated since becoming so enraptured with the humanity of India.My friends and I carried her to the oven. I watched her body begin to burn before the door clanged shut.This never could have happened in the society in which I’d grown up. My culture’s habits in dealing with death are private, behind-the-scenes, all arrangements taken care of. If our loved ones are laid out for us to view, they are made beautiful. Funerals are, traditionally, solemn, mournful and gloomy occasions marked by kind reflections and “respectful” whispers. We don’t want to risk offending the mourners or, even worse, the deceased.And when the bereaved are overcome by grief, we don’t know how to react because we can’t stand seeing people in pain. We want them to stop crying, stop wailing, stop sinking deeper and deeper into their own misery because we’re sure that will make them feel better. But really we’re just trying to make it easier for ourselves.With my mother’s good death, accompanied by the celebratory way we dealt with her body, those of us who had lost her were given the permission to find happiness from the end of an extraordinary life. If I learned anything from my fellow Indian mourners, it’s that it’s much easier to be sad when there is joy.“It was all worth it,” Kristine had said, looking out over the Yamuna river that arcs quietly behind the Taj like a swooping brush-stroke.It wasn’t just the trek through the desert on camels, trains and bicycles, scaling hilltop forts and palaces, waking up before dawn and driving through the dark to the Taj that was worth it. To her, at that moment, everything in her life was worth it. And she’d been able to share the whole adventure with her family.Jon Magidsohn’s book, Immortal Highway, will be published shortly by Iguana. jonmagidsohn.com/memoir/