The jeep slowly ambled its way through the busy bazaar, people running out of the way to avoid its wrath. A policeman jumps out, grabs some clothes displayed outside a shop, chucks them in the back of the jeep, and angrily reprimands the shopkeeper. The vehicle moves on, with a loudspeaker remonstrating other shopkeepers. I explain to my fellow backpackers that the police constantly ask shopkeepers not to put their wares on the street, so that any suspicious packages can be more easily identified. If they don't comply the police confiscate their goods as punishment.You could call this part of the Indian police force's anti-terrorism strategy. Paharganj market, where many foreign backpackers stay because of cheap and clean rooms, is opposite the main New Delhi railway station. A few weeks ago a series of small bombs went off less than a mile away at Connaught Place. India is on edge, with some commentators worried that more communal violence between Hindus and Muslims might break out here as tensions rise. There is much talk about establishing a US-style department of homeland security and there has been media frustration over the lack of any serious headway by the police and intelligence services on terrorism generally.In some ways, the always troubled relationship between India's majority Hindu (81%) and second largest minority (11%) Muslim population has become better. For a start there is no longer a continual standoff with Pakistan – always used by Hindu nationalists to raise doubts about the patriotism of Indian Muslims. Combined with this, Indian Muslims are firmly established in popular culture (through Bollywood, cricket, television soaps) to no longer warrant widespread suspicion. Third, Indians themselves have been very proactive in building community links and trying to reduce tensions every time a religious riot breaks out or a bomb goes off. Last year after the multiple terrorist attacks on Mumbai's local trains, many popular Muslims across the city made loud appeals for their co-religionists to donate blood at hospitals and contribute towards rescue activities. These may be symbolic gestures but they matter and they have an impact.But in many ways India's reputation as a relatively successful multicultural state is being undermined. Recent terrorist attacks have mostly been attributed to Indian-born Muslims, a change from the days when fingers immediately pointed towards Pakistan every time something went off. Pakistan has its own problems, as the Marriott Hotel bomb in Islamabad attested, thanks to the very groups its intelligence agency fostered as a way to undermine India.And then there are the Hindu fundamentalists. There has been growing anger about Hindu fundamentalists attacking Christians in the state of Orissa and more recently Karnataka because the former allege that Christian missionary groups are forcibly converting low caste Hindus to Christianity. There is no evidence of course, except some patchy stories that missionary groups offer health facilities and other benefits to members of congregations. For hardline Hindu groups such as the VHP (Vishwa Hindu Parishad) and its even more fanatical subsidiary Bajrang Dal – this is a valid enough excuse to attack Christians, destroy churches and intimidate politicians. These Hindu nationalist groups are also hated by Sikhs, who accuse them of trying to control Sikh politicians and their affairs, and by Muslims, who saw them play a major part during the anti-Muslim riots in Gujarat in 2002.But the matter is getting out of hand. An increasing number of police investigations have recently found Bajrang Dal activists with weapons and bombs, and even fake Muslim gear.  Many point out the obvious – that Bajrang Dal terrorists are trying to implicate Indian Muslims when attacking Muslim targets. And yet the Indian government is strangely reticent in targeting these Hindu fanatics with the same gusto it parades suspected Muslim terrorists.There's also no doubt that hardline Muslim groups want to use terrorism as a way of separating Hindus and Muslims, and there seems to be no real strategy or intelligence in dealing with the problem.Thus it's difficult to predict which way the wind will blow. In 2002, after the anti-Muslim pogroms in Gujarat, Hindu fanatics were openly claiming that the state was the start of a nationwide campaign. And yet their attempts to fan similar violence elsewhere failed and the Hindu nationalist BJP government lost the subsequent election because it didn't pay enough attention to poverty. Whatever the experts say, this country is too large and too complicated to predict. But unless something is done to quell rising Hindu fundamentalism, which also fans Muslim, Christian and Sikh grievances, then the Bajrang Dal could end up as India's Taliban. There's an old saying here – don't ever feed milk to a snake, sooner or later it will bite you.