When travelling in a country as richly alien as India, it is tempting and almost forgivable to reach for the familiar. The unwary retreat to large, Western-style hotels where they are safe but dissatisfied (and also – misguidedly – convinced they are safe from water-borne diseases.)Yet the solutions are there. All over India people have opened their homes or created small hotels where you feel safely part of the country. But the word "hotel'' does little justice to this fabulous mix. There are, in our latest guide alone, treehouses, villas, camps, palaces, cottages, bungalows and forts – up mountains and rivers, in cities and in the countryside. The variety is almost bewildering. Adopt any role you wish: collector of human experience, idler, yoga disciple, massagee, meditator, adventurer, aimless wanderer, self-improver, design buff – India can absorb all your fantasies and offer a thousand more.Above all, India is utterly itself. It is so diverse that the footprints of other cultures quickly fade or take on an Indian hue. That is a considerable strength, and you, too, if you step off the path to meet the people to whom these places belong, will be changed. Each place gives you India on its own plate – a treat for every type of traveller.Before you march headlong into the full Indian experience, unwind in this city oasis with an acre of garden. The Manor, designed by a Japanese architect, started life in the 1950s as a jungle-fringed hotel; now it finds itself in the city's smartest suburb. With far more character than many other luxury addresses, it exudes a minimalism that is never austere: lovely wall hangings in the corridors, stunning mosaic floors. The delicious food is Indian or fusion and the tranquil garden is a sweet spot for a fresh lime soda. Try a morning yoga or a rejuvenating massage – a 15-minute taster is included in the price.• themanordelhi.com; 15 double rooms from Rs7,500 (£95). All prices in this article are for a double or twin room per night Step into the air-conditioned cool marble reception – delicious! Immediately you are made to feel at home, in among the big sandstone Jaisalmer fresco and the chairs crafted from Rajasthani ox carts. Owners Rajat and Sanjana can organise anything you come up with. Every peaceful bedroom is special in its own way – a gold-plated elephant head-dress or a Bollywood poster, a small balcony, a swish wet room. There's a spa and a rooftop restaurant with views east over suburbs and trees. A five-course menu flows from the kitchen, with an exceptional chef and a brand new tandoor.•shantihome.com; 17 doubles; from £75The perfect soft landing into India. Owners Martin and Annie have a profound knowledge of India and give the warmest welcome you could wish for – cool lime sodas on arrival, delicious food and conversation later. Their new bougainvillea-strewn, Lutyens-style farmhouse is an hour outside the craziness of Delhi. Each elegant bedroom opens onto a veranda running around a courtyard. In summer you can sleep on the charpois (rope-strung beds) in the wonderful gardens. Martin will walk you round his farmstead, where organic vegetables grow; they keep pigs and buffalos, too.• tiklibottom.com; two doubles, two twins; full-board from £150 The choice of setting for "Sacred Five Trees" is inspired and the 40 metre-long covered veranda is a place to sit and dream amid the sweet scents of jasmine and frangipani. Unfussy decorative touches – copper pots, bowls of floating flowers, cane lampshades – soothe, as do the views of the river, the buffalos grazing and the distant forest. Belgian by blood, Goa-born and convent-educated in Surrey and Mumbai, Lulu's approach to guests is wise and warm; nothing is too much trouble. Only traditional materials have been used: laterite stone, high wooden ceilings and tiled roofs. Bedrooms, each with a private balcony, wrap around an inner courtyard.• islaingoa.com; four doubles; full-board from £130Among the coconuts on the outskirts of Loutolim, one of Goa's prettiest villages, a Jodhpur-blue exterior and fairy lights cascading from the terracotta roof are the first signs that you're in for something different. Norman and Carole's 700-year-old house is a wonderland of colour, outstanding local and international art (much of it Cuban), richly embroidered Rajasthani upholstery and antiques. Complementary interests – for Norman, art and a snooker table; for Carole, her exceptional cooking and jewellery (for sale) – come together with a shared passion for their garden. Four serenely well-designed bedrooms the colour of jewels face out on to the pool.• casasusegadgoa.com; four doubles; from £65Off the beaten track, up in north Goa, are two stylish villas with views that soar downriver. On arrival you are ushered to the terrace with a sundowner: lap up the luxuriant scene. The views from the infinity pool are more breathtaking still. Later, meander downhill for a barbecue under the stars. The rooms each have a sit-out space overseeing the river or the islands. There are simple bright linens and rugs on dark stone floors, and walk-in showers. Look forward to long days lazing by two pools, serenaded by wildlife and spoiled by staff. Join in yoga on the terrace or plan a trip to the beaches. Leave by speedboat – James Bond-style. Bliss.• casacolvale.com; 11 doubles; from £90 If you have pottered up the mountainside in that splendid little train, filled with expectations of Shimla, you may have been underwhelmed by the town. Its glorious past and its parochial present are at odds. But Chapslee is a treat, undisturbed by mobiles, internet or TV. One of the oldest houses in town (1835), it was the summer residence of the late Raja Charanjit Singh of Kapurthala; the present owner is his grandson. The walls are festooned with swords and sabres, Raj-era paintings and embroideries. Bedrooms are immensely comfortable and the suite is spoilingly sumptuous. The sitting room is in hunting-lodge style; the garden is smothered in nasturtiums. It's more English than England, a flawless snapshot of another age.• chapslee.com; four doubles, one suite; half-board from £190Pull through gates, enter landscaped grounds, and be welcomed with a marigold garland by serene, white-robed staff. As you fill in a questionnaire about your mental and physical health, realisation dawns that this is no regular luxury hotel. Your stay is planned in terms of diet and treatments: Ayurvedic massage and exquisite food, meditation and a rejuvenating spa, pukka astanga and hatha yoga twice a day and, if you like, afternoons spent in the organic vegetable garden. Of course, you can come just to soak up the atmosphere and sunbathe by the pool.• shreyasretreat.com; three cottage suites, eight tents, one cottage for five; full-board £250. Yoga and sound meditation classes includedThere are two separate bungalows, one housing a single suite, the other two double rooms. Huge sliding screens give onto verandas with bamboo blinds and views across the shimmering lake. This must be one of the most heavenly spots in all Kerala. The thatched air-conditioned suite has a dining room, living room and two bathrooms – a super-cool retreat. The lovely pool is shared. Interiors are colourfully minimalist, typical of the ethos of Malabar House, a small chain of boutique properties, which renovates old Keralan buildings with sympathy.• malabarhouse.com; one suite for two from £230; cottage for two from £140 Laze by the pool, sip cocktails under the mango tree. This 300-year-old colonial building was the office of an English tea broker. Interiors are studded with bold local paintings, entertaining artefacts and simple antiques. The bedrooms have high ceilings, deep comfortable beds and big windows for cool breezes. Chic bathrooms in the cottages have open-to-the-sky showers. Windows overlook the ingenious Chinese fishing nets (ancient but still in use) or the courtyard garden with its fountain and pond full of lilies. Dinners of caught-that-day fish are a pleasure, but it is the staff that are the biggest delight.• oldharbourhotel.com; 10 doubles, three cottage suites; from £95 A few years ago Christel and Jan swapped their busy hotel in Spa, Belgium, for this cluster of cottages on a palm-fringed beach. The bedrooms are large and lovely, airy and light; walls are washed in ochre; silk bedcovers are piled high with cushions in rich reds and oranges. The chef will whip up tasty local dishes for you any time. Cross the sandy garden, duck under the thatched porch and you're on the beach, which belongs to you and the fishermen alone. It's almost a relief to discover when you arrive that there's not a lot to do.• abeachsymphony.com; four cottages for two; from £95. Child bed available Ahilya, perched high above the Narmada river where there's always a breeze, is an enchanting hotel. The building's pale stone floors, dark timbers and ancient shuttered doors have been exquisitely restored. Richard Holkar is the driving force behind Ahilya. His family were the kings of Indore, though the family is more westernised today. Thanks to the Holkar Trust, the hand weaving for which Maheshwar was once famous is again thriving – you may visit the handloom centre nearby. Tranquil bedrooms have finely woven fabrics and views. Have a buffet breakfast on the ramparts and dine on delectable home-grown food on the terrace.• ahilyafort.com; nine doubles, two twins, a single, two tents; full-board £140 Reception is a treehouse, with an open-air lounge/dining room/bar and a look-out with live footage of the camp's watering hole. Home, too, is five treehouses scattered across the grounds; each is authentic, romantic, spectacular and spacious. There are big open showers, tribal paintings, vibrant throws and doors that fold back to a big balcony with a sensational view. You are pretty much left to your own devices but open jeeps and experienced guides will ferry you into the reserve from 7.30am. Bandhavgarh, compact and teeming with wildlife, has the densest tiger population in India.• treehousehideaway.com; five treehouses for two; from £165 full-board Thirteen tents look out across a 100-year-old reservoir, home to more than 250 species of migratory birds, while antelope graze on the bank. Smartly contained within white canvas, bedrooms are furnished in elegant Rajput style, while bathrooms feature marble and slate. Toast and tea are delivered to your tent before breakfast, pillows are of softest down. All is exemplary, from lessons on village lore to surely the most delicious food in the region. Head to bed by torchlight – to discover hot water bottles tucked between the sheets.• chhatrasagar.com; 13 tents; from £230 full-board, with tax, jeep and birdwatching tour includedShahpura Bagh would look very different if ancestor Rajadhiraj Nahar Singh had not mortgaged the jewels to build earth dams and bring water to his people. There would be no pastures, mustard crops or evergreens. At the top of the house, bedrooms are served by light and cool walls and bathrooms with old claw-foot tubs. Eat together in the beautiful dining room. The hospitable family will entertain you with hilarious anecdotes of Rajasthan's most "colourful characters".• shahpurabagh.com; four doubles, six suites; from £65The women of the dusty village still cook over open fires, as they did when brave Darbar Lal Singh ruled 300 years ago. Anirudh Rathore's restoration recalls the halcyon days of royal Rajasthan. Seated beneath the fabulous ceiling of the dining room, guarded by portraits of five generations, you can appreciate how this was the court where warriors met over matters of state. Disturbed only by distant prayer, you can float in the exquisite infinity pool. Why not play at being the movie star when, couched in velvet on a bullock cart, you progress through the village (not for the shy), to the great curiosity of the locals? Few travellers make it this far: a rare treat.•  fortbarli.com ; six doubles, two suites; from £75 Enjoy acres of wheat fields, twittering birds, gardens and hammocks swinging from shady fruit trees. The old house itself is elegantly light and cooled by the breeze. Old, rescued artefacts account for much of the furniture. A well-stocked gym and library will stretch different muscle groups before a candlelit dinner in the company of your warm, cultured hosts. Bhanwar and his wife are deeply eco-conscious, encouraging guests to share a car, employing and buying locally, composting. Even the pool, set among palms, is an irrigation resource.• savista.com; 13 doubles, three suites; from £80English gardens, a terracotta bridge, 80s kitsch – yet this is still the real India, living with a family in what Mr and Mrs Singh love to call "a cosy home from home". It's right in the heart of romantic Udaipur and, from the terrific rooftop terrace, you can visually plan your day's itinerary, starting at the famous Fateh Sagar Lake. The furniture in the bedrooms takes you on a colour-coded journey, beginning with 200-year-old Rajasthan and tumbling into the present.•  lakeviewvilla.in  ; four doubles, one suite; from £23 A retired British doctor, a traveller and a talker with comedic flair, Chris has poured energy into creating his utopia; his staff wear the broadest smiles and the whole place sweeps you into a warm embrace. The house stands at the foot of a steep hill, huddled in a horseshoe of scrub hills with views from the pretty garden across the lake to the Western Ghats. Bedrooms are a picture of taste and restraint – tiled floors, white linen, solar-powered showers, fresh flowers on bedspreads. Chris is passionate about the environment and social responsibility, guided trips to the village support the local community.• cardamomhouse.com; six doubles, one suite; from £40Husna-Tara has created a dream – effortlessly stylish and wickedly indulgent. In 1860, a Scottish tea company established the estate, enticed by the luxuriant hillsides and cool climes; today they supply Harrods. As perfect as the teas are the sundowners on the terrace and the immaculate lawns – and the bedroom suites are some of the loveliest in the world. Gaze from a wicker chair on inspirational views, dine by moonlight on exquisite foods. Camp out at a "lodge" near the river where sumptuous picnics are presented on linen. Tricky to reach but worth every rut and bounce.• glenburnteaestate.com; eight suites; from £230 full-board with activities, transfers and laundry included• Observer readers can buy a copy of Alastair Sawday's Special Places to Stay, India & Sri Lanka, which is published on Thursday, for £7.19 (rrp £11.99) plus £2.99p&p. Visit sawdays.co.uk/bookshop and use the code INDIAOBSERVER or phone 01275 395431. Offer ends 31 October 2009