Prayers were said at churches across India on Sunday for an elderly nun who was raped at a convent school in an attack that has scared Christians and intensified the nationwide anger over sexual violence.The 71-year-old was raped when she tried to stop a robbery early on Saturday at the Convent of Jesus and Mary in Ranaghat town, 74km north of Kolkata. Six armed men raided the convent, vandalised the chapel and stole the equivalent of £7,500 from the school.The nun was left bleeding in the convent and was being treated in a hospital on Sunday. The convent’s CCTV system caught the raiders on camera and police have detained several men. Related: Delhi rape: how India's other half lives The attack took place as India continues to debate the controversial documentary India’s Daughter, broadcast by the BBC in Britain and other countries but banned from receiving an official airing in India by the authorities.  Related: India's Daughter: Delhi gang-rape film airs early on BBC following objections Police in Delhi arrested a 21-year-old activist on Saturday who has been attempting to get around the ban on the film, which explores the fatal gang rape of a student in Delhi in 2012. He was later released on bail.Ketan Dixit screened director Leslee Udwin’s film in a slum in south Delhi where Mukesh Singh and three other men on death row for the brutal assault used to live.With borrowed projection equipment, Dixit showed the documentary to around 40 people in the Ravidas Camp slum. “So I felt people in the camp should see India’s Daughter and make up their own minds about the film,” he told the Guardian. “They may be poor, but they have a right to see such films and discuss them. What we’ve to understand is that the issue is not about poverty or lack of education, but about mindsets.” The women in the slum were shocked by the fury of the defence lawyer A.P. Singh, who effectively blamed the victim for her own death, Dixit said. He said a woman had told him after the screening: “If men change their mentality, women will be safe. It’s shocking to see so-called educated men talk like this. We don’t think like [the lawyer] though we’ve never been to school.”Dixit had defied the ban earlier too and shown the film in a village near Agra on International Women’s Day. Speaking before his arrest, Dixit had said he was less worried about the police than about radical Hindu groups. “They threatened to attack my parents’ house in Agra if I’m not arrested within 48 hours. Instead of fighting a social evil like rape, they’re agitated about a film on rape,” he said.