Here in Australia the year has not started well on the race relations front. Yesterday saw the Australian branch of fast-food chain KFC condemned by sections of the American media over an advertisement deemed racist by African-Americans. But it is another, and more serious, international racism row that is dominating the headlines. It surrounds the knife murder of 21-year-old Indian university graduate Nitin Garg in Melbourne over the weekend.The response from the Indian community in Australia and the media back in India was unequivocally furious. Here, they said, was yet another demonstration of how Indian students have been singled out by racist Australian thugs. SM Krishna, India's external affairs minister, denounced the murder as a "heinous act against humanity" and "an uncivilised brutal attack on innocent Indians". His ministry has issued a warning to Indians planning to travel to Australia.Indians believe that Australian authorities are in denial about racist assaults against their compatriots. In the case of Garg's death, police in Melbourne so far have not concluded that it was the result of a hate crime. Senior federal government ministers have inflamed Indian anger with assurances that Australia remains safe for international students. One Delhi newspaper even published a cartoon depicting Melbourne police as the Klu Klux Klan.The reality is rather messier than either side of the debate might like to concede. Both the Indians and the Australian authorities are right, to some degree.The statistics suggest Indian complaints are not entirely unfounded: 1,447 people of Indian nationality were victims of crime in Victoria in the 12 months to July 2008. And yet, we would paint a distorted picture to say that racism is all to blame. There is no doubt that some violent attacks on Indian students have been racially motivated. But there is also no doubt that many have been the product of opportunistic criminals who have identified Indian students as soft targets (many work late nights to support themselves or supplement their incomes).Some perspective would do everyone good. The streets of Melbourne and Sydney, Australia's two main cities, do not resemble those of Baghdad or Johannesburg. As for Indian outrage about racism, it should be reminded that no one's hands are clean: what about the pogrom against Muslims conducted by Hindu nationalists in Gujarat in 2002?Even so, the problem of racism remains a real one in Australia, although it is not confined to the rise of an aggressive white nationalism, epitomised by gratuitous, narcissistic flag-waving and "100% Aussie" tattoos. When there was a surge of racist "curry-bashings" in the western suburbs of Sydney in 2009, it was not white Australians who were the culprits, but Australians of Middle Eastern (primarily Lebanese) background.The increasingly shrill tone of the Indian government and media does nothing to aid their cause, however. The Australian government and public are not indifferent to their grievances. Educating students from overseas earns Australia $A15.5bn per year, with Indians representing the second-largest source of students. Australians take genuine pride in being an open, safe and friendly country. The Australian government, for its part, sent a delegation to India led by deputy prime minister Julia Gillard last year in a bid to improve bilateral relations.The greater challenge, at the Australian end, seems to be cultural rather than political. There is in the country something of a benign neglect towards racism, in part because much of it tends to be of the low-level variety that could be easily excused as part of an ironic, knockabout, piss-taking Aussie sense of humour. "Xenophobia", as comedian Barry Humphries once quipped, "is love of Australia". Those who complain about racism are just taking themselves too seriously and fail to have a bit of a laugh at themselves. Perhaps so – sometimes. When it comes to racist violence, no one should be laughing.