Basanti extended her basket towards me. Made from pale wooden strips of bamboo, all it seemed to hold was a bit of grass at the bottom. But the grass was moving. She pulled the green fluff out in a single handful, revealing her latest catch. To me, it was such stuff as nightmares are made on: each with two bulbous claws, three spindly legs on either side of their dark blue shells. I didn't care if twine had been wrapped around their pinchers like straightjackets. Their beady eyes said otherwise.But to Basanti and the other women of Mahinsa, these crabs are their livelihood. Home to 150 families, or about 800 people, the village is one of over a hundred scattered along the shores of Chilika Lake, in India's eastern state of Orissa. The lake is technically a coastal lagoon, the country's largest, and its grey brackish waters shelter crabs, prawns, fish, 160 species of migratory birds and even the rare Irrawaddy dolphin, which helps attract valuable tourism.Three years ago, Mahinsa had no toilets and barely any trees. Today, NGO projects have tried to change this: planting palm trees, setting up vermicompost piles, and installing water pumps that children wash their feet at before racing each other back to school. Most importantly, they've brought a livelihood.I thought of the proverb, "Give a man a fish, feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and feed him for a lifetime," as a group of women led us around the island, their saris a kaleidoscope of fuchsia, turquoise and bubblegum pink. At times the track was sandy, lined with prickly pear cacti and tiny white flowers. The air smelled of the ocean, of early morning fish markets, and long-billed sandpipers strutted along the shore while white cranes watched over them.We followed a network of dirt paths to the ponds where they cultivate the crabs. While some harvests can bring in as much as $300, most average about $200. With six harvests a year and 10 to 15 women sharing the profits, that works out to about $80 a year for each woman. This extra income can then be used to educate their children, pay for healthcare, or build up their savings for a rainy day.And with the threat of monsoons and cyclones never far off, rainy days are sure to come.Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a 'Letter from' one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions for our Letter From page – they should focus on giving our readers a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send submissions to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com