The Mumbai terror attack has come after a series of terror strikes during the last few months in India. Obviously, the political leadership and the police intelligence in India have proved themselves unequal to the task.One cannot be blamed if it is thought that inefficiency and nepotism in the government machinery and police force may be making things easy for the terrorists. When corruption is so widespread, it is perhaps possible for terrorists to grease the palm of people in the government and police force to achieve their criminal aims. The fight against corruption and terrorism should go hand in hand; without eliminating corruption and nepotism in the government, it may not be possible to defeat the terrorist forces.India is a vibrant democracy with enormous freedom enjoyed by citizens, which is perhaps unique in this part of the world. While any Indian can be proud of such freedom, quality governance alone can ensure a safe and progressive life for citizens. One conspicuous aspect about India is that the lawbreakers have enormous loopholes and the government and the judiciary seldom punish them adequately. The terrorist who attempted to storm parliament in Delhi and was awarded the death penalty by the court is yet to be hanged after several months.NS VenkataramanTrustee, Nandini Voice For the Deprived, Chennai, India Shashi Tharoor (Comment, November 28) says "what can destroy India is a change in the spirit of its people, away from the pluralism and coexistence that has been our greatest strength". It is as if Nehru were still alive, "Naxalite" an obscure Scrabble word and the country not desperately overpopulated. He must know about the many thousands killed in the Indian sector of Kashmir over the last 20 years - estimates range from 50,000 to 100,000. Indian Kashmiris survive on antidepressants and the cost of quiet has been a lost generation and 700,000 occupation soldiers.Where is pluralism in Gujarat? The leaders of the post-Godhra pogroms against Muslims go unpunished. Nobody has been sentenced for the appalling murder of former MP Ehsan Jafri. If Muslims say there is no justice for them in India, who is to disagree? Hindutva is alive and well, terrorising Christians in Orissa and in Karnataka. We are told by its agents that Hindu terrorism is an impossibility in Hindustan. The unbearable population growth of the dysfunctional states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh has already led to severe tension and riots between groups of Hindus in Mumbai, the city of every Indian migrant's dreams. If the credit meltdown hastened the end of a particular economic model, the latest meltdowns in inter-community respect suggest that Indians need to "introspect deeply" on the dangerous direction in which this wonderful country is headed. Cathal RabbitteMumbai, India The horrors of terrorism that Mumbai has been subjected to are much the same as what Sri Lanka has been subjected to at the hands of the Tamil Tigers for over a quarter of a century, but away from the media limelight. The Mumbai events highlight once again the obligation of the international community to do whatever possible to help eliminate such terrorism, wherever it occurs. In this regard, it is a reason for utmost disappointment that despite proscription Tamil Tigers carry out fundraising events openly in the UK to fund terror in Sri Lanka. We urge the UK government and police to rectify this situation urgently. Chula RajapakseSpokesperson, United Sri Lanka Association, Lower Hutt, New Zealand We are deeply saddened by the tragic loss of innocent lives in Mumbai. Nothing can justify the slaughter and kidnapping of civilians. However, it is erroneous to portray all Muslims as terrorists. This will give jihadists the chance to set off a clash between the west and the Muslim world at a time of uncertainty. The silent majority of Muslims condemn such abominable attacks. The challenges ahead are daunting. It is therefore time to show our disapproval to terrorists' twisted mindset by standing together to extinguish the flames of global terrorism.Dr Munjed Farid Al QutobLondon