India, where I come from, is beautiful, dignified and wise – just like my grandmother, Nani ma (grandmother in Hindi). The insight and depth of argument India brings to the table at the climate change conference in Copenhagen is well researched and reflects its experience in negotiating for years.When India was young, developed countries were busy polluting the world and India, now that it is coming of age, is calling for them to take ambitious binding commitments as per their historical responsibilities and to help India age gracefully by giving it adequate finance and technology to grow, but on a low-carbon pathway.India is the second most populous country in the world and releases the fifth largest amount of emissions – yet I would argue that it has almost negligible per capita emissions, as most of the population is so poor. Poverty has actually grown over years, no doubt down to our inability to correlate growth with better standards of living, which is perhaps why we figure very low on the Human Development Index compared to other developing economies. So it's somewhat unfair to club us together with China – we're neither as old nor as polluting as our next-door neighbour.Despite all this India really has behaved more maturely than its age might suggest. Recently in parliament, Jairam Ramesh, our environment and forests minister, announced that the country would reduce the intensity of carbon by 24% by 2020. India has also ratified the Kyoto protocol and come out with a national action plan on climate change, which has eight missions, one of which is among the most ambitious solar projects, to generate about 20 gigawatts of power by 2022 and another to enhance renewable energy sources.But my grandmother always tells me how much money she has, but she'd never allow me to search her purse. Similarly India will give biannual reports to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) about its emissions reduction actions but will never allow international scrutiny for its domestically funded actions. It would also like all the finance offered to be additional and not as a Christmas gift (read official development assistance).Grandmothers also hold on to traditions. India has always put forward its view that the text being negotiated in Copenhagen is not in line with the convention (UNFCCC body principles) and the Bali Action Plan which was enforced by parties at the landmark COP13 in Bali. It feels that the text favours rich countries and most of the statements try to move away from the principles that have been agreed upon.This was again reflected in the recent tussle between the small island states and the advanced developing economies on whether to start discussions on amending the Kyoto protocol and bring in a new protocol. Since the Kyoto protocol acknowledges the differences between rich and poor nations with individually tailored responsibilities (one of the only global negotiations where this holds true), India will continue to defend it and block any move that would enable the richer countries to buy time and commit less and the conference to deviate from its core agenda.I often remind my grandmother that you need to accept we live in a new world. I urge the Indian government to see that it is putting so many people's lives at risk, including many of my own friends from the island nations. Could it not do anything to get a more ambitious deal? Could it not push the US harder, take the mike and make a bold statement that the European Union should show leadership?I am sure that the reasons for it blocking Tuvalu's proposal to amend the Kyoto protocol is not to escape from its own responsibilities but to make sure that developed countries' overdue obligations are committed first and attention from them is not diverted .India wants to ensure a deal in Copenhagen. When your grandmother needs to convince you, she would try to use all the ploys she could. India needs to do the same. It should empower its stakeholders to raise their voices and aggressively engage with the Indian media, civil society, youth and indigenous communities to progressively put pressure on the developed nations to deliver on their responsibilities.Be vocal and bold. That's all I ask.