Sex has always been the touchiest of subjects for Indian cinema, but Aids ought to be a Bollywood film producer's dream. It ticks all the right storyline boxes: a cast of untouchables; doomed love; tragic consequences of family-busting proportions. But while it might seem a wonder there aren't more all-singing, all-dancing Indian films on the subject, the notion of Indian films depicting the risks of unsafe sex seems as detached from reality as a typical Bollywood plot, in which people have sex while fully clothed, drenched in monsoon rains beaneath a waterfall or - a recent occurrence in Bollywood movies - in private swimming pools.But four new shorts - Migration, Blood Brothers, Positive and Prarambha, produced under the umbrella of Mira Nair's Aids Jaago (Aids Awake) film project and directed by some of India's leading film-makers - have started looking at sex and its attendant dangers in a different way. In these films, Indians, married and unmarried, gay and straight, poor and posh, have tender, troubled, even hungry sex - but with the warning that when it's unprotected it could lead to HIV and Aids.The films deliver their message with varying degrees of subtlety. Two are more like stylish public service announcements than movies. Nair's own Migration follows a farmer who is forced to find work in Mumbai and brings home a nasty souvenir, while Vishal Bhardwaj's Blood Brothers is about an advertising executive who may have traded in his perfect life for an unprotected one-night stand. Positive, by Farhan Akhtar, plays with the kitsch Indian imagery of family life, using some of those lovely, bright school pictures of rosy-cheeked children and their happy, hard-working parents. But Santosh Sivan's Prarambha (The Beginning) is the most engaging of the bunch; it stars Prabhu Deva (seen as India's Michael Jackson for his dance moves) as a trucker who gives up unsafe sex and becomes the unlikely champion of HIV outcasts. It's knowingly packed with every Bollywood cliche - from the cute, kohl-eyed orphan, through comic baddies, to a terrifically implausible finale, all set to music. In 12 minutes, it manages to be the perfect Bollywood film.However, these aren't the first Indian films to touch on Aids. In 2004, the Indian actress-turned-director Revathi made Phir Milenge (We Will Meet Again), starring Celebrity Big Brother survivor Shilpa Shetty. The film bombed: India wasn't ready to wake up to Aids and was still reeling from foreigners, such as Bill Gates, predicting that there would be 25 million Indians living with HIV by 2010.Thankfully, the figures haven't turned out quite so badly (about 2.5 million-3 million in 2007) and, this time, the influx of money to publicise the risks of HIV (Aids Jaago is funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation) and the bigger stars in the Aids Jaago series (Shiney Ahuja, Raima Sen, Sameera Reddy, Irrfan Khan, Siddharth) should do more to raise awareness than Phir Melenge could manage.That said, Aids Jaago won't revolutionise Aids awareness in India (though there's a brilliantly catchy and informative advert on Indian regional TV with the power to do that: search YouTube for Condom Song - Telugu). But in a country that loves film passionately, it's helping to explain the nature of HIV to ever more people, possibly making more of an impact on middle-class cinema-goers who thought they were safe from Aids. And, importantly for Indian film history, these four films really could open the floodgates for the portrayal of the fullness of sex in mainstream Indian cinema. Hooray for Bollywood!· Aids Jaago screens on Sunday at the ICA, London and March 22 at Watermans, Brentford