Sans Carla Bruni, President Sarkozy's trip to India should be a "grip and grin" affair. Turning up as guest at India's Republic Day - where the country's military parades through the heart of Delhi - will ensure warm hugs and big smiles on Saturday. No doubt, there will be business deals to be struck and arms to be sold.However, underneath the bonhomie, and close to Sarkozy's heart, lies an issue raised by Britain's environment minister, Phil Woolas, last week before Gordon Brown's visit: climate change and the role of big, poor polluters like India. In Woolas's words, the Indian government was not "putting its shoulder to the wheel" in the fight against climate change.Sarkozy may be blunter. During his trip to China last year, he issued a not-so-veiled threat to tax imports from high carbon-emitting countries (read China), so that EU companies obliged to meet strict environmental standards could be protected. If the mercurial French leader sticks to his guns, his Delhi visit may be loveless in more ways than one.There's no doubt India is being difficult about climate change. Delhi argues it should be able to grow its economy unhindered by the burden of sins committed by countries that industrialised centuries earlier. Indian ministers point out today that it takes 18 Indians to pollute as much as one American.But there's no ducking the facts. India is home to a billion people and the world's fourth largest polluter. Its economic rise has seen its carbon dioxide emissions almost double since 1990.The current globe's experiment with the environment is fraught with dramatically dangerous outcomes. The North Pole is disappearing. Glaciers are receding. Weather systems are changing, perhaps irrevocably.The re-emergence on the world stage of China and India makes the point that climate change is linked to growth. The west got rich first and then got clean. The question is can the world re-invent ways in which countries become wealthy?In terms of development, China is a rung above India. Beijing has dashed ahead in terms of industrialisation. Manufacturing, the dark satanic commerce that emits atmosphere-altering gases, makes up just a quarter of the Indian economy. In contrast, China is the workshop of the world - and its carbon footprint is three times that of its smaller southern neighbour.But neither country can afford to continue their high-carbon, high-growth rise. China and India are linked in this goal: to raise billions out of poverty without destroying the earth. To achieve this aim both countries need technology and money.The only nations on earth that have the know-how and the cash are the already industrialised countries in Europe, North America and Japan.Will nations such as the United States invest in, create and then affordably spread technologies across the world? Given that no one has built a low-carbon economy, India and China are hedging their bets on this question.Both nations are suspicious of entering a new age where the west has a monopoly on key technologies. They remember how bitter the fight was to get anti-retroviral drugs to fight Aids out of the hands of western multinationals and into the mouths of poor Africans. Deaths in the third world did not move governments then.That explains to some degree the reluctance of both countries to accept binding commitments to cut carbon dioxide emissions.Both Beijing and Delhi are unlikely to be cowed by threats. These two countries, linked by the Himalayas, understand that global inequities cannot be frozen. They are aware that neither rich nor poor can survive calamitous climate change. Both are waiting to see what the west offers up.Trade should be part of the solution, not part of the problem. But it will have fair, not necessarily free, trade that will ensure that wealthy nations' carbon debt to the poorer parts of the world gets paid. In return China and India should accept pollution limits. Arranging this grand bargain is not going to be easy, but then making history never is.