My name is Sharda and I'm 16. I live in one of India's poorest states of Uttar Pradesh in a low-income group family. My father, who was a post office clerk, committed suicide five years ago by jumping into a well because he couldn't cope with the pressure of providing for our family of seven – my mother and my five siblings. Since then, my mother has been struggling to make ends meet with my dad's pension and a small tailoring business she runs from home. When my father was alive, we used to live in our own house. But after his demise, we moved in with my uncle into his big house in the neighborhood. My mother initially refused to live at my uncle's – her brother – but the temptation to save rent made her relent. I studied up to grade 10 but had to give up my studies after my father's death. I have to contribute to the family income and take care of my younger siblings. I help mum stitch clothes and deliver them to the houses in the neighborhood. I'm particularly good at embroidery and help mum with this craft because she has a problem coping with the intricacies of needlework due to her failing eyesight.My uncle is a prosperous businessman and a widower. He has three sons, all in their 20s, who help him run three grocery stores. Apart from tailoring, my mum also does housekeeping for my uncle in lieu of rent. It's a big house – with seven rooms -- and we occupy the outhouse. But my uncle is kind. He lets us use his kitchen, fridge and watch TV on occasions. One day, while we were all watching TV, I noticed that my youngest cousin had his eyes glued to me rather than the television screen. This continued for many days. One day I asked him what his problem was, to which he replied that he found me very attractive and would like to marry me one day. I told him he was nuts as Hindu culture doesn't permit marriage between first cousins. But he was adamant and started wooing me with fervour. He clandestinely started getting chocolates and sweets for me from his grocery store. Initially, I refused to accept the goodies but when he persisted, I gave in – these were, after all, luxuries that I could not afford. Gradually, I started enjoying his attention and even began to like him. He promised that he would treat me like a queen after marriage, take me around in his fancy car and we'd travel across the world. How charming was the imaginary world my cousin had created for me. And, like a fool, I truly fell for it. One day, he came early to the house from the store and asked me out. He said his friend was throwing a big birthday bash and had invited the two of us. I was thrilled at the prospect of attending a party. I lied to my mother about needing new needles for embroidery and ran off with my cousin to the party venue. Except that there was no party. My cousin had tricked me into coming out with him and took me to a hotel where we spent a couple of hours.Life was never the same for me after that. A few weeks later I panicked when I found out I was pregnant. When I told my cousin about it, he told me to relax. He assured me that he'll search on the internet for a remedy and he also warned me not to disclose news of the pregnancy to the rest of the family. After consulting the internet, my cousin advised me to take an emergency contraceptive pill which he said, "will make the baby vanish".As I had no education in these matters, I popped the pill. But much to my horror, I discovered weeks later that I was still pregnant. I told my cousin about this problem and asked him to marry me. The jerk refused, saying that would all happen in good time, but first I must get the baby aborted. I was aghast. Telling my mum about the havoc in my life was not an option as she would have killed me. So I went along with my cousin to a local quack who promised us anonymity. The baby was quietly dropped.I feel my whole world has collapsed around me. My lack of education in matters related to sex have brought me to such a sorry pass. Teachers never bothered tackling this topic in school, while Indian parents are most hesitant to give sex-related advise to their kids. I know I'm not alone in my predicament – there are hordes of ill-educated girls like me in India. I'm so miserable that I sometimes contemplate suicide. The only thing that holds me back are thoughts about my hapless mother. I'm petrified of my future. At the moment, I feel I don't have one.