The Mercure is that very rare thing in India: a new, clean, comfortable, central hotel with mid-range pricing. OK, it's a chain with no character to speak of, but frankly, there is enough character in Hyderabad, and in India, already. Head out into the old town, to the lake, to the astonishing Golconda Fort – where by the 17th century they had plumbing and sanitation vastly superior to anything in Europe at the time – and return here. The hotel is quiet, the restaurant is perfectly acceptable, and there's a local place serving the classic local biryani opposite. +91 40 67122000, mercure.com, doubles from £28 a nightIn a wonderful setting, on a canal in central Kerala, is Jos's homestay, Keralagramam. The beautiful, converted environment-friendly coconut workshop is only a few miles from Kochi (formally Cochin), and is big enough for an entire family, though toddlers might be a worry as there are lots of fishponds around the house. Ride to shrimp farms in a rickshaw, wander through the village, or just spend your time reading and enjoying fantastic home cooking. The fish curries are superb, but best are the rice flour pancakes stuffed with flaked coconut. +91 484 2240278, keralagramam.com, double in the main house £45 a night B&B, the Backwater Cottage sleeps up to four – £90 for two plus £10 per extra bed, B&B While you're in classic, touristy Kerala, you should also spend a couple of nights at A Beach Symphony if you have the budget. This collection of individual luxury cottages (one has its own plunge pool the size of some hotels' swimming pools) just set back from stunning Marari beach near Alleppey, would be perfect for those who have had enough of traffic and temples. It's comfortable, spotless, and run by a lovely Belgian couple, with good food and efficient and friendly staff who can't do enough for you. You can simply enjoy the sea, the pool and an oily massage, or head off for birdwatching, to see nearby villages or to cruise the backwaters. The owners are genuinely interested in the local community, are involved in the local school and very pleased to show you around. Worth the cash and perfect for small kids. +91 9744 297 123, abeachsymphony.com, from £95 a night low season (April to October) and £145 peak season The new Ginger Hotel near New Delhi railway station is a useful alternative to Par Ganj fleapits. It is good value for money, clean and very well located – a rare combination in a capital. It's boring and characterless, and all the better for it. As elsewhere in India, there's plenty of character on the street outside. A family room is around £20, standard room £15 (call 020-6629 2929 from the UK, gingerhotels.com).If top end luxury is what's required, try The Manor, a boutique hotel a little way out of the centre with a fabulous "contemporary Indian" restaurant attached. If you want something special at the end of the trip or just a blowout, stay or eat here. More for Wallpaper*-reading global voyagers than families, but the staff were delightful in the restaurant when we turned up with a one-year-old. The blue cheese-stuffed nan and the tandoori glazed Scottish salmon are fabulous. +91 9871 117968 themanordelhi.com, doubles from around £100 including one-way airport transfer, welcome drink and breakfast; tasting menu around £30In Calcutta, it has to be the Tollygunge Club. It is tricky to get in as this private sporting club with the attached accommodation is meant to be for members' guests only. But find someone to sign you in or try simply calling (this is India, so all things are possible). There are lawns, two pools, an outside bar looking out over the golf course, the hum of Calcutta all around you and the chance to see the local elite do their showy, glossy, elite thing. +91 33 2473 4539, thetollygungeclub.com, doubles from £50Four or five hours' drive from Delhi is Kesroli Fort, a 13th-century stronghold tastefully converted into a little hotel with spectacular views over surrounding countryside. Go in winter and take a scarf and a sweater against the chill at night; in summer, lots of sun cream and hats. Either way, borrow the hotel bikes and cycle through the fields and villages or simply walk for a rare opportunity to see rural life as it still is in much of India. It's rare anywhere to wake up to the sound of buffaloes lowing, rarer still to go out before breakfast and tramp trails through dew-sodden grass with the animals themselves being driven out before you. Food isn't fantastic, though perfectly palatable – but evening chai on the battlements is a fabulous Indian experience. Good for kids – though watch the staircases – and great for a break from the city or from the tourist trail between Agra and Jaipur. Nearby Alwar is worth a detour for castles, bazaars and general mayhem. +91 98294 99901, the-hill-fort-kesroli.neemranahotels.com, doubles from £41 to £88 but frankly go for one of the more expensive rooms – they are beautifully done with magnificent viewsIf you don't fancy a houseboat on the lake, try Greenacres, just out of the centre of town. A good, reasonable alternative , it has vast rooms with bags of character, at least in the old bit. The new rooms are functional but fine. The food is good – though sadly none of the great Kashmiri specialities appear to be there – and breakfast on the lawn is a pleasure. Family owned and it shows. +91 19 42313848, wazirhotels.com, doubles from £40In Ahmedabad, in deeply interesting and sadly rarely visited Gujarat, there is the venerable House of MG, a tycoon's rambling family home in the city centre, now restored. Get a big room at the back or upstairs to avoid traffic noise. The restaurant upstairs does some of the best food I've tasted in India, a superb thali of Gujarati dishes, which rely on a subtle mix of textures and tastes rather than overpowering spices. The guided evening walk through the old city with its fantastic old bourgeois houses – havelis – is a joy. +91 79 25506946, houseofmg.com, doubles from £92 a nightThe Chonor House is run by a foundation established in the mountain town in 1995 for the preservation of Tibet's arts and crafts, and by far the best place to stay in Dharamasala. Stunning murals decorate spacious rooms, they serve good coffee and it's set back from the bazaar's bustle and hooting Punjabi tourists. There's a pretty shaded terrace, a library, a TV room and a sense that the Dalai Lama is probably drinking tea or meditating in the room next door. Actually he is probably at the temple five minutes' walk away. +91 1892 246405, norbulingka.org/chonor_house, doubles from around £50 The tourist centre of Jaipur isn't an easy place to get accommodation right, particularly not if you are with kids. Stay too close to the old city and you risk noise, dirt, dust, heat and hassle. Stay too far out and you risk traffic as well as that "how did we end up here?" feeling. My tip is the Barawara Kothi, an old colonial villa in the Civil Lines part of town. The decoration of the rooms is either uninspiring or mercifully free of ethnic tat, depending on how you view things – but they are clean, spacious and have nice touches such as small stained-glass windows. The beds are comfortable, the food is good and there is a delightful garden with beautiful lawns that means hot and bothered kids can run off some energy. You are close enough to the centre to get in but far enough away to get some quiet. +91 141 2222796, barwarakothi.com, doubles from £47 in high season, much less in low season (April to September)