Dev Anand, who died in London on Sunday, aged 88, was the first and greatest matinee idol of Hindi cinema, an actor and director whose soft unaffected performances resonated with Indians across the social spectrum. With a career that began as India emerged from imperial rule in the late 1940s, he became a figure recognisable to anyone in the country – regardless of class, religion, caste or region. He was central to the essential role that cinema played after independence in binding the disparate peoples of India into a nation with a shared culture and sense of belonging. And he did so by appealing to the humour, gentleness and strong sense of justice that are hallmark qualities of the ordinary Indian. Gregory Peck and Dirk Bogarde are the two closest comparisons that come to mind from western cinema.His loss will be felt not only in the movie industry but among common Indians who, amid the continuing poverty and frustrating lack of progress that came in the immediate decades after British rule, looked to films to provide the messages of hope that India's politicians and stagnant economy could not. His success was in no small measure due to his appeal among women, who enjoyed his playful serenades and flirtations with numerous beauties.In what was then an extremely conservative society, Bollywood, and stars like Anand in particular, gently pressed back boundaries by portraying relations between the sexes as those between companions and equals. Like Gandhi and Nehru, the radicals of Indian cinema sought to rebel without causing outrage. His 1965 film, Guide, was a tale of love between a single man and a married woman – an extremely taboo subject that was nonetheless finessed into a popular and perennially beloved hit.His films observed that tacit Bollywood ethic of casting as diversely as possible. In that sense, he helped to familiarise his audience with the possibility of Hindus, Muslims and others living in amity in a plural India. He was born a Hindu, but his leading lady in Guide was the Muslim star Waheeda Rehman, and one of the great loves of his life was the actress Suraiya – also a Muslim.Always ahead of his time, he introduced mainstream India to noir-style crime movies with Baazi in 1951, which led to a spate of such films in the 1950s and entrenched the genre in the public's taste. In 1971 he both starred in and directed Hare Rama Hare Krishna, which addressed India's bourgeoning hippie scene and the sex, drugs and rock-and-roll that came with it. It contained a famous near-scandalous music routine in which a feisty young woman spends an evening high on dope in the midst of a motley gang of long-haired and tie-dye-clad westerners.Though his films were not as successful in later life, respect for him endured. Remembered for his palpable on-screen sweetness, he gave Indians an inspiring image and narratives of integrity and decency, giving them an optimism that, until recently, the circumstances of the country rarely gave cause for.