An officially sponsored Taj Mahal trip by Orlando Bloom to encourage more foreign tourists to visit went awry at the weekend when the British actor was denied entry to India at Delhi airport.Bloom, who had been invited to visit the monument in Agra by the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh state, was told to get on a flight back to London three hours after touching down early on Saturday morning. The reason: his e-visa, for which he had reportedly applied in November, had not been cleared.“The immigration officials were insensitive and stubborn, and though Bloom was feeling uneasy and needed a doctor he wasn’t even allowed to sit,” said Amar Singh, a prominent Uttar Pradesh politician who had gone to receive the actor. “They kept saying, ‘Bloom is an actor, so he is doing drama.’”Officials refused to provide Bloom with a 72-hour temporary landing permit that would have allowed him to visit Agra.Singh added: “But Bloom is so humble and down-to-earth … Even though he was being deported from India, he readily agreed to fly back from Heathrow the same day if I succeeded in arranging his visa. No Bollywood star would’ve done that.”While the actor, whose mother was born in India, waited at Heathrow, Singh asked the Indian foreign minister, Sushma Swaraj, to get the Indian high commission in London to open its visa section and provide him with the document. With TV news cameras in tow, Bloom finally went to Agra with Singh on Sunday on a whirlwind, 45-minute tour. “At the end of his visit, he moved away from the group and sat by himself cross-legged in front of the 17th-century marble monument, eyes closed, chanting a prayer,” said a Taj Mahal official. Tourism officials have been hoping that a decline in the popularity of the Taj Mahal during the last three years could be turned around by celebrity visits such as Bloom’s.Though the Taj Mahal remains India’s most-visited monument, the number of tourists coming to the site has declined sharply by 150,000 during the last three years. Last year only 640,000 tourists turned up. However, the introduction of e-visas has proved popular with tourists, especially in the UK. Nearly a quarter of the more than 340,000 e-visas issued by India this year have gone to British tourists.