Last weekend, it was reported that India had denied a visa to Rebiya Kadeer, the ostensible leader in exile of China's minority Uighur community, who China accuses of masterminding recent unrest in its western province of Xinjiang. Many Indian strategists applauded the decision – only for the Uighur Human Rights Project to later deny the reports. New Delhi, the strategists argued, had little to gain from riling Beijing and even less to gain from adding to Kadeer's travel itinerary, a global junket aimed at building sympathy for the plight of the Uighurs. The Turkic, predominantly Muslim Uighurs made headlines this summer after riots and state repression shook Xinjiang. India's interests, some say, would be best served by staying out of the mess altogether.After all, a visit from Kadeer would, it seems, only cause grief for her would-be hosts. Her impending attendance at the Melbourne International Film Festival in Australia prompted Chinese directors to withdraw their films and Chinese hackers to attack the festival's website. In a furious diplomatic spat, Beijing slammed Japan's decision to grant her a visa. And Chinese officials threatened Ankara over the Turkish prime minister's promise to allow Kadeer into Turkey.This certainly isn't the first (nor will it be the last) time a state has put pressure on other countries to curtail the movement of controversial individuals. But what we should find distressing is the extent to which countries have allowed their own affairs to be dictated by China's propaganda campaign. Kadeer is supported by American money, but she is not a "terrorist" (as China insists on dubbing her and her allies), nor is she capable of orchestrating the unrest in Xinjiang (as China claims she did). Instead, China has turned this woman – who I had the pleasure of meeting briefly when she visited openDemocracy's offices a few years ago – into a straw-man, directing domestic outrage against her while distracting attention from the real anger, real frustration and real grievances of the Uighurs.Indians should feel disappointed by the idea that their country would placate China's officials and legions of "netizens". In so many ways, India is strikingly different from its fellow Asian giant. India is a democracy, bubbling with debate and dissent. It is a truly plural country, uniting dozens of languages, thousands of dialects, numerous religions and ethnicities. It is no stranger to ethnic violence and secessionism, but it has managed to accommodate most of these outbreaks through the democratic process and under the wide roof of Indian identity. No Indian leader could now speak as Chinese president Hu Jintao did yesterday when, in archaic terms, he called for the "revival of the great Chinese race".But like China, India has settled upon a more functional vision of foreign policy in the 21st century. In the wake of the cold war and the stumbles of American power, both New Delhi and Beijing believe in building a "multipolar world order", in which many more countries can be stakeholders in an international system defined by negotiation and respect of national sovereignty. Such a system may be more global and representative, but it provides little scope for any kind of judgment and policy beyond the strategic.Fifty years ago, India welcomed the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan leadership as they fled the guns and tanks of the Chinese army. Up to the 1990s, India supported Aung San Suu Kyi's democratic movement in Chinese-backed Burma, when western governments had little interest in her struggle (let's not forget that the west also had – and continues to have – a great predilection for expedient, morally blind foreign policy). Indian policymakers remember that these decisions had real strategic consequences, including a disastrous war with China in 1962 and the loss of influence on its eastern border. For India to deny Kadeer a visa would stem from a more cautious political calculus. But would also suggests that India accepts the rules of Chinese geopolitics: power – never ideals – is the ultimate arbiter of action and compromise.