One of the highlights of my job working at Tara Books - a small publisher in Chennai, India - is meeting children who drop by to browse through our books. Chatting to three sisters (aged eight, 10 and 12) last week, the conversation turned to their most beloved characters: Hermione Granger, Charlie (of Chocolate Factory fame), Dick King Smith's Sophie, Violet Baudelaire from A Series of Unfortunate Events, Darrell from the Mallory Towers books, and the cartoon characters Calvin and Hobbes.What struck me about this list (apart from its western bias) was how varied the characters were: a mixture of male and female, heroic and flawed, traditional and unconventional. Very uplifting, especially in light of a recent study showing that male 'central' characters significantly outnumber females in children's books."I hadn't really considered the sex of characters in the books that the girls read," their mother told me, "but thinking about it now I guess that they look for their own role models, and are drawn naturally to characters with qualities they admire."Being part of a feminist publishing house in India, I've had the chance to think a lot about the role of gender in children's books, and its significance in this part of the world. Stories that appear in the media about Indian women are often very negative, with the themes of forced marriage, the killing of unwanted female children, and low levels of female literacy coming up again and again. These are all very real issues, but they're not the whole story.On a day-to-day basis it's the more mundane signs of inequality that I notice. Walk down the street and tens of motorbikes will whizz past you, almost always driven by men, and more often than not with a woman perched side-saddle on the back. Eat in a local restaurant and you would be hard-pushed to find a female waiter, but go eat in someone's home, and it's a different story. It would be pretty unusual for the lady of the house to sit down and eat with you. She'll be in the kitchen putting the final touches to the next dish, or busy serving the food.And yet, the picture is even more complicated than this. This is a society in which women ARE visible in the workforce – from construction workers to engineers, doctors to street-side coconut sellers. However, in the words of my male colleague: "Very, very few Indian men help with household chores. It is just not seen as their role, and this doesn't change if the wife has a job outside the home." This is exactly why it's so important that books show different possibilities to children growing up in India: female autorickshaw drivers, fathers who happily spend time in the kitchen preparing dinner, young girls who are not prepared to embody society's expectations of sensitivity and gentleness.One of my favourite Indian "heroines" is Jaya – the central character in Tara's book Trash, which tells the story of a group of ragpicker children living in Chennai. Enterprising, intelligent and brave, Jaya takes care of Velu, a young boy who arrives in the city having run away from his village. It is Jaya who finds Velu food, shows him how to work as a ragpicker, and protects him against adults looking to exploit him."Jaya showed me ways I could help other children and the environment" says Muskan, a nine-year-old who goes to a school for underprivileged children in Mumbai. Neya, whose family live in a more comfortable suburb of Chennai, says: "I'd like to have a friend like Jaya. She looks after Velu and understands how things work. I don't know anyone just like her, but my sister Maya says that I'm similar to her! I like that idea." These seemingly small adjustments in perception and expectation have the potential to bring about real change in the future. Literature may not have all the solutions, but a change in who tells the story, and from which point of view, can alter the way people think.Above all, the strength of literature lies in its subtlety – it doesn't need to preach, and I have never encountered any resistance to the unconventional characters who appear in our books, even from the most conservative of quarters. At the end of the day what we do is simple and hard to object to. We publish books with characters that demonstrate that people are not defined by whether they happen to be a boy or a girl. And for every child or parent who takes that message on board – whether consciously or unconsciously – we've won a small victory.