When the Times of India broke the story that it had bought Virgin Radio for £53m last weekend, it marked the first foreign takeover by an Indian media company. The paper's headline read: "Voice of India will now be heard all over London."The world's largest-circulation newspaper was founded to support the Raj's interest in western India 170 years ago, and the old lady of Boribunder has revelled in the role of reverse colonialist.Bennett Coleman, India's biggest media company and proprietors of the Times of India, will now own one of Britain's three commercial radio licences and serve 2.7 million listeners and another 600,000 unique users through its website. The Virgin name will disappear, because Virgin Radio in India is a partner with a rival of Times of India's radio stations.The rise and fall of Virgin Radio, bought in 2000 for £225m by Scottish Media Group and sold for less than a quarter of that sum, could be seen as a sign of things to come. Thanks to the internet, the traditional western media business model - selling news and entertainment to audiences, and then selling audiences to advertisers - is falling apart, just as the current economic slowdown is making things worse. Cherry-pick assetsAll this comes at a time when media companies in the developing world, where internet penetration is low, are seeing bottom lines bulge as their audiences grow.India is now the second largest newspaper market in the world with 99m copies sold daily - and newspaper sales grew by 11% last year. Not only "dead tree" media benefit from the rising tide of literacy and wealth. According to PricewaterhouseCoopers, TV and radio advertising in the country will grow by more than 20% for the next five years.Sitting on top of this mountain of cash in India is Bennett Coleman, a family-owned company where the proprietors like profiles to be kept low and profits to be kept high. The group sells more than 6m newspapers a day - a figure that includes local language editions and the country's biggest business paper, the salmon-pink Economic Times. It has two television channels - including a rolling news network backed by £10m from Reuters. Times Group also owns 32 radio stations in India, a string of profitable websites, a PR company and an outdoor advertising company, which Goldman Sachs and Lehman brothers together paid $25m each for a 8% stake.Indicating Bennett Coleman's global ambitions, its managing director, 41-year-old Vineet Jain, said last week it would "aggressively [grow] in India and cherry-pick assets and brands around the world".Ravi Dhariwal, Bennett Coleman's chief executive, says he is an admirer of "the Financial Times and the Economist". "American newspapers have not innovated," he adds. "That is why they are losing readers. They just get heavier and lose relevance with younger people. The quality market in England is still healthy but newspapers have to be good value, a low price. You know the FT is a couple of bucks." When asked if Times Group might consider buying the Financial Times, he says he will say "nothing more".Bennett Coleman's dominance can be attributed to one man: 53-year-old Samir, the vice chairman and Vineet's elder brother. Low-key and unassuming, Samir rarely gives interviews to the mainstream media. The Jain family are Marwaris, a community known for their business sense and spirituality. Samir and Vineet's mother Induja chairs the group. When Forbes magazine listed the family matriarch on its 2006 list of the wealthy as the 15th richest person in India, she sued the magazine on grounds of privacy. Samir Jain is a vegetarian who doesn't drink or smoke, and a fitness fanatic who has no interest in politics or Bollywood, often slipping out of newspaper parties unnoticed. Plucked from running the family's ailing jute division, he considers news a business. In the early 90s, Samir Jain began to market the Times aggressively, first by cutting the cover price and then once circulation ballooned by sharply raising advertising rates. He shut down venerable but unprofitable magazines, and introduced new supplements filled with celebrity gossip. Samir had little time for journalistic egos. The editor of the newspaper, once a grand figure, is now virtually anonymous.While critics accused the Jains of "dumbing down" content, readers flocked to the new paper. The Times' circulation has shot past 2.5m, up from half a million a couple of decades ago. In the latest year for which figures are available, ending March 2007, Bennett Coleman's profit before tax was 6.45bn rupees (£80m) on revenues of 28.5bn rupees.Product placement"Times Group spent a lot of time building brands that capture the attention of the young reader. That's important when half the population is under 25," says Vanita Kohli-Khandekar, author of The Indian Media Business.In its glossy supplements the paper's editorial space is sold to advertisers, leaving it unclear to an unfamiliar reader whether the content is paid-for advertorial or not. Bennett Coleman says there are no ethical issues as it is not "news editorial space" that is being filled. "It is not marked as an advert but it is clearly an advertising supplement only for lifestyle coverage," says chief executive Dhariwal.In 2004, the paper took a step further when it began accepting payments for advertisements in the form of shares in the advertiser's firm. It now has 120 such "private treaties", which lock out rivals from seeking ad revenue.The firm's executives insist that neither its own shareholdings nor its advertisers influence its coverage. But articles in Times publications rarely reveal the paper's shareholding interests. This practice, say critics, is a conflict of interest."With the price wars, papers are cheap. The Times of India, for example, costs just 2.50 rupees. So you are heavily dependent upon advertisers," says Pradyuman Maheshwari, a journalist who started a media blog but shut it down after receiving legal notices from Bennett Coleman.However, Times executives dismiss such talk as motivated by "envy". Dariwal says that "editorial works hand in hand with the advertising department to understand readers. We have stakes in companies because we have a fundamental belief in India's success. The idea we would not write something because we owned a slice of a company is nonsense. As shareholders we would want to know if something is wrong and would encourage reporters to write about it."