Sometimes romance is a quiet connection rather than an intense declaration… which is why the most romantic moment in my life was on the night train from Varanasi to Delhi, when Christopher and I were barely even speaking.It was no one's fault, our six weeks' travelling around India had been astonishing: we moved open-mouthed from grand palaces to colourful markets, past adorable kids in neat school uniforms, to people living – quite literally – in holes in the wall. But now our senses were saturated and our wonder worn to a nub: we quietly shuffled on to the night train and into our bunks, barely exchanging a word.I don't know about Chris, but I was asleep in seconds – and the second-class sleeper compartment on an Indian train is not a quiet place. Snores of every pitch rang back and forth among the bunks like grunting finalists at Wimbledon; children woke, startled, as the train lurched along the tracks; mothers sleepily sang snatches of unfamiliar songs.I woke at dawn when the train stopped briefly at a small station in Shikohabad Junction, 65km east of Agra, and small boys flooded on to the train, lugging huge silver kettles. Chris was obviously awake, too: he climbed into my bunk nursing two glasses of chai – the hot spicy tea made with condensed milk which would be undrinkable anywhere else, but on an Indian train at dawn is nothing short of ambrosial.Road weary and grubby and sleep-deprived, Chris and I quietly sipped our tea, looking out the window at the gathering dawn light. It revealed a quiet India: ordinary people going about their everyday lives on the Great Plains, the flat fertile lands irrigated by the Ganges and its tributaries. The train slowed as we passed a small boy driving bison through the watery rice paddies with lazy flicks of a stick. The sun grew higher, caught in distant rivers which snaked like burnished copper into the horizon. It was almost celestial in its beauty.Without speaking, Chris took my hand and squeezed it. We could have slept through to Delhi – kept our energy for the last push of big sightseeing blockbusters. But instead we'd found and shared this quiet moment of light and simplicity. It felt like a gift.Jennifer Cox is the author of Around the World in 80 Dates (£7.99, Arrow). The overnight train from Varanasi to Delhi costs £13 one way (www.irctc.co.in). Emirates (www.emirates.com) flies from Heathrow to Varanasi from £608. Ffestiniog Travel (01766 772 030; www.festtravel.co.uk) has a six-night package from £1,150, including flights from Heathrow, three nights each in Varanasi and Delhi, and the train journey from Varanasi to Delhi in a first-class sleeper. For details go to www.incredibleindia.org