Life is an uphill struggle for the enormous population of people living with HIV in India. We cannot look at HIV in isolation, as it is so closely related to poverty. More than 300 million people, about one in four Indians, live below the poverty line. A vast population live in abject poverty on less than $1 per day.Progress has certainly been made for people living with HIV, as the government now provides free antiretroviral treatment. But people living with HIV also need food, acceptance, care, good mental health and opportunities. But too often they are marginalised and very poor, lacking the basic ingredients needed to lift themselves out of their situation.I believe the present socio-political-economic environment is the biggest challenge for people living with HIV in India. Corruption and a lack of accountability have pushed people with HIV to the fringes of our society. This leaves a handful of faithful NGOs and individuals reaching out to millions of people.Walk with me through the streets and slums of Mumbai and I will show you people living with HIV and Aids who are suffering silently, not knowing where their next meal will come from or whether they will get a decent funeral. People in India are not dying of Aids, they are dying of hunger, stigma and rejection.India has been combating HIV for more than two decades now and has done well in improving the number of people accessing treatment. In many ways the government, with much support from NGOs, has achieved a slowdown in the spread of HIV. Also, fewer people are dying each year from Aids-related illnesses. But the challenge remains enormous.From my experience, I know that people living in utter poverty on the margins of the society, those most vulnerable to HIV, are not just statistics. They are people, valued human beings, and it is important that we treat them as such. They have opinions and beliefs that should be valued.No one wants to live with HIV. No one chooses to be discriminated against or ostracised by their society. If people are valued, then I believe there will be access to drugs, to quality care and the comfort they need. Compassionate work without valuing others is a mere framework with no substance. Valuing others will make every other task seem effortless.