Visitors to Bangalore arrive at a modern airport and take the new highway down into the city. They see the buildings they expect in India's IT capital. Those of us who live here enjoy finding corners where we can remember Bangalore's past. There are statues of ancient chieftains, and stones by the side of the road commemorate their heroism in a forgotten form of the current language. There are colonial buildings and beautiful private gardens from the time this was a garden city, "the pensioners' paradise".Our neighbourhood is special because it has a small piece of Bangalore's future, and most of us are not sure what to do about it. Our estate is fairly new – we are still shown as a coconut grove on the city map – but built in traditional style. Houses are two or three storeys with stairs outside. Typically the landlord lives on the ground floor and tenants on the floors above.We buy our vegetables from a barrow, groceries from the little kiosk-like shops on every corner. The rich and well-organised order their rice and flour in large sacks, and keep them in locked storerooms.The new supermarket, very much part of modern Bangalore, does not fit our neighbourhood. It is serving puzzled people. In the morning I go for wholemeal bread and sterilised milk, which the corner shops don't stock. Morning is when the maids come to buy breakfast supplies, and they wander the aisles looking for a old-style counter where they can just ask for what they need.When I go in the evening, housewives in saris have come to make bigger purchases. They would like to bargain. They expect the manager to chat to solid customers such as themselves. But this supermarket is part of a chain, and managers have been trained to behave in a new and different way. The ladies in saris are affronted.I felt sad at their discomfort but yesterday, I saw a different sight when I went for my milk. Four young Muslim women, completely covered except for intelligent eyes, had invaded. They divided the aisles between them, doing a quick inventory, and then darting to the checkout: "Where was this? Why didn't the market stock that? When would the next shipment arrive?" Then they darted off to the shelves again, making the place their own. Very soon this store will be a part of our neighbourhood.