Russia has denied cruise missiles fired at Syrian targets from a warship in the Caspian sea fell short of their target and landed in Iran.Anonymous US sources claimed on Thursday that four of 26 missiles had landed in a rural part of the country although it was unclear exactly where. Northern Iran and Iraq are on the 900-mile (1,450km) flight path to Syria.Russia claimed that all 26 missiles fired from the warship hit their targets in north and north-west Syria. A Facebook post by the Russian defence ministry, reacting to the claims from US sources, said: “No matter how unpleasant and unexpected it is for our colleagues in the Pentagon and Langley, our strike yesterday with precision-guided weapons at Isis infrastructure in Syria hit its targets.”Iran’s semi-official Fars news agency also said the Iranian defence ministry had rejected the reports, claiming they were part of the west’s “psychological warfare”.Pentagon and State Department officials refused to comment on the reports.Russia and Iran both back the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, who is fighting a four-year civil war against rebel groups, some of whom have received US training and are backed by Sunni Arab states including Saudi Arabia. The US and its allies are also conducting airstrikes against Isis, which has fought both the Assad regime and opposition groups. Related: Who backs whom in the Syrian conflict The French defence minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, on Friday said France had launched a new airstrike at an Isis training camp in Syria. “France hit Daesh [Isis] in Syria last night in Raqqa ... It is not the first time, nor will it be the last time,” he told Europe 1 radio. “French Rafale jets delivered bombs on this training camp and the targets were met.”Military activity in the area has been monitored by the US military and intelligence services, which have concluded that four missiles failed to reach Syria, instead landing in Iran, according to reports by Reuters and the New York Times.The missiles would have passed over Iran and Iraq to reach their targets. The terrain-hugging Kalibr-NK cruise missiles, known by Nato by the codename Sizzler, fly at an altitude of 50 metres and are claimed by the Russian defence ministry to be accurate to within three metres. Syrian state television on Wednesday quoted a military source as saying the missiles targeted 11 Isis positions in Raqqa, Aleppo and Idlib.Russia’s air campaign in Syria has caught the US and its allies on the back foot and alarmed Syria’s northern neighbour Turkey, which says its airspace has been repeatedly violated by Russian jets.The US secretary of state, John Kerry, had a 30-minute telephone call with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, on Thursday to express concern that Russia’s targets in Syria were not related to Isis.“The secretary repeated our concerns about the preponderance of targets that are being struck by Russian military forces that are not Isil-related,” said a spokesman, John Kirby, using an alternative acronym for Isis.There were “no tactical-level decisions” made during the call, Kirby added. He also said he could not confirm reports that Russian missiles had crashed in Iran. “I can’t confirm it but I think it points all the more towards the need to have proper deconfliction procedures in place,” he said.Russian jets and warships have been bombarding targets across Syria for 10 days in a campaign Moscow says is aimed at the Isis fighters who control large parts of north and east Syria, as well as swathes of neighbouring Iraq. But many Russian strikes have taken place in areas of western Syria held by other insurgent groups, and western leaders have accused Russia of intervening primarily to support Assad. The UK-based Syria Observatory for Human Rights on Friday said Isis had captured several Syrian villages from rival insurgents near Aleppo. Rami Abdulrahman, the head of the group, said the advance marked Isis’s biggest gains in the area since late August and brought them to just over a mile from a government-held industrial zone. Ashton Carter, the US defence secretary, predicted earlier that Russia would suffer casualties “within the coming days” as it deepened its military involvement in Syria.Carter said Moscow would soon start paying the price for its escalating military intervention in Syria in the form of reprisal attacks and casualties.He was talking at a meeting of Nato defence ministers in Brussels on Thursday, during which the ministers agreed to increase a Nato response force intended to move quickly to flashpoints.There were no plans to deploy the force to Turkey, though the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, suggested its existence alone should discourage future Russian or Syrian incursions into Turkish territory.“We don’t have to deploy the Nato response force or the spearhead force to deliver deterrence,” Stoltenberg said. “The important thing is that any adversary of Nato will know that we are able to deploy.”There have been signs that Saudi Arabia and its Gulf allies are preparing to counter the Russian attack. Stoltenberg said the military alliance was ready to defend Turkey against threats after violations of its airspace by Russian jets conducting the airstrikes against Syria. 