Yesterday Iran and the five permanent members of the United Nations plus Germany met for the first time in 13 months in Geneva. As usual, the noises off the stage threatened to drown the proceedings out before they had begun. The first batch of WikiLeaks exposures revealed that Saudia Arabia had repeatedly urged the US to bomb Iran's nuclear facilities. Last week an Iranian nuclear scientist was assassinated and another wounded in a bomb attack, which Iran's foreign minister, Manouchehr Mottaki, linked to UN security council resolutions against Iranian scientists. He said the resolutions provided cover to terrorist groups to carry out assassinations under the direction of foreign spy services.Then Iran announced it was using locally mined uranium in its fuel cycle. As it already has enough uranium to continue enrichment, and could not mine enough yellowcake feedstock to service an industrial reactor anyway, the announcement was symbolic. But the message was not – Iran will not be deterred from pursuing its civilian nuclear programme.Both sides are stuck in a rut of proving to the other that their policies are prevailing, and that they are in a stronger position than they were 13 months ago. But neither has seriously begun negotiating. It is time to learn from past mistakes. And, in this respect, it is interesting to hear what the Iranians who have a stake in regime change have to say about dealing with Iran's government. The opposition Green movement says that sanctions are not only hitting the wrong people, but also stopping Iran's development in a way that takes the heat off President Mahmoud Ahmadeinejad's own economic incompetence. Bitter as they are about what happened to their candidates and voters before and after the election last year, they too say that Iran has to be engaged with. They distinguish, in other words, between a president they call illegitimate and a man who remains the de facto head of the government.The idea that sanctions are going to force Iran to stop uranium enrichment, which it has already voluntarily done once and got nothing in return, is wishful thinking. Talking not just to official negotiators but to all the centres of power in Iran, as Turkish and Brazilian diplomats did to get a fuel-swap deal, would be more effective. The nuclear issue should also not hold the whole negotiation process hostage. The choice is not between talking and bombing. It is between short-term tactics and long-term strategy. Reversing 30 years of hostility between the Islamic Republic and US is not going to happen overnight. And establishing a continuing dialogue, at all levels, is the only way to do it.