10.02pm: Mousavi today kept up the pressure on the government and blamed those behind the "rigged" presidential election for the bloodshed during two weeks of mass street protests, the Guardian's Robert Tait and Ian Black write in our latest dispatch.8.05pm: Some news from state-run Press TV.Mousavi aide Abolfazl Fateh, who studies in the UK, has been banned from leaving the country "until he elaborates on aspects pertinent to the recent post-election unrest."A top cleric calls for a "national conciliation", though his words as reported by Press TV indicate whom he blames for the problems.Minister of Science, Research and Technology Mohammad Mehdi Zahedi says a fact-finding commission will identify and punish the vigilantes who viciously attacked a number of Iranian universities last weekend. The story also says the regime deployed 10,000 security officers to keep the peace during today's university entrance exams.7.52pm: BBC scores an interview with the doctor who tried to save Neda Agha-Soltan's life Saturday.Some news:Dr Hejazi said he first thought the gunshot had come from a rooftop.But later he saw protesters grab an armed man on a motorcycle."People shouted 'we got him, we got him'. They disarmed him and took out his identity card which showed he was a Basij member. People were furious and he was shouting, 'I didn't want to kill her'."People didn't know what do to do with him so they let him go. But they took his identity card. There are people there who know who he is. Some people were also taking photos of him." 7.47pm: This video purports to be taken of yesterday's classes in Baharestan Square. The footage is blurry and it is hard to figure out what is going on. It looks like shifting lines between police and protesters, with one protester who was carrying a green banner and got too close being snagged and beaten by police.6.37pm: This video clip shows the devastation security forces wrought on what looks like a quiet street in Tehran. Youtube commentors offer these translations:Basically: last night several man in military uniforms with arabic accents attacked this building and several others in the same street. They broke the door, and made their way into the building all the way to the rooftop, and broke the a/c units, throwing some of them to the street. They also broke the cars in the street.'Did you call the police to report?"'No, the police are the ones who did it."'Is there anything else you would like to say?'No there is nothing else. We need to be armed to defend our selves."6.23pm: The Guardian's Middle East Editor Ian Black looks at the Arab world's reaction to the unrest in Iran. He writes:Arabs – governments and people – are reacting to Iran's post-election turbulence with mixed feelings, impressed by a display of regime-shaking people power, alert to the perception of western double standards or meddling, but above all pondering the repercussions of the crackdown in Tehran.6.18pm: A reliable twitterer says that a group of mourners went to Neda Agha-Soltan's grave today but were turned back by security forces, who consisted of the usual mix of riot police, plain clothes cops and basiji militiamen. The twitter says they detained people who were carrying green signs or refused an order to disperse.6.12pm: Our video production team knit together this montage of amateur footage from yesterday's protests.6.08pm: An anonymous (and thus inauthenticated) voice inside Iran sends this missive to the international community, especially the international media. The writer says the Iranian people are weak, tired and scared, and are struggling to keep their spirits up. The writer also says the chief of the Tehran police refused orders to surpress demonstrators. Some excerpts:Please tell your governments that if they are seen as interfering or supporting our actions - then we have lost! I believe that if we can receive covert resources and support without prompting action by the regime, our enemy will be severely suppressed. Today we heard from sources outside of Iran that we can not win. Those who are saying this in the media please notice: You must also mention the success of the results thus far. For the sake of the spirit of our demonstrators, you must mention that we are making great strides. Your words have the power of giving energy to our cause.People are afraid to demonstrate without money or resources. Many are afraid that a general strike will drain bank accounts and thus cripple our efforts. Please be cautious when calling for demonstrators to remove money from banks, stop shopping and work. While it is effective for us to use these measures, please be cautious and regard that we are making necessary plans within our groups. The Iran television news is showing pictures that have been collected off websites of the demonstrators, and they are asking viewers to send in informative leads to who the face belongs to and where they live. Recently many have blanked out the face of the demonstrators before uploading our pictures. That is a great help to our cause.5.38pm: Our correspondent in Tehran says the country was calm today relative to the unrest of this week and last because there is a very large entrance exam today for the country's public universities. One and a half million students participated, he said.Meanwhile, the correspondent says credible rumours continue to fly that the government has brought in Arabs to bolster the security forces. Yesterday on this blog we posted an interview with a young volunteer militiaman who said the regime had brought in volunteers from Lebanon, where Iran has ties to the Islamist Hezbollah movement.5.22pm: The British Parliamentary Committee for Iran Freedom, headed by Lord Corbett of Castle Vale, releases this statement:We stand alongside those Iranians bravely defying the fundamentalist mullahs who have stolen their freedom. Their chants of "Down with the dictator" and "Down with Khamenei" reflect their demand for regime change and establishment of democracy instead of theocracy. Our sympathies are with the families of those savagely killed, injured or arrested by the suppressive Revolutionary Guards which is trying to put down this nationwide uprising. Some 200 people are reported murdered. Iran is ripe for democratic change and it is up to its people and their Resistance to bring this about. We urge the UK government and the UN Security Council to: Pressure the regime to hold UN-supervised elections based on people's sovereignty and not the rule of the supreme religious leader.Suspend diplomatic and trade ties and impose a foreign travel ban on Iran's senior officials. Refer the crimes of Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to an international tribunal.4.58pm: This unconfirmed report out of a hospital in Tehran tells of protesters young and old killed in barrages of bullets. The writer says police were taking gunshot victims' corpses away by truck before their families could collect them.The page includes photos purported to be the medical staff protesting the violence outside the hospital.4.31pm: One of the leading European importers of Iranian caviar, Hague-based Persian Caviar, has decided to boycott the product, France Soir reports (in French)."I will not give any more money to a regime that is massacring my people," said Hossein Akef, the Iranian director of the company. Persian Caviar, which sells about €400,000-€450,000 in Iranian caviar a year, will continue to import the luxury food item from other Caspian Sea countries, "all of which are also good," Akef said.In addition to caviar, oil and other hydrocarbons, Iran is a major exporter of pistachios, spices, rugs and minerals. Its largest trading partners are China and Japan.4.01pm: Here find a PDF copy of Kalameh-ye Sabz, Mir Hossein Mousavi's newspaper. The headline reports the detention of 70 academics after a meeting with Mousavi yesterday. The cartoon reads: "It was your own fault!".3.53pm: A reliable twitterer says security forces, including soldiers, uniformed police and plainclothes militiamen, are massing in Daneshju (university student) Park, preparing to meet protesters at Vali-asr square.3.42pm: (Thanks Matthew. Daniel Nasaw in the Guardian's Washington bureau here. Please send tips, updates, news items and comments to daniel.nasaw@guardian.co.uk. Also you can follow me on twitter at danielnasaw.)3.30pm: All but four of those 70 academics arrested last night have been released, according to a reliable source of Human Rights Watch.(After liveblogging Iran for 11 of the last 12 days that's it from me for a few days. Thanks for all your comments, corrections, tip-offs and translations. Please keep them coming. Once again Daniel Nasaw in Washington is about to take over.)3pm:Dealing with flies in TV interviews: While Obama cooly swats them away, Ahmadinejad has to do his up.UPDATE: A reader sends a translation of what sounds like the run-up to a very friendly interview. The reader says the interviewer uses a curious verb 'bebandim', which the reader says, "doesn't mean 'discussing' an actual conversation, it means 'making up a conversation.'"Ahmadinejad: I am good, thanks. How are you?Interviewer: How are you sir? I hope you are well. Thanks for asking. Doctor, [should we] only make up conversation about economic issues?Ahmadinejad: You could ask political questions too, global issues generally.Interviewer: Yes, definitely...Barack Obama has arrived (he probably means news of Barack Obama)Ahmadinejad: No, I've talked about that before. (zipping his pants)Interviewer: Yes. ok. What specificaly do you want? Should we be specific about middle east regional issues.Ahmadinejad: Generally yes...[Ask things like] which way is the direction of the world going towards.Interviewer: uhum.2.45pm: At least two people from among the hundreds of people arrested have been released. A reliable Twitter user says Alireza Beheshti, editor in chief of Mousavi's newspaper Kalameh and Ayatollah Beheshti's son have been released. And one of the photographers for the citizen journalist group Demotix has also been freed. As a new blogpost from Demotix notes: "It's too early to tell if this is an example of a relaxation of press restrictions in Iran or if, as seems more likely, this particular photographer was fortunate."2.15pm: The US academics Flynt Leverett and Hillary Mann Leverett, who claim that Ahmadinejad won, have published a provocative article with Seyed Mohammad Marandi, in which they warn of the perils "ill-informed" commentary on Iran.While the protests are subsiding, days of round-the-clock, ill-informed commentary in the United States have helped to "sell" several dangerously misleading myths about Iranian politics. Left unchallenged, these myths will inexorably drive America's Iran policy toward "regime change" — just as unchallenged myths about Saddam Hussein's pursuit of nuclear weapons and ties to al-Qaida paved the way for America's invasion of Iraq in 2003. 2.02pm: Robert Tait says Mousavi is increasingly defiant and sends more of his quotes.In a second statement on his website, the defeated presidential candidate insists he will not step back and will not be "driven from the scene". He declares: "I am ready to show how the electoral wrong-doers, standing beside the main agitators that have caused the present disturbances, have spilled people's blood. I would not, for the sake of personal expediency and fear in the face of threats, withdraw for one moment my demands for the return of the rights of the Iranian people, whose blood is being unjustly spilled today."He added: "(The people's) problem is with millions of votes whose fate is unknown." Calling for people to keep calm while resisting, he goes on: "It is a must for us to neutralise this evil conspiracy through our behaviour and expressions."He traced the current violence to a failure of the authorities to punish security forces and vigilantes who had brutally suppressed student protesters at Tehran university halls of residence in 1999. "If those behind the crimes of the dormitory incident had been dealt with through proper criminal proceedings, we would not have witnessed the repetition of those incidents on a bigger scale and such an audacious inversion of the truth. They are ignorant. They don't know that such ploys, whose nature is clear to all, will not drive Mousavi from the scene." 1.47pm: The New York Times has an interesting piece on the Arab reaction to the Iran crisis. The gist of the article is that Arab states, which are mostly Sunni, have never liked Shia Iran, so they don't mind seeing Iran weakened.One gauge of how Arab leaders are reacting to the Iran crisis is their silence. Officials seem eager to avoid even the appearance that they are trying to influence the outcome, political analysts said. The state-controlled media outlets around the region have also been relatively low key in their coverage."When you are waiting so much for something that makes you happy, you hold your breath, you make less noise in order not to affect the outcome," said Randa Habib, a political analyst and columnist in Amman, Jordan1.25pm: Reuters has more quotes from Mousavi, who seems in no mood to capitulate."A major rigging has happened. I am prepared to prove that those behind the rigging are responsible for the bloodshed."1pm: Today's rally was supposed to have started 30 minutes ago, but there have been no reports of gatherings and/or clashes from Twitter users we have been relying on in the last few days. Mehdi Karroubi, one of the defeated presidential candidates, called off a rally to mourn those killed, according to al-Jazeera."It is very unfortunate that in this situation, even political leaders such as Karroubi are not given a site to hold a mourning ceremony," Karroubi's party website said.12.30pm: There are several Twitter messages urging citizens journalists in Iran to video copies of daily newspapers to help authenticate the date of what they film. That is easier said than done given how chaotic the scenes have been.But it highlights a growing problem on the coverage of this crisis. The media keeps being sent footage claiming to be recent when it turns out to have been filmed several days before. Someone from the BBC Newsnight programme emailed earlier this morning to say that we had posted an old video yesterday, so we took it down. The BBC was also showing footage yesterday that we were told was filmed on Saturday. It's a tricky problem and getting trickier everyday as more videos get made and uploaded. Please continue to help us verify the dates of films and reports of incidents.12pm: Iran faces a "crisis of legitimacy", Mousavi told a meeting today of Iranian sociologists, writes Robert Tait.At the meeting he also openly criticised the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, for siding with Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in the controversy over this month's disputed election."The recent pressure on me is aimed at making me withdraw from my stance of annulling election," Mousavi was quoted as saying on his website, Kalemeh. "Given the current situation, the government will face a crisis of political legitimacy."Referring to Khamenei, he said: "The supreme leader's support for the government in normal conditions would be useful, but the impression of his identification with the president is not for the benefit of the country." 11.50am: "Today we are trying to protest in front of the university. We will not stop. We will continue. Nobody is for this regime. They want Khamenei to go," said Reza, a Tehran University graduate in a call to my colleague Mark Rice-Oxley.He also claimed that at least one woman was killed in yesterday's clashes.There were around 2,000 of us, though we were in separate groups because they made it difficult to gather in one place,We were attacked by Basij and Revolutionary Guards. There were helicopters. Some people were chased away by helicopters. They beat us and shot at us and wounded people. I know one woman was killed, though I heard that many more were killed because it wasn't just happening in Tehran but in other cities too.11.45am: Ahmadinejad has responded to Barack Obama's criticism of the violence used against proteters."Why has Mr Obama, who advocates change, been trapped and follows the same path as Bush," state TV quoted Ahmadinejad as saying, according to AP.11.35am: Mousavi is not backing down. "I insist on the nation's constitutional right to protest against the election result and its aftermath," he said in a statement, according to Reuters. He also criticised the raid on his newspaper. "I strongly criticise the closure of the Kalameh-ye Sabz daily and arrest of those who worked there. Such illegal behaviours (the closure of the newspaper) unfortunately will lead society to get information from foreign media," Mousavi's statement said.11.25am: There is gruesome account of police beatings from Behnaz, a student in Isfahan, on Lidovky, the website of the Czech daily Lidove noviny. Reader Andrew Gardner has sent through this translation of an email exchange between her and news editor Jan Nevyhosteny.LN: How are the Basij trying to suppress the unrest?Behnaz: They are beating demonstrators in a brutal fashion. They're hitting people with heavy staves, to the head and to the stomach. Some people have been beaten to death. They have no reservations about attacking children and old people. There's talk of a pregnant woman having been shot; she then gave birth on the street. Here in Isfahan, one person was first beaten and then thrown from a roof. I was at his funeral today [24 June]. His family can't talk about the circumstances of his death with anyone; they've been threatened. I'm convinced that many more such cases will surface overtime.LN: Is the regime applying pressure on the families of protesters?Behnaz: The regime is putting a lot of pressure on the families of demonstrators who've been detained and killed. When you see how they treat people on the streets, in front of everyone, what must they be doing to those who are in detention?LN: Were the elections manipulated, or were there only isolated instances of manipulation?Behnaz: If the elections had been perfectly in order, why would the government be so resistant to holding them again? They should, after all, produce the same result. Why, instead of that, do they prefer to kill so many innocent people on the streets?11.01am: There is an interesting line coming out from AP on Mousavi. His website says he is coming under pressure to withdraw his election challenge it says. One of the other defeated candidates Mohsen Rezai, was reported to have withdrawn his complaint about the election yesterday (although there is now some doubt about where Rezai stands - a Farsi speaking contact has emailed this link to BBC Persian service, which apparently says that Rezai has threatened to release document unless the guardian council withdraws the claim).The Guardian's former Tehran correspondent Robert Tait says there are suggestions that Mousavi is under house arrest. He says this is something that has been rumoured at various points during this crisis. It has resurfaced again this time in Goya News, which cites a "reliable source".11am: "There are signs the government is beginning to regain control," says the BBC's Jon Leyne (who was expelled from Tehran last weekend).Wednesday appears to have had the least protests of any day since the result was announced.But any idea that the opposition is about to go gently is probably an illusion.This is an argument within Iran about the future of the country. The two sides have deeply differing views on how Iran should be run, and its place in the world. And neither is about to give ground.10.39am: What of those green armband-wearing footballers? State media denies reports that they have been "retired". "No player has been banned and basically parliament is not authorized to impose such a ban," said Jalal Yahya-zade, the head of the parliament's sport committee, according to Press TV.10.20am: More on those reports of British arrests from my colleague Sam Jones.10.15am: Massoumeh Torfeh, an Iranian academic from London's School of Oriental and African Studies, and Ian Black, the Guardian's Middle East editor, discuss whether the protests now appear to be on the wane, and whether that means the government really has the upper hand.In this Comment is free Podcast they also examine the thinking behind the regime's allegations of foreign involvement in the demonstrations and consider likely developments over the coming days and weeks.10.10am: One of Mousavi's legal advisers has been arrested, according to an email from the international human rights group Human Rights Watch.Its emergencies director Peter Bouckaert writes:We can confirm that Professor Ardeshir Amid Arjmand, the head of the Human Rights Department at the Faculty of Law in ShahidBeheshtiUniversityin Tehran, and Mousavi's top legal advisor, was detained on the evening of Monday June 22, by four armed men who came to his home, searched it, and took him away. Our list of detainees now numbers 330, but most of those are known opposition figures and advisors, bloggers, journalists, and others who were directly targeted for detention from their homes or offices. Our list does not include the hundreds of ordinary protesters who have been detained since the protests started, so even by conservative estimates those detained now number in the thousands.Little is known about the whereabouts of those detained, and family members and lawyers have been unable to gain access to the detainees. But for those of your readers who want to better understand how the Iranian regime deals with their opponents, I recommend our 2004 report, Like the Dead in their Coffins: Torture, Detention, and the Crushing of Dissent in Iran. Not much has changed in Iran since we wrote that report, and there is little doubt that the current detainees are facing the same abuses, particularly long-time solitary, incommunicado confinement, beatings and torture, and severe pressure to make false confessions implicating senior reformist leaders in a western-backed plot to overthrow the government.9.55am: Signs of internal dissent? More than 100 MPs appear to have snubbed an invitation to celebrate Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's election win, according to the BBC.Robert Tait points out that the absentees included: Ali Larijani, the parliament speaker; his predecessor Gholam Ali Haddad-Adel, whose daugther is married to Ayatollah Ali Khamenei's son, Mojteba; the head of the research bureau, Ahmad Tavakoli; and Mohammad Reza Bohanar, the deputy speaker who was once a key Ahmadinejad ally.9.40am: Claims that Iran is restricting Iranian journalists from covering the protests are "sheer lies" asserts the deputy cultural minister, Ali-Reza Malekian, on the semi-official Fars News Agency."The ongoing developments are reflected by news outlets and news agencies but the difference between their news coverage and that of the foreign media is that the local media take the national interests into consideration but the foreign media don't care about our national interests," he said.Mousavi's own newspaper, Kalemeh Sabz, or the Green Word, was raided on Monday.9.30am: The opposition movement is changing tactics with plans to use smaller and more dispersed demonstrations to try to protect protesters, sources have told Eli Lake of the Washington Times.This chimes with remarks made by the Iranian expert Karim Sadjadpour at a panel discussion at the Carnegie Endowment for International.  You can watch the discussion on yesterday's blog (8.34pm).9.20am: More on Neda Agha-Soltan: Global Voices has a round-up of the songs, poems, websites and video tributes to Neda.8.40am: More on the crackdown on journalists: Iran's intelligence minister, Gholam-Hossein Mohseni-Ejei, is quoted by the Washington Post as saying: "Whoever, under any name or title, collects information in Iran will be arrested, and so far a foreign journalist has been arrested."He did not identify the journalist but as we reported on Tuesday (2pm) the reporter Iason Athanasiades has been detained. Athanasiadis, who has also filed copy for the Guardian during the crisis, disappeared last week. Yesterday the Canadian government demanded immediate access to the detained Canadian journalist Maziar Bahari.8.30am: The Revolutionary Guard commander, General Ali Fazli, has denied reports that he was sacked in the wake of the protests, according to state-funded Press TV. And in what sounds like blatant propaganda he claims that eight Basij militia have been killed in the unrest and 300 of them have been wounded "to protect the people of Tehran".8.10am: More than 130 academics including Noam Chomsky and Slavoj Zizek, have now signed a letter in support of the protests.It says:It is up to the people of Iran to determine their own political course. Foreign observers inspired by the courage of those demonstrating in Iran this past week are nevertheless entitled to point out that a government which claims to represent the will of its people can only do so if it respects the most basic preconditions for the determination of such a will: the freedom of the people to assemble, unhindered, as an inclusive collective force; the capacity of the people, without restrictions on debate or access to information, to deliberate, decide and implement a shared course of action.Years of foreign-sponsored 'democracy promotion' in various parts of the world have helped to spread a well-founded scepticism about civic movements which claim some sort of direct democratic legitimacy. But the principle itself remains as clear as ever: only the people themselves can determine the value of such claims. We the undersigned call on the government of Iran to take no action that might discourage such determination.7.50am: Seventy academics were arrested after meeting Mousavi, according to Kalemeh, a website affiliated with the opposition movement, as we reported last night.The professors were taken into custody after a meeting with Mousavi late last night. The report says it is not clear where the detainees were taken, according to AP.Robert Tait says they were members of of the Islamic Committee of University Lecturers.7.30am: These are the main developments overnight:•The Foreign Office is examining claims British passport holders have been detained in the unrest in Iran.•Former president Hashemi Rafsanjani and the opposition leader Mir Hossein Mousavi have met senior parliamentary figures to discuss the crisis. Rafsanjani was urged to end "post-election" tension.•An opposition rally to mourn those killed in the protests is expected to take place at 4pm (12.30BST) at Enghelab Square, scene of previous demonstrations and unrest.You can follow the events of previous days here:24 June: clashes in Bahareston Square23 June: Obama speaks out22 June: the martyrdom of Neda Agha-Soltan21 June: Iran in turmoil20 June: protesters defy Khamenei19 June: Khamenei's hardline speech18 June: mass mourning17 June: crackdown continues16 June: day of unrest15 June: aftermath of disputed results12 June: election day• This article was amended on 2 June 2011. The original said Neda Soltani was shot during a demonstration in Iran. That is the name of a different individual. This has been corrected.As there are so many restrictions on journalists in Iran it is difficult to get information, so if you are in Iran and have news, please email me at matthew.weaver@guardian.co.uk or post updates or interesting links in the comments section below.And if you have taken any pictures of the latest events in Iran, or know anyone who has, please send them to pictures@guardian.co.uk. Please provide as much information as you can about your pictures including what they show, and when and where they were taken. Thanks.