Almost as soon as the story broke that an Iranian nuclear scientist had been killed by a remote-controlled bomb, an attack which Iran blamed on its three arch-enemies – exiled royalists, the US and Israel – important elements of the narrative began to fall apart. According to opposition sources, the Tehran university professor Massoud Ali Mohammadi, an author of several articles on quantum physics, was working for Iran's nuclear defence programme, although this was denied by Iran's atomic agency.But it was less clear where the professor's real loyalties lay. The state broadcaster IRIB described him as committed and revolutionary, but his name appeared among those ­university teachers who supported the ­opposition ­candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi before the disputed election last year, and his students claimed yesterday that he had been active in ­helping them organise protests.So while Iran's foreign ministry was quick to suggest that the professor's death was the work of US and Israeli covert plans to delay Iran's nuclear programme, it is just as probable that his killing might have been arranged to stop further defections or to set the stage for an attack on the leaders of Iran's opposition movement. There has been a steady escalation of violence, as political protest has shown no signs of abating. The nephew of Mr Mousavi was shot during clashes during the Shia Muslim Ashura festival. Last week the car of the another defeated opposition candidate in the elections, Mehdi Karroubi, was hit by bullets. These are messages to desist, and if they are not heeded the next step would be to carry out the threat of assassination.If this threat is real, it should engender caution in Washington, particularly as the US president comes under pressure to impose another round of sanctions to back up his ultimatum to Iran to comply with a UN demand to halt production of nuclear fuel. The consensus is that domestic unrest and technical problems with the uranium enrichment programme have made the Revolutionary Guards which run it vulnerable to outside pressure. Problems with the centrifuges in Natanz and the exposure of a site under construction near Qom have given the US renewed confidence.But as the regime in Tehran loses its last vestige of legitimacy with its own people, it is important that international sanctions do not restore to the Iranian leadership its role as defender of the faith. The US must not play into the hands of an Iranian president keen to cast domestic opponents as foreign agents. The temptation in Washington is to think that it can influence events in Iran. It has in the past, but rarely, if ever, for the better.