So the UK is stepping up plans for possible missile attacks on Iran, apparently to help Washington (Report, 3 November), "because there is increasing concern about the possible existence in Iran of ... undisclosed nuclear-related activities". So no concerns about Israel escalating its nuclear capabilities, including extending the range of its Jericho III missiles and the size of its nuclear-tipped cruise missiles on the submarine fleet (Report, 31 October). Israel's nuclear-capable Dolphin submarines are sold to them by Germany. This skewed diplomacy and dangerous nuclear arms race in the Middle East will never bring peace.Rae StreetLittleborough, Lancashire• Britain must fully back the US in any pre-emptive military strike on Iran's nuclear capability. Israel has been repeatedly threatened by the unstable Iranian president. The nightmare of nuclear blackmail will soon arrive, with European cities within range of Tehran's atomic warheads. Iran's despotic rulers, who commit electoral fraud, won't hesitate to blackmail the west. The Iranian regime's nuclear threat must be dealt with post-haste.Dominic ShelmerdineLondon• Is not your exclusive an example of what is wrong with British journalism? It relies totally on anonymous sources and spokespeople from the MoD, Whitehall and "western intelligence". Do we really trust any of these vague sources? Is this a planted story as part of a sustained media campaign to put pressure on Iran?Stephen DorrilHolmfirth, West Yorkshire• It's entirely predictable that the US would start a new war over Iran. Iraq has been wound down and Afghanistan will come to an end soon. War is America's biggest business and, like any other business, constantly needs to expand into new markets.WH WhiteLondon • I read your front page in disbelief. The two countries which sponsored the coup in Iran in 1953, which then supported the corrupt dictatorship of the Shah, which recently started two unnecessary wars in Muslim countries, feel they have the political and moral high ground to attack Iran? Without supporting Iran, we have to try to understand how things look from their point of view. Steve SkaithBournemouth • "Evidence of nuclear programme mounts." I'm looking forward to reading the dossier.Gary ParkhurstNorwich• "When will they ever learn…"Mike WorthingtonHexham, Northumberland 