7.45am: Here are some of the main developments overnight:• Obama has condemned the crackdown as "unjust".•One of the defeated presidential candidates, the conservative Mohsen Rezai, has withdrawn his complaint about the election. He said the security situation was more important than the election. •The newspaper Kayhan has called for the arrest of the opposition leader Mir Hossein Mousavi (see our 11.21pm update last night).You can follow the events of previous days here:23 June: Obama speaks out22 June: the martyrdom of Neda Agha-Soltan21 June: Iran in turmoil20 June: protesters defy Khamenei19 June: Khamenei's hardline speech18 June: mass mourning17 June: crackdown continues16 June: day of unrest15 June: aftermath of disputed results12 June: election dayAs there are so many restrictions on journalists in Iran it is difficult to get information, so if you are in Iran and have news, please email me at matthew.weaver@guardian.co.uk or post updates or interesting links in the comments section below.And if you have taken any pictures of the latest events in Iran, or know anyone who has, please send them to pictures@guardian.co.uk. Please provide as much information as you can about your pictures including what they show, and when and where they were taken. Thanks.8am: Obama did something remarkable at his press conference yesterday - he snubbed the high-ups in the US press corps by taking his second question from Nico Pitney, who has been liveblogging the Iran crisis on the Huffington Post.Earlier on his blog Pitney had urged Iranians to suggest possible questions that he could put to Obama if he was asked.As the Guardian's tech correspondent Bobbie Johnson notes, the enquiry – about the conditions under which the US might accept an election result favouring Ahmadinejad – was fairly standard, but its source was not.The Guardian's Ewen MacAskill said that Obama risked accusations of siding with the Iranian opposition movement by taking Pitney's question. Pitney returned from the press conference to write:Feeling very grateful for all your submissions. I just returned from President Obama's press conference, where I was able to ask a question directly on behalf of an Iranian ...As I tried to say at the press conference, all of the Iranians who are communicating online do so at great risk. It was very courageous of them and I hope the question I ended up choosing did them some justice...Last night, after emailing with a few people about Obama's press conference and what he might say, I decided to throw it open to our readers. I received a call from White House staff saying they had seen what I'd written and thought the President might be interested in receiving a question directly from an Iranian...I ended up choosing the question I did because it was one of the consensus questions that many people had suggested.Other reporters at the press conference "looked at one another in amazement at the stagecraft they were witnessing," according to the Washington Post.8.25am: Tehran police claim they have raided the headquarters of the "post-election unrest" on Tehran's Haft-e-Tir Square. "The plotters have been arrested and are currently under investigation," state-funded Press TV said. New York-based Human Rights Watch claimed that a "notoriously abusive Iranian prosecutor, Saeed Mortazavi," has been put in charge of investigating the detained reformists. He has been implicated in past cases of "torture, illegal detention, and coercion of false confessions" it says.We are continuing to try to gather more information about all those who have been arrested. If you can help please email or post comments.8.40am: The conservative US thinktank, the American Enterprise Institute, is running an Iran Tracker to monitor the crisis. It is compiling a Google map of reported incidents of arrests, deaths and protests. It includes both corroborated and uncorroborated figures.It suggest there have been more than 1,000 arrests, and 184 deaths. But it adds this warning: "given the dynamic situation, however, these numbers should not be taken as authoritative, but as a representation of the overall trends."9.20am: A heavy police and army presence is shown in this video, claimed to have been made yesterday.Update: A Farsi-speaking reader emails with these comments on the video: At around 2 minutes the crowd chants "sepaahi sepaahi hemaayat hemaayat" to the soldiers, meaning thank you for for your support. Judging from the rather lush green vegetation and the limited dialogue that I hear, I would venture to guess that this video was shot in the region of the Caspian sea coast.UPDATE: Another Iranian reader has a different interpretation of the chant:It doesn't mean thank you for your support but, "please support us" or be on our side.9.35am: The Iranian foreign minister, Manouchehr Mottaki, said he had "no plans" to attend a G8 meeting in Italy this week. More evidence of rising tension with the west, says Reuters.As a possible counter-weight to his remarks on Iran, Obama has decided to send an ambassador to Iran's ally Syria, for the first time in four years, the New York Times reports.10.20am: Zahra Rahnavard, Mousavi's wife, has called for the protest to continue and for the detained protesters to be released. "I regret the arrest of many polititians and people and want their immediate release ... It is my duty to continue legal protests to preserve Iranian rights," Reuters quoted her saying.Rahnavard is emerging as a key figure in the opposition movement. There is planned rally tomorrow to mourn those who have died, and reports of more protest planned for today.A protest is planned today outside the offices of the guardian council after it refused to annul the election. It will take place at 4pm (12.30BST) according to al-Jazeera. It says:The planned gathering will be a key test of whether a government crackdown, which has left at least 19 people dead, has quelled the angry demonstrations that followed the re-election of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the incumbent president.10.40am: The supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei says he won't yield to pressure on the election, according to a Twitter flash from Reuters."I had insisted and will insist on implementing the law on the election issue ... Neither the establishment nor the nation will yield to pressure at any cost," Khamenei said in his first remarks since Obama's press conference.10.50am: Salon has a powerful article, with disturbing images, about a 17-year-old student who it says was horrifically beaten by the police in Tehran.It starts: The pictures you are about to see are not from someone who supports anarchy, he is not even a part of the "DUST" that Ahmadinejad called his opponents. He is just a 17-year-old boy who was supposed to take the university entrance exam within a month before his fingers were broken and the finger webs were cut with a blade. 10.55am: The Canadian government is demanding immediate access to the detained Canadian journalist Maziar Bahari.He was arrested on Sunday while working for Newsweek.11.25am: Shrin Ebadi, an Iranian human rights lawyer and Nobel peace prize winner, has offered to represent the family of Neda Agha Soltan, the woman whose death was captured on that horrific video. "I am personally prepared to legally represent her family against the people who ordered the shooting and those who fired at her. This act was against the law," she told al-Jazeera.12pm: Protesters are gathering for the start of a rally in Tehran in 30 minutes. Jasmin, one of the protesters, told al-Jazeera that she is not put off by the heavy presence of the security forces. Speaking on a phone line from Tehran she said some of the militia have made sly victory signs to the protesters at previous rallies.12.15pm: A group called Human Rights Activists Iran has more details (including photos) of the students arrested since the election.12.20pm: The Iranian authorities and their lackeys in the state-controlled media are trying to launch a counter-offensive on the Neda phenomenon, writes Robert Tait.Jomhouri Islami newspaper is blaming her shooting on snipers from the MKO (a militant group calling for the overthrow of the republic). It said the group exploited the lack of security created by the demonstrations. Javan, another pro-regime paper, blamed an even more unlikely source - my friend and recently expelled BBC correspondent Jon Leyne. It claims that Leyne hired "thugs" to shoot her so he could then make a documentary film.Meanwhile, the government has forbidden hospitals from releasing deaths certificates that give shooting as the cause of death.12.30pm: The Guardian has compiled a new video of the latest footage emerging from Iran.UPDATE: The clip of basijis breaking into a house was shot last week, probably in Isfahan.12.45pm: There are numerous Twitter reports of demonstrations taking place in Tehran. One says the protesters are at six locations: Bahareset, Valiasr, Enghelab, Vanak, Tajrish, Sadehgieh.12.55pm: More on the death and arrest of protesters: The International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran has a very full list of all those arrested since 12 June, plus details where possible. It says 27 people have been killed since the election.1.03pm: Robert Tait describes one voter's experience as an illustration of the election shenanigans that went on.He went to a polling station on the day of the election not having shaved for a couple of days - which gave him the appearance of a Basij or a plain-clothed pro-regime type. When he handed his ID notebook in order to cast his vote, the authorities didn't bother to stamp it to confirm that he had already done so and was ineligible to cast any further ballots - they assumed from his appearance he was pro-Ahmadinejad and so wanted to give him the chance to vote again.. He voted for Mousavi - and taking advantage of the official hospitality - he went straight to another polling station and cast another vote for Mousavi. It was to no avail and that's not what the tacit nod towards casting a second vote was designed to achieve. But it's a fascinating insight into the jiggery-pokery that went on in election day.1.31pm: Anne Applebaum focuses on the important role of women in Iran's upheaval.Regimes that repress the civil and human rights of half their population are inherently unstable. Sooner or later, there has to be a backlash. In Iran, we're watching one unfold.1.40pm: Hundreds of people, many from the families of those arrested have gathered outside Revolution Court, according to a usually reliable Twitter user. There are also reports of clashes and teargas being fired on Bahareston Square.A reader emails with the correct spellings of the locations for today's demonstrations: Baharestan Square, Enghelab Square, Vanak Square, Vali-asr Square, Tajrish Square and Sadeghieh Square.2pm: One reader was so struck by the absurdity of the accusation made against the BBC's Jon Leyne (see the 12.20pm post) that he created this image (left). "After reading the ridiculous claim that Jon Leyne was involved in the killing of Neda, I decided to make this picture," Sam explains2.10pm: I'm hearing the same reports mentioned in the comment below that a girl has been shot in Bahareston Square. This is impossible to verify. Meanwhile, the regime continues to blame the British for stirring the unrest. Iran's intelligence minister, Gholam Hossein Mohseni Ejeii, told the Fars news agency: "Britain was among the countries which, in violation of diplomatic criteria, sought to aggravate the problem through massive propaganda and other measures." "The BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation) Persian also played an eye-catching role (in this regard). There were also a number of people with British passports who also played roles in the unrests [sic]"2.20pm: Paulo Coelho, the Brazilian writer and friend of the doctor who rushed to Neda Agha-Soltan's side, has identified the doctor and published an email exchange with him.One email says: Dearest Paulo,I am now in Tehran. The video of Neda's murder was taken by my friend, and you can recognise me in the video. I was the doctor who tried to save her and failed. She died in my arms. I am writing with tears in my eyes. Please don't mention my name. I'll contact you with more details soon.LoveArashCoelho explained why he was planning to reveal Arash's name. "I may leak your name to the press, in order to protect you - visibility is the only protection at this point," he said.Arash has now fled Iran.2.50pm: There are more disturbing reports on Twitter of injuries in Bahareston Square. One usually reliable source says it is like a war zone with blood everywhere and many nursing broken bones.3.00pm: Here's a Google map showing the location of the current protests (hat tip: Huffington Post).Lots of people have been arrested in the square and there are fires, and helicopters hovering overhead, according to unconfirmed reports.(I'm making way now for my Washington colleague Daniel Nasaw. Thanks again for all your comments, corrections, tips and updates, please keep posting them).3.30pm: (Daniel Nasaw in Washington here, taking over our Iran liveblog coverage. Please send any tips, news, corrections, updates, anything, to me at daniel.nasaw@guardian.co.uk or on twitter at danielnasaw. We're particularly eager to hear news of the ongoing protests in Tehran today)3.32pm: Newspaper Roozonline has an interview (in Persian) with one of the young plainclothes militiamen who have been beating protesters. UPDATE: Robert says the man is paid 2m rial per day, which would be about £1220 for ten days of work. A hefty fee, even by UK standards. A reader writes: "You can imagine what that kind of money means to a villager from Khorasan".The Guardian's Robert Tait sends this synopsis:The man, who has come from a small town in the eastern province of Khorasan and has never been in Tehran before, says he is being paid 2m rial (£122) to assault protestors with a heavy wooden stave. He says the money is the main incentive as it will enable him to get married and may even enable him to afford more than one wife. Leadership of the volunteers has been provided by a man known only as "Hajji", who has instructed his men to "beat the counter-revolutionaries so hard that they won't be able to stand up". The volunteers, most of them from far-flung provinces such as Khuzestan, Arak and Mazandaran, are being kept in hostel accommodation, reportedly in east Tehran. Other volunteers, he says, have been brought from Lebanon, where the Iranian regime has strong allies in the Hezbollah movement. They are said to be more highly-paid than their Iranian counterparts and are put up in hotels. The last piece of information seems to confirm the suspicion of many Iranians that foreign security personnel are being used to suppress the demonstrators. For all his talk of the legal process, this interview provides a key insight into where Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, believes the true source of his legitimacy rests.3.38pm: The BBC has a piece on a furniture store hopping on Twitter channels dedicated to the Iran unrest to flog its wares.Furniture store Habitat has apologised for causing offence after accusations it abused unrest in Iran to drive online Twitter users to its products.It added keywords - called hashtags - like 'Iran' and 'Mousavi' to messages so people searching for those subjects would see the firm's online offers.Users of the networking site reacted angrily and the posts were removed. The offending tweets have mostly been taken down from the site, but this page shows some of the reaction.3.45pm: Update: A video posted here earlier was not recent footage so it's been removed to avoid confusion. Apologies.3.49am:This disturbing video shows what looks like a gravely injured young man who appears to have been shot. In the background you can hear what sound like gunshots. The video says it was taken today, but I cannot confirm that or tell where it was shot.UPDATE: A reader says he saw this video Monday and think it was probably shot over the weekend.3.55pm: Opposition candidate and pro-tem Mousavi ally Mehdi Karroubi has cancelled a memorial demonstration that had been planned for tomorrow. A spokesman says no location was available. If anyone has more details from his Farsi-language webpage, let me know.UPDATE: In the article, Karroubi spokesman Saeed Razavi Faqih, a cleric like Karroubi, says, "It's unfortunate that in this time, even an important political figure like Karroubi can't even perform a funeral ceremony anywhere in this country". They were unable to get a permit for the service, "so we cannot even mourn the martyrs of republicanism (jamhuriat) and freedom".4.08pm: CNN just interviewed someone who was at Baharestan Square. She tells of a massacre and a massive assault by policemen. The witness was hysterical and speaking very fast."I was going towards Baharestan with my friend. This was everyone, not just supporters of one candidate or another. All of my friends, they were going to Baharestan to express our opposition to these killings and demanding freedom. The black-clad police stopped everyone. They emptied the buses that were taking people there and let the private cars go on. We went on until Ferdowsi then all of a sudden some 500 people with clubs came out of [undecipherable] mosque and they started beating everyone. They tried to beat everyone on [undecipherable] bridge and throwing them off of the bridge. And everyone also on the sidewalks. They beat a woman so savagely that she was drenched in blood and her husband, he fainted. They were beating people like hell. It was a massacre. They were trying to beat people so they would die. they were cursing and saying very bad words to everyone. This was exactly a massacre... I don't know how to describe it."4.45pm: Here is some comparatively tame footage of what purports to be a protest in Tehran today. The people are chanting "Death to the dictator".5.07pm: Some more political news out of Iran, courtesty of Guardian readers who are following the Iranian press:Conservative candidate Mohsen Rezaei, former commander of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, has dropped his allegations of electoral fraud. Two reformist newspapers (Karroubi-affiliated Etemad-e Melli, and Tahlil-e Rooz) are reporting that Majlis (parliament) Speaker Ali Larijani is under fire from pro-Ahmadinejad forces in the legislative body. He earned the camp's ire last week by speaking out about attacks on protesters. Criticism of Larijani is led by members of parliament Hosseinian, Kchekzedah and Rasai. They characterise Larijani as "political gullible". Ettemad-e Melli reports that reformist candidate Mehdi Karroubi has sent an open letter to Ezatallah Zarghami, head of the Iranian state media, criticising the media for being "biased and dishonest and engaging in a campaign of misinformation regarding the recent protests." In the letter, Karroubi says that Ahmadinejad supporters are adherents of an "archaic and reactionary form of Islam, that is, Taliban Islam". He says, "It is the immense unreliablility of the state media that has led people to seek foreign sources for obtaining the truth".5.10pm: On Comment is free America, Richard Silverstein writes that American neo-conservatives, "those guys who brought you regime change in Iraq, imaginary WMDs, fake Iraq-al-Qaida connections, 4,000 dead GIs and a trillion-dollar war" are beating the drum for US intervention in Iran.5.14pm: On Comment is free, Asim Siddiqui writes the Iranian regime is making a mockery of the concept of Islamic government.The Iranian demonstrators of 1979, whose children are demonstrating today, would not have dreamt that the turban was simply going replace the crown and that Iran would go from one repression to another. However, it is not the labelling of a state as "Islamic" that makes it just or unjust, but its structures: does it have sufficient checks and balances between the branches of government, is the leader accountable and replaceable by the people freely; are the people sovereign or the clerics?5.17pm: The Guardian's Washington bureau chief Ewen Macaskill reports that President Barack Obama appears to have sent a letter to Ayatollah Ali Khamenei last month, ahead of its disputed election, calling for an improvement in relations.5.20pm: (The post here contained old information. We removed to avoid confusion. Thanks for letting us know).5.27pm: The official state media Press TV reports that Mir Hossein Mousavi has denied any part in organising the bloody protests at Beharestan Square outside the parliament building today.5.31pm: CNN reports that President Obama is reconsidering the "hotdog diplomacy" approach, in which US diplomats overseas were to be invited for informal Independence Day celebrations on July 4.5.50pm: Guardian writer Mark Tran has a fresh write-up of the unrest in Iran.One bit we haven't reported on this blog: News from Ayatollah Montazeri.Grand Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri, one of Iran's most senior clerics, who has been under house arrest for 10 years, called for three days of national mourning from today for those killed."Resisting the people's demand is religiously prohibited," he said on his website. Once the heir apparent to Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Montazeri fell out with the founder of the Islamic republic shortly before Khomeini's death in 1989.6.19pm: A correspondent in Tehran, whom we will not identify out of fear for his safety, visited Neda Agha-Soltan's family home last night and learned her family has been forced out of the house.The correspondent writes:Neighbours said that her family no longer lives in the four-floor apartment building on Meshkini Street, in eastern Tehran, having been forced to move since she was killed. The police did not hand the body back to her family, her funeral was cancelled, she was buried without letting her family know and the government banned mourning ceremonies at mosques, the neighbours said.Read the full story here.6.33pm: UPDATE: We had this video in our round-up earlier.7.18pm: Mehdi Noorbaksh, a political scientist at Harrisburg University of Science and Technology in Pennsylvania and the son-in-law of longtime opposition leader Ebrahim Yazdi, has a theory about how the unrest could play out. He bases this on his discussion with contacts in Iran and his analysis of recent news. I've done minor edits for style and clarity.There is a possibility, and I am saying a possibility, for a compromise on the election result among the involved parties in Iran in the next couple of days. I received a call from Iran late last night indicating that there is a possibility for a runoff between Musavi and Ahmadinejad. There are a few points that we should consider in this context.1. The Guardian Council accepted election's irregularities a few days ago and indicated that it involved 3m votes. This body did not restrict these irregularities to a few thousand or even hundred of thousand votes, but millions. That was a face saving gesture to open the door for a possible future compromise if pressure is mounted on them. There are other irregularities having the same nature. Many districts, up to 170, show vote counts of 95% to 140% of the eligible voters. 2. Ali Larijani, the head of the Iranian parliament, is trying to convince the leadership on the side of the supreme leader to give national TV time to Musavi to talk to the Iranian people. In his TV talk a couple of days ago, Larijani was critical of the Iranian national TV for not allowing Musavi to use that medium of communication to talk to the Iranian people. He also announced that a few members of the Guardian Council were biased toward one candidate, namely Ahmadinejad, in the election. 3. There is report that Rafsanjani has succeeded to get the signatures and support of many of the high clerics in Qom in denouncing the election. If they openly denounce the election that could be a colossal blow to the supreme leader, and the much diminished legitimacy of the institution of Velayat-e Faqih (rule of jurisprudence) and his authority. 4. The time for the Guardian Council's investigation of the vote fraud has been extended possibly for more time in negotiating a solution to the conflict. 5. There are reports that divisions within the Revolutionary Guard are beginning to surface. There is speculation that one of the commanders, Afzali has either resigned or been abdicated from his post. 6. Rallies are expanding in many other cities of Iran, and street demonstrations have not been diminished in Tabriz, Isfahan, Kermanshah and other cities. Although the size of the demonstrations is smaller, they are more violent and forceful. 7. The killings of demonstrators will definitely result in more defiance and bolder actions of the protesters and gain more legitimacy for the green movement and its leadership. More killings will definitely delegitimize further the supreme leader's authority. Imposing a government, after mass killings, on the Iranian people is a much more difficult task. Noorbaksh says there is a major caveat:I insist on the word 'possible' because [the regime] may change the course if they think they have been successful so far in their crackdown and they ultimately succeed in suppressing the opposition. All indications are telling us that if that is their assessment, they are absolutely wrong about it. But you know how this regime is blinded to the realities, as Mousavi said a couple of days ago. 7.24pm: Tehran mayor Mohammad-Baqer Qalibaf has urged the regime to authorise peaceful opposition rallies, according to state Press TV. In a Tuesday interview with IRIB channel two, Mohammad-Baqer Qalibaf said that legalizing street rallies would prevent 'saboteurs who draw weapons and kill people'. ...Tehran's mayor stressed that the 'use of force' was the wrong way to clarify public's doubts about the election results, calling all 'the supervisory and executive bodies in the government' as well as, 'the media and presidential candidates' to play a major role in resolving the issues. 7.33pm: A reliable twitterer says that Ardeshir Amir Arjemand, Mousavi's legal adviser, has been arrested. I cannot confirm this independently.8.16pm: I'm told an opposition rally is planned for tomorrow at 4:30pm, from the Vali-Asr intersection to Enghelab Square in Tehran.8.26pm: Confirmed! No hotdogs, halal or trayf, for those Iranian diplos.At the White House today, Obama spokesman Robert Gibbs put on the kibosh."Given the events of the past many days, those invitations will no longer be extended," presidential spokesman Robert Gibbs said.No Iranian diplomats had accepted the invitations, the state department said.8.34pm: Here is a video (with chapters) of the panel discussion at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace yesterday on the aftermath of the Iranian election.Some of the top quotes:"Khamenei's speech last Friday was the biggest mistake of his career. It may be the end of his political career. It is certainly the end of his career as spiritual leader." -- Abbas Milani "President Obama has handled this crisis superbly. He has not received enough credit for how thoughtful, measured, and serious he has been. If we insert ourselves into this crisis we hurt the reformists and help Ahmadinejad." -- Ambassador Nicholas Burns9.46pm: Seventy members of an organisations of Islamic university professors were arrested today after a meeting with Mir Hossein Mousavi, according to website Kalemeh.ir, which is affiliated with the Mousavi camp.I'm also hearing unconfirmed reports that university professors who during the campaign signed petitions supporting Mousavi have been detained.10.08pm: That's it from me for tonight. Thanks everyone for tips, updates, corrections and comments.• This blog was amended on 2 June 2011. The original referred to the death of Neda Soltani during a demonstration in Iran. That is the name of a different individual. This has been corrected.