It takes less than an hour to clone one of Britain's new useless "microchip" passports, thanks to the work of Jeroen van Beek, a security researcher at the University of Amsterdam.That technology and other means are critical to many, many Iranians trying to travel. The blue Iranian passport may be ranked second from bottom in the Henley index of travel freedom but that doesn't stop Iranians seeking a document to get out of the millionaire mullahs' country. The government prevents Iranian men from getting a passport if they don't do national service. And so Ayatollah Khamenei allows a roaring trade in illegal passports. The nomenklatura are not affected, as the sons of the wealthy and those of people on the Guardian Council buy off national service. President Ahmadinejad's anti-corruption drive has done nothing – he is powerless in Iran but for his passport to travel and give speeches around the world. Even his allies have been imprisoned when they mention the "C" word.I spoke to a man at a north Tehran coffee shop who was ripped off twice. He was given a contact by a friend who had successfully procured a passport for $5,000. They call you. And they never give you their number. The meeting took place in a park and, without any guarantees, money was exchanged. The passport would be ready in a week.Nothing happened. Such is the desperation; he did it again and was ripped off again. "I think I have found another contact," he said. Hopefully, it will work this time. I just have to save up. The thing is that the friend who gave me one of the previous contacts got stopped coming into Imam Khomeini airport last week. He had used his passport four times to travel abroad but the man he bought it from had been caught doing a deal and he revealed the numbers of all the passports he had sold. He got five years and my friend was arrested at the airport and got six months in Evin Prison. He's now doing national service in a desert area in south east Iran – with an added six months to the normal two years' service.Perhaps he was lucky. Under article 15(1) of the 1988 amended Passport Act, the sentence should be 18 months in prison and article 525(2) of the Islamic Penal Code says a "fake stamp" in a passport means "one to 10 years of imprisonment". There's a big UNHCR office in Tehran, a testament to the US-led wars in Iraq and Afghanistan that have caused a flow of war-weary refugees into the towns and cities of Iran – the largest refugee crisis in history.According to UNHCR, counterfeit Iranian passports are widely available and the prices change "according to the quality of the counterfeit work". While the middle classes opt for buying on the black market, the very poor get to cross borders at will, but that is an ancient trade. Tehranis are rightfully frightened of crossing the porous Pakistan and Afghanistan borders where human trafficking is rife, with police often reporting round-ups of gangs, as well as frequent repatriation.There's stiff border security on the Azerbaijan border and the dhow-route to Oman across the Gulf isn't very useful as it's unlikely any consulate will help an escaping Iranian. Kurds, meanwhile, are on the Turkey-Iran border and cross when they want – part of a government-sanctioned smuggling route for drugs and alcohol.Women may not have to do national service but face other hurdles. Singles can't get visas to many Gulf countries if they are under 30. Countries like US-backed Saudi Arabia seem to believe that every young Iranian single woman must be a sex worker. And married women need the permission of their husband to travel anywhere abroad. Such is the unreconstructed Islamic respect for women.The Bush administration tried to tie in all this counterfeit passport business with its "war on terror" and the need to bomb Iran. In 2002, the FBI said it had caught an Iranian gang in Thailand that was busily forging passports and when asked about the supposed connection between Iran and al-Qaida, Thai police had to respond by saying "they were not certain if the FBI agents were able to establish links between the Iranians and al-Qaida networks in the region or in the US".The 9/11 Commission report absurdly claims that Iran knowingly facilitated transit for al-Qaida militants: "... operatives ... travelled through Iran, which did not stamp visas directly into passports". Presumably, the commission didn't understand the difference between Shia and Sunni, just like Republican presidential contender John McCain.It's no wonder that tourist guides to Iran advise that a foreigner's passport is his most valuable asset and to keep it strapped about one's person. Actually, crime in the big cities of Tehran, Isfahan and Shiraz is much less than one might find in London or Paris. And given that most of Iran's Jewish community chose to ignore a recent Israeli invitation to come and occupy Palestinian land, life in Iran from a regional perspective – as against the labour camps of Dubai and the US-backed destruction of Iraq – isn't that bad at all. But for those fighting for more freedom in Iran, passports are a weapon of the state used to destroy their lives. Human Rights Watch accuses the Iranian government of violating its own laws.