Iran has promised to make drastic cuts to its nuclear programme in return for the gradual lifting of sanctions as part of a historic breakthrough in Lausanne that could end a 13-year nuclear standoff.The “political understanding”, announced on Thursday night in the Swiss city’s technical university, followed 18 months of intensive bargaining, culminating in an eight-day period of near-continuous talks that went on long into the night, and on the last night continued all the way through until dawn. Related: Iran nuclear talks: timeline In a joint statement, the European Union’s foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, and the Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, hailed what they called a “decisive step” after more than a decade of work.Speaking afterwards, Zarif said the accord showed “our programme is exclusively peaceful, has always been and always will remain exclusively peaceful”, while not hindering the country’s pursuit of atomic energy for civilian purposes.Speaking at the White House, Barack Obama said that if fully implemented, the agreement would “cut off every pathway that Iran could take to develop a nuclear weapon”.As news of the deal reached Tehran, people took to the streets to celebrate, looking forward to the prospect of life without sanctions. In Washington, meanwhile, there was a clear sign of the battle to come over the agreement, which Republicans have vowed to overturn. Senator Mark Kirk, who is promoting fresh sanctions against Iran, declared that former British prime minister Neville Chamberlain “got a better deal from Adolf Hitler” at Munich. In his remarks in Lausanne, Kerry issued a riposte to rightwing critics of the accord.“Throughout history, diplomacy has been necessary to prevent wars and to define international boundaries, to design institutions, and to develop global norms,” Kerry said.“Simply demanding that Iran capitulate makes a nice soundbite, but it’s not a policy. It is not a realistic plan ... The test is whether or not it will leave the world safer or more secure than it would be without this agreement. And there can be no question that the comprehensive plan that we are moving toward will more than pass that test.” Related: Iran nuclear talks: 'framework' deal agreed - live updates The US president is expected to face intense opposition on Capitol Hill, particularly from Republicans, who are determined to use their control of both chambers of the legislature to undermine an agreement they believe is soft on Tehran. Obama acknowledged there would be “a robust debate in the weeks and months to come” but insisted the agreement was both the most peaceful and effective method to ensure Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon. “If we can get this done, and Iran follows through on the framework that our negotiators agreed to, we will be able to resolve one of the greatest threats to our security, and to do so peacefully.”The declaration of a framework deal is both preliminary and partial. It does not cover all the issues in dispute and is intended to be only a precursor to a full, comprehensive and detailed agreement due to be completed by the end of June. Before then, the understanding must survive attack from hardliners in Iran and the US. But the joint statement and the details published in Lausanne represent a set of basic compromises that had eluded negotiators for many years. Iran will cut its nuclear infrastructure to the point that western governments are satisfied it would take a year to “breakout” and build a bomb, if Tehran chose to follow that path. At the same time, Iran will open itself up to a level of monitoring and scrutiny of its nuclear programme that is likely to unparalleled anywhere in the world.When all that has been achieved, which could be in as little as six months, the overwhelming bulk of international sanctions would be lifted and Iran would re-enter the global economy.  Related: Iranians celebrate nuclear deal: 'This will bring hope to our life' The accord also has the potential to be a turning point in normalising Iran’s adversarial relations with the west, which have been a constant in world affairs since the Islamic revolution of 1979.“This could be one of the most important diplomatic achievements in a generation or more,” said Ali Vaez, an Iran analyst at the International Crisis Group.The UK foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, said: “This is well beyond what many of us thought possible even 18 months ago.” Hammond said that Iran would face stringent monitoring of its programme.“There is a very rigorous transparency and inspection regime with access for international inspectors on a daily basis, high-tech surveillance of all the facilities, TV cameras, electronic seals on equipment, so we know remotely if any equipment has been moved,” he said.But Israel dismissed the deal, and said it would continue to prevent a “bad” final agreement. Strategic affairs minister Yuval Steinitz said in a statement after the announcements in Switzerland: “The smiles in Lausanne are detached from wretched reality in which Iran refuses to make any concessions on the nuclear issue and continues to threaten Israel and all other countries in the Middle East.” Obama spoke to Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, who told him that a final deal based on the agreement “would threaten the survival of Israel”.Among the main points of the understanding unveiled in Lausanne are:The first major test of the understanding will come in the next few days, when Kerry is expected to present the details to a closed session of the Senate foreign relations committee before a vote on a bill that would give Congress the power to accept or reject any nuclear agreement and another that would impose new sanctions.Zarif, Kerry’s opposite number at the talks, is expected to return to Tehran to a hero’s welcome from a public desperate to escape the shackles of sanctions, but he has frequently warned his fellow negotiators that he will face a backlash from hardliners opposed to dismantling any of Iran’s prized nuclear infrastructure.Kazem Sadjadpour, an Iranian university professor, said on state TV: “I feel very proud as an Iranian … This is a turning point in Iran’s history of diplomacy. This is a night of mourning for Netanyahu and his warmongering allies in the US congress.”The nuclear standoff with Iran has been a threat to global security and non-proliferation for well over a decade since a uranium enrichment plant at Natanz and a heavy water production plant at Arak were exposed in 2002 by an opposition group, probably using Israeli intelligence. Negotiations began in 2003 with European states in which Iran offered to limit its capacity to 3,000 centrifuges if its right to enrichment was recognised. The deal collapsed by 2005 and there was no sign of compromise for the next eight years, as the international community ratcheted up sanctions and Iran responded defiantly by expanding its nuclear programme, moving from production of low-enriched uranium to 20%-enriched uranium, a major step towards the capacity to make weapons-grade fissile material.The confrontation continued to escalate until 2013 and the election of a pragmatist president in Iran, Hassan Rouhani, who acted swiftly to establish lines of communication with the White House and between Kerry and Zarif. An interim deal was agreed in November 2013 that halted production of 20%-enriched uranium and eliminated Iran’s stockpile of the material in return for access to $700m a month of its assets frozen around the world.The interim deal, known as the joint plan of action, bought time for a comprehensive agreement which was initially intended to be completed by July last year. The negotiators gave themselves another four months until November, and then after marathon talks in Vienna, it was postponed again, setting 30 June as the new deadline.