7.30am: These are the main developments overnight:• The powerful guardian council has ruled out annulling the election.•The United Nations secretary general Ban Ki-moon has called for an immediate end to the arrests, threats and use of force.Ban "is dismayed by the post-election violence."•The opposition movement is reported to be considering changing tack from street protests to strike action. But there are plans for another street demonstration on Thursday. You can follow the events of previous days here:22 June: the martyrdom of Neda Agha-Soltan21 June: Iran in turmoil20 June: protesters defy Khamenei19 June: Khamenei's hardline speech18 June: mass mourning17 June: crackdown continues16 June: day of unrest15 June: aftermath of disputed results12 June: election dayAs there are so many restrictions on journalists in Iran it is difficult to get information, so if you are in Iran and have news, please email me at matthew.weaver@guardian.co.uk or post updates or interesting links in the comments section below.And if you have taken any pictures of the latest events in Iran, or know anyone who has, please send them to pictures@guardian.co.uk. Please provide as much information as you can about your pictures including what they show, and when and where they were taken. Thanks.7.45am: More disturbing video has emerged of the police crackdown and the victims of the violence.A new Guardian video shows protesters being beaten and threatened with shooting [Warning the video shows graphic images]. There is also another horrific video claiming to show the death of a protester yesterday [warning contains graphic images].8am: The troubling video of Neda Agha-Soltan's death has been compared to the image of a Chinese protester blocking a tank in Tiananmen Square protests. On the left is the Iranian cartoonist Nikahang Kowsar's take on the crisis. Incidentally, the Iranian authorities have taken issue with the western media using the word "crisis". The French riots were not described as a crisis, they said and yet the violence there was much worse.8.20am: There were plans today for an anti-British demonstration outside the British embassy in Tehran, according to the state-funded Press TV. But the protest has apparently been banned. "Iran's interior ministry condemns Britain's interference but has granted no permission for the gathering outside the British embassy on Tuesday," the ministry said on its website.8.35am: A contact in Tehran has emailed this account of yesterday's events:The streets were full of armed guards, they were not normal police although the police were helping them. They were ordering people to go home. By the afternoon they threw tear gas in our streets. They banged on doors, and ordered all the people watching from the windows to go back inside. They also hit those that were filming with their mobile phones.They broke down a door, and started hitting one guy inside his house. Our neighbour who was just standing on the corner of street was arrested without any reason. The people are very afraid. 8.45am: Mousavi's appears to be planning a general strike. A discussion on his Facebook page says: "We are working on a general strike plan. Please help us with your ideas if you have expertise on this issue."8.55am: The protesters "are powerless in the face of an overwhelming police and security force presence. People are genuinely intimidated," the Guardian's former Tehran correspondent Robert Tait says.9.10am: Yesterday's demonstrations were not confined to Tehran according to this video of chaotic scenes in the city of Kerman, in south-east Iran. It is was apparently filmed yesterday but this is impossible to verify.9.25am: Iran is to temporarily recall its ambassador to Britain, according to a flash on Reuters, citing an Iranian MP.The speaker Ali Larijani has called for a revision of Tehran-London ties, according to state-funded Press TV. It says: In recent days, the US and a slew of European powers - namely Britain, France, Italy and Germany - have lashed out at the Iranian government for the nature of its measures in restoring security in the country. Iranian officials have accused Western powers of interfering in the country's internal affairs. 10.20am: More on the temporary recall of Iran's ambassador to the UK.The move was apparently discussed at a meeting between parliament's national security policy commission and the foreign minister Manouchehr Mottaki."In the meeting yesterday we concluded to summon Iran's ambassador to London for a limited time for some explanations and a complete report of events and Britain's interference in Iran's internal affairs," Ahmadi said, according to Reuters.But an Iranian government source could not confirm the move. A comment from the Foreign Office is expected shortly.10.30am: One of the other defeated presidential candidates, Mehdi Karoubi, has joined in calls for a nationwide rally on Thursday to mourn the death of a protester, one of his aides told Reuters.Mousavi is also calling on his supporters to join the rally.10.40am: There are reports that 30% of employees in Iran are taking part in a general strike. If you have more information please contact us to verify this.11am: Update on the pro-Mousavi footballers, spotted by Robert Tait.The Iranian footballers who showed solidarity with the pro-Mousavi demonstrators by sporting green wristbands during last week's world cup qualifier against South Korea in Seoul have had their passports confiscated, according to Balatarin. They have also been banned from giving media interviews while state newspapers in Iran have launched a concerted attack on them, calling on the football authorities to force them into early retirement. 11.22am: A date has been set for Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to be sworn in as president. According to state media he will take the oath of office between July 26 and August 19."Provocative" says a reader who spotted the news.11.30am: Ask Barack Obama a question about Iran, Nico Pitney, of the Huffington Post is offering.He explains:Later today, President Obama is holding a news conference at the White House and I'll be attending. If I get called, I want to ask a question that comes directly from an Iranian.Pitney deserves to be called, his Iran liveblog has been very impressive.12pm: Don't expect that this will be resolved quickly, writes the veteran Iran watcher, Gary Sick, the principal White House aide for Iran during the revolution.The Iranian revolution, which is usually regarded as one of the most accelerated overthrows of a well-entrenched power structure in history, started in about January 1978 and the shah departed in January 1979. During that period, there were long pauses and periods of quiescence that could lead one to believe that the revolt had subsided. This is not a sprint; it is a marathon. Endurance is at least as important as speed.12.10pm: Splits in the regime? The speaker of the Iranian Parliament, Ali Larijani , has expressed his "deepest concern" over the crackdown against the protesters, in particular the violent raid against Tehran University."The interior ministry should clarify why the security forces destroyed the building and why students were injured or even killed," said Larijani according to Press TV.When Ayatollah Ali Khamenei threatened protesters with harsh treatment during his hardline sermon at Friday prayers, Larijani was shown sitting next to Ahmadinejad.12.30pm: Robert Tait has more on the infighting in the regime.The splits at the top of the Islamic regime seem to be reaching new levels. Vatan-e Emrouz, a newspaper owned by Mehrdad Bazrpash - a renowned hardliner and close aide to Ahmadinejad - has today attacked Larijani, the conservative speaker who is nominally on the side of the status quo and against the protesters. The newspaper risks alienating Larijani - a powerful figure close to the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei - by criticising his comments on state television.Larijani accused the guardian council of pro-Ahmadinejad bias and said that most Iranians are suspicions of this month's election result. Under the headline, "The Director and the Electoral Role", it carries a front page picture of Larijani in conversation with the former president, Hashemi Rafsanjani - Ahmadinejad's most powerful enemy, who is thought to be trying to persuade the experts' assembly to move against Khamenei. Nothing could be more designed to push Larijani into the opposition camp. He is thought to be dithering over which side to take.12.40pm: White House spokesman Robert Gibbs said Iran has begun to "change" because of the protests but cautioned that Barack Obama would not back calls for a general strike there, according to Reuters.12.44pm: Amnesty International is calling on Iran to stop using the Basij militia, who have been beating up demonstrators."It's time for the Iranian authorities to allow peaceful protest and to remove the Basij from the streets. The policing of any demonstrations should be left to the police or other security forces which are properly trained and equipped," says Hassiba Hadj Sahraoui, of Amnesty.1.05pm: Obama is giving a press conference at 12:30pm Washington time (5.30pm BST) so he will have to walk the tightrope on Iran again. He has been very cautious, taking a much more measured line than European leaders, but he is coming under considerable domestic pressure to turn up the rhetoric, at a time when Iranian leaders are blaming outsiders for the crisis.1.25pm: A contact has emailed to say that his friend has been arrested in Tehran and taken to Evin prison. He is thought to be one of hundreds of protesters rounded up in the crackdown on the opposition. It is difficult to know how many have been arrested and who they are, so we are trying to compile a list. If you have solid information on people who have been arrested please email me at matthew.weaver@guardian.co.uk, or post information and/or links in the comments section below.The International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran has a list of prominent Iranians who have disappeared or been arrested since the start of the unrest.They include: former foreign minister Ebrahim Yazdi, general secretary of Freedom Movement of Iran; Mohammadreza Jalaieepour, a student at Oxford University; Saeed Hajjarian, an advisor to former president Mohammad Khatami, paralysed in an assassination attempt in 2000; Mohammad Tavasoli, the director of the political office of the Freedom Movement of Iran; human rights lawyer Abdolfattah Soltani; human rights activist Shiva Nazarahari; journalist Mahsa Amrabadi; a former spokesperson for Khatami, Abdolah Ramezanzadeh; politician Mostafa Tajzadeh; political activists Mohsen Aminzadeh, Mohammad Atrianfar, and Mohammad Tavasoli; Freedom Movement members Ahmad Afjeiee, Emad Bahavar, Mojtaba Khandan, Saieed Zeraatkar, Rouholah Shafiee, Ali Mehrdad, and Mohammad-Reza Ahmadinia; members of the reformist Islamic Participation Front: Ali PourKhayeri, Shahin Nourbakhsh, Ali Taghipour Mohammad Shokuhi, Ashkan Mojaleli, Maysam Varahchehre, Mahdieh Minavi, and Farhad Nasrollahpour; members of the Central Council of the University Alumni group ADVAR - general secretary Ahmad Zaydabadi, Hadi Kahal and Hamed Iranshahi; activists Payam Haydar Ghazvini, Nasim Riahi, Mojtaba Rajabi, and Atar Rashidi in Ghazvin province.The press freedom campaign Reporters Without Borders lists 23 journalists and bloggers who have been arrested since the election.They are: Somayeh Tohidloo, Ahmad Zeydabadi, Kivan Samimi Behbani, Abdolreza Tajik, Mahssa Amrabad, cartoonist Behzad Basho, Khalil Mir Asharafi, Karim Arghandeh, Shiva Nazar Ahari, Mohamad Atryanfar, Shahrvand Emrouz, Saeed Hajjarian, Mojtaba Pormohssen, Mohammad Ali Abtahi, Hamideh Mahhozi, Amanolah Shojai, Hossin Shkohi, Mashalah Hidarzadeh, Saide Lylaz, Rohollah Shassavar, Mohammad Ghochani, Jila Baniyaghoob, Canon Zeman Irani, Bahaman Ahamadi Amoee, and Ali Mazroui2pm:Add the name of another reporter to those arrested. A reporter with the Washington Times, thought to be Iason Athanasiadis, has been arrested.Athanasiadis, who has also filed copy for the Guardian during the crisis, disappeared a few days ago.Those arrested face a "terrible ordeal" according to Angus McDowall, a former Tehran reporter.2.05pm: George Friedman, an analyst at the thinktank Stratfor, argues that the uprising is failing in an interesting counterblast to the media's excitement.The global media, obsessively focused on the initial demonstrators — who were supporters of Ahmadinejad's opponents — failed to notice that while large, the demonstrations primarily consisted of the same type of people demonstrating. Amid the breathless reporting on the demonstrations, reporters failed to notice that the uprising was not spreading to other classes and to other areas. In constantly interviewing English-speaking demonstrators, they failed to note just how many of the demonstrators spoke English and had smartphones. The media thus did not recognize these as the signs of a failing revolution.2.25pm: Arrest update: Three prominent student leaders in Baluchistan were arrested last week Shahryar Hosseinbor, Ahmad Rigi and Saeed Arbabzahi, according to the Unpresented Nations and Peoples and Organisation. The photojournalist Amir Sadeghi was also arrested.2.35pm: The Iranian authorities are scrambling to prevent efforts to make Neda Agha-Soltan a martyr of the uprising. They have ordered her family to take down posters mourning her death according to the Times.2.45pm: New video footage purports to show the heavy presence of the security forces on the streets of Tehran today. In the last minute of the film several Basij militia on motorbikes are seen wielding batons. The person holding the camera or phone appears to be trying to avoid being seen.3.00pm: Iran has accused the UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon of interfering in its affairs, the ISNA news agency reported."Mr Ban Ki-moon, under the influence of some powers, is ignoring the realities of Iran's election and his remarks are clearly contradicting his duties ... and are a clear interference in Iran's state matters," it quoted foreign ministry spokesman Hassan Qashqavi as saying, according to Reuters.3.15pm: The LA Times has a very full piece on the life and death of Neda Agha-Soltan, after speaking to her family. To those who knew and loved Agha-Soltan, she was far more than an icon. She was a daughter, sister and friend, a music and travel lover, a beautiful young woman in the prime of her life.The family said she was on the way to a demonstration when she was shot. But she was never an activist, they added, and she began attending the mass protests only because she was outraged by the election results."She typified the youth of Tehran," according to Masoud Golsorkhi the Iranian born editor of the magazine Tank.3.20pm: Gordon Brown is due to make a statement to Parliament about the situation in Iran, in 10 minutes.Earlier Iran's ambassadors to France, Sweden and Finland were summoned to discuss the crackdown on the protests. There were also reports that Iran has recalled its ambassador to the UK.3.31pm: Brown is making a statement on to the Commons on a European Council meeting held last week, in which he is expected to discuss Iran.He says two British diplomats were expelled from Tehran yesterday, over "allegations without foundation".Two Iranian diplomats have been expelled from Iran he said. "I'm disappointed that Iran has placed us in this position," Brown said. He also called on Iran to continue to respect the human and democratic rights of its people.3.40pm: The opposition leader David Cameron said the Britain was right to expel the Iranian diplomats.(That's it from me. Daniel Nasaw is standing by in Washington to take over. Thanks again for your comments and updates, please keep sending them.)4.01pm: Thanks Matt. Daniel Nasaw in Washington here. If you have any tips, news or accounts from Iran or anything I should see please email me at daniel.nasaw@guardian.co.uk or find me on twitter at danielnasaw.4.06pm: Britain today ordered the expulsion of two Iranian diplomats in a retaliatory move that followed the expulsion of two British diplomats from Tehran yesterday.The tit-for-tat comes after Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad have repeatedly accused Britain of meddling in Iranian affairs since the disputed election of 12 June, and Khamenei in Friday prayers said Britain is "evil".Prime Minister Gordon Brown told parliament just now:Iran yesterday took the unjustified step of expelling two British diplomats over allegations which are absolutely without foundation. In response to that action, we informed the Iranian ambassador today that we would expel two Iranian diplomats from their embassy in London. I am disappointed that Iran has placed us in this position.President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad told the United States and Britain on Sunday to stop interfering in Iran's internal affairs after the disputed June 12 presidential election, which led to days of protests in which about 17 people have been killed. (Reporting by Adrian Croft; Editing by Matt Falloon)4.22pm: Here is the opposition take on the BultanNews website I pointed out yesterday, which asked Iranians to help identify protesters, ostensibly for prosecution.This site, Lebas Shakhsi (Persian for "civillian clothes") posts images of suspected plainclothes militiamen who attacked protesters, and asks for help identifying them. A reader tells me that the first man photographed has been ID'd, and asks: "Please help identify the rest of these who without shame (gonah) have spilt our brothers' and sisters' blood on the ground". I present this for your information only, readers.Meanwhile, BultanNews seems to be down, perhaps a result of the "denial of service" campaign promoted on Twitter yesterday.4.25pm: Robert Tait has more on the footballers who wore green to the World Cup qualifying match against South Korea last week.Their gesture attracted worldwide comment and drew the attention of football fans to Iran's political turmoil. Now the country's authorities have taken revenge by imposing life bans on players who sported green wristbands in a recent World Cup match in protest against Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's disputed re-election.According to the pro-government newspaper Iran, four players – Ali Karimi, 31, Mehdi Mahdavikia, 32, Hosein Ka'abi, 24 and Vahid Hashemian, 32 – have been "retired" from the sport after their gesture in last Wednesday's match against South Korea in Seoul.4.32pm: The always-terrific National Iranian American Council blog reports, from BBC Persian, that opposition candidate and pro-tem Mousavi ally Mehdi Karroubi has renewed his call for a demonstration of mourning Thursday.Also, a reliable twitterer reports plans to assemble in front of the Majlis (parliament) at 4pm in Tehran tomorrow.Can anyone in Iran report on the state of the general strike and march on the bazaars that was planned for today? Email me please.4.42pm: The National Iranian American Council blog also this morning posts translations of notes purportedly written by reformist former President Khatami calling for a march on the bazaars and from reformist clerical group Organisation of Combatant Clergy condemning attacks on protesters.4.47pm: Here is an English transcription of a state-run Iranian TV interview from today with a young man purported to be a detained protester. It ran this morning on Vision of the Islamic Republic of Iran Network 1, Tehran. [Presenter] The few rioters who disturbed Tehran's order in the past few days, have made significant statements regarding their objectives.[Female with pixellated face] There was a military hand grenade [as received] in my hand bag and in my son's bag. It was all because my son wanted to have power and show that he could take over power [and use it] against his own country and his fellow countrymen. This was all because of an atmosphere created by the BBC in Iran. I was influenced by this channel.[Reporter asks a young man] When did you come to Tehran?[Young man]: About seven or eight days ago.[Reporter]: When were you arrested?[Young man] Three days ago.[Reporter] Where?[Young man] Under Hafez flyover.[Reporter] Did you have any criminal record at all?[Young man] No, not at all.[Reporter] What about drugs?[Young man] Yes. I had half a gram of crystal with me once. I came to Tehran to repair my mobile phone but when I saw that there was disorder, I started robbing people. I used the opportunity provided by the crowds and rioters and started robbing people.[Young man] How did you do it?[Young man] I did it with my brother. I would keep people busy and my brother would rob them.[Reporter to young man 2] How old are you?[Young man 2] I'm 15 years old.[Reporter] So you didn't vote?[Young man 2] No.[Reporter] How long have you been here?[Young man 2] Three days.[Reporter] Where were you exactly arrested?[Young man] Ostad Mo'in Avenue.[Young woman] I was influenced by VOA Persian and the BBC. They were reporting that the [police] forces were the ones who were beating up people. I wanted to know what was happening and whether or not this was true. But when I went there, I realized that most of us protesters were attacking government property, the [police] forces and other people. They broke house windows and intercoms. Those who were protesting were somehow rioting. We set public property on fire, threw stones at people's cars, there were no [police] forces near us to be hit by our stones. We hurled stones at other people's cars, doors, windows, intercoms. We set motorcycles on fire. When I was running from the police yesterday my dad didn't want to open the door and let me in. I opened the door with force and sought refuge at home, but I was finally arrested.[Reporter to another man] Did you take part in the election?[Man 3] No.[Reporter] So you didn't vote at all?[Man 3] No.[Reporter] Those who protested had taken part in the election and had their own objections. What did you want in the protests when you didn't even vote?[Man 3] I was not pursuing anything particular. I think I was influenced by some networks like the BBC and the VOA to do this unethical action.[Reporter to another young man] Did you vote?[Man 4] No, I was under-age by a 10 or 20 days. There were so many things happening. I set buses, cars and even trees on fire. The Law Enforcement Force was warning us not to hurl stones towards cars, but I still threw stones. I did all sorts of things. I was provoked. I really didn't want to do these things.[Reporter] How were you provoked?[Man 4] They [fellow protesters] were provoking me with really bad language or even swear words. They said they [police] were Israelis.[Reporter] Who agitated you? Were they specific people?[Man 4] They mostly wore masks and I think they are the real people behind this whole thing.4.59pm: A reliable twitterer says across Tehran today motorists are keeping their headlights on in protest of the suspected electoral fraud.5.04pm: Reader MP in London passes on a report from a cousin who is a student at Qazvin University and lives in Karaj, about 30 miles outside of Tehran. The cousin reports that the dean and a number of students and professors at Qazvin University along have been arrested and jailed at Evin Prison. She said that the police have warned people not to shout 'Allah-o Akbar'' from their rooftops -- a widespread but heretofore safe protest action begun last week -- and that anyone heard doing so risks arrest. Most students and other protesters will be going to Tehran for a planned march on the bazaars.  Mobile to Mobile communication is still possible but hard. However, landline communication is becoming increasingly impossible as to block internet users! 5.26pm: Ominous words for detained protesters from the Iranian regime judiciary. Via Reuters: The official IRNA news agency quoted senior judiciary official Ebrahim Raisi as saying on state television late on Monday: "Those arrested in recent events will be dealt with in a way that will teach them a lesson." He said a special court was studying the cases. 5.35pm: President Barack Obama's opening remarks on Iran at a White House press conference just now:The United States and the international community have been appalled and outraged by the threats, beatings, and imprisonments of the last few days. I strongly condemn these unjust actions, and I join with the American people in mourning each and every innocent life that is lost.  I have made it clear that the United States respects the sovereignty of the Islamic Republic of Iran, and is not at all interfering in Iran's affairs. But we must also bear witness to the courage and dignity of the Iranian people, and to a remarkable opening within Iranian society. And we deplore violence against innocent civilians anywhere that it takes place.  The Iranian people are trying to have a debate about their future. Some in the Iranian government are trying to avoid that debate by accusing the United States and others outside of Iran of instigating protests over the elections. These accusations are patently false and absurd. They are an obvious attempt to distract people from what is truly taking place within Iran's borders. This tired strategy of using old tensions to scapegoat other countries won't work anymore in Iran. This is not about the United States and the West; this is about the people of Iran, and the future that they – and only they – will choose.  The Iranian people can speak for themselves. That is precisely what has happened these last few days. In 2009, no iron fist is strong enough to shut off the world from bearing witness to the peaceful pursuit of justice. Despite the Iranian government's efforts to expel journalists and isolate itself, powerful images and poignant words have made their way to us through cell phones and computers, and so we have watched what the Iranian people are doing.  This is what we have witnessed. We have seen the timeless dignity of tens of thousands Iranians marching in silence. We have seen people of all ages risk everything to insist that their votes are counted and their voices heard. Above all, we have seen courageous women stand up to brutality and threats, and we have experienced the searing image of a woman bleeding to death on the streets. While this loss is raw and painful, we also know this: those who stand up for justice are always on the right side of history.  As I said in Cairo, suppressing ideas never succeeds in making them go away. The Iranian people have a universal right to assembly and free speech. If the Iranian government seeks the respect of the international community, it must respect those rights, and heed the will of its own people. It must govern through consent, not coercion. That is what Iran's own people are calling for, and the Iranian people will ultimately judge the actions of their own government. I'll post more as he responds to questions on Iran.5.45pm: More remarks from Obama, in his strongest language yet on Iran.At a White House press conference, Obama said he is waiting to see how the current unrest and the disputed election plays out before he commits to altering US foreign policy toward Iran. "We have provided a path whereby Iran can reach out to the international community, engage, and become a part of international norms," he said. "It is up to them to make a decision as to whether they choose that path." He said the beating, killing and detention of protesters is "not encouraging", but predicted the debate in Iran would colour the response to the international communities' overtures."There is a path available to Iran in which their sovereignty is respected, their traditions, their culture, their faith is respected, but one in which they are part of larger community that has responsibilities and operates according to norms and international rules that are universal," he said. "We don't know how they're going to respond yet.""The Iranian government should understand that how they handle the dissent within their own country, generated indiginously, internally... will help shape the tone not only for Iran's future" but also its relations with the world.Obama took a query from Nico Pitney, my liveblogging counterpart over at Huffington Post, who had pledged to ask a question suggested by a reader in Iran.Pitney asked, "Under which conditions would you accept the election of Ahmadinejad, and if you do accept without any significant changes in the conditions there, isn't that a betrayal" of the demonstrators?Obama responded that no international election observers were present on the ground, so the US government cannot say what happened. But he said that a "sizeable percentage" of Iranian deem the election illegitimate."So ultimately, the most important thing for the Iranian government to consider is legitimacy in the eyes of its own people, not legitimacy in the eyes of the United States," he said.6.03pm: Obama responds to criticism from congressional Republicans that he has not taken a firm enough line in support of the demonstrators:He says that even his relatively measured remarks have been distorted by the Tehran regime to make him seem to be interfering in the dispute. He cited reports that the CIA is backing the protesters."It gives you a sense of the narrative that the Iranian government would love to play into," he said. "So members of congress, they've got their constitutional duties and I'm sure they will carry them out in the way they think is appropriate. I'm president of the United States, and I'll carry out my duties as I think is appropriate. "In the hothouse of Washington there may be all kinds of stuff going back and forth in terms of Republican critics versus the administration," he said. "That's not relevant to the Iranian people," whom he speculated are not paying much attention to congressional Republicans' remarks nor to his.Asked by NBC's Chuck Todd why he is merely hinting that human rights violations, Obama bristled:"I'm not hinting," he said. "I think that when a young woman is shot on the street when she gets out of her car," that's a human rights violation. "I think everyone here is on a 24-hour news cycle. I'm not. We don't yet know how this is going to play out."6.11pm: The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace is streaming a discussion called "Iran's Clenched Fist Election: What Next for U.S. Policy?"Participants include the very well informed and astute Iran analyst Karim Sadjadpout, Ambassador Nicholas Burns and Abbas Milani. The discuss the aftermath of the election and its implications for U.S. foreign policy in the region. The Post's David Ignatius moderates the discussion.6.18pm: A curious item on the website of the Tahlil-e Rooz newspaper out of Tehran reports Majlis (parliament) Speaker Ali Larijani, a Khamenei loyalist who has criticised the treatment of protesters, wants Mir Hossein Mousavi to talk about the disputed election on state television.A correspondent sent this translation (which I edited for clarity and style):Ali Larijani, the head of the eighth Iranian Parliament is attempting to schedule an interview with Mir Hossein Mousavi on the state run Iranian TV enabling Mousavi to state his protests regarding the results of the election. A member of the "committee in charge of post-election events" said, "The biased behavior of the state-run media has fanned the flames of protest of the populace and this situation is unacceptable for many officials including the head of parliament". This official also said, "Larijani believes that censorship and the biased coverage of state media is not helping in solving the crisis and is eroding the confidence of the public in the state media. In this regard, the head of parliament is attempting to schedule program including Mousavi on state TV. This program will provide a forum for Mousavi to state his objections regarding the election results and allow officials responsible for elections and a representative of Ahmadinejad to respond to these objections".6.54pm: Eurasianet.org looks at the rumours that Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani has been in Qom, rallying the assembly of experts against Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei.A key, though second-hand, item:A reformist website, Rooyeh, reported that Rafsanjani already had the support of nearly a majority of the Assembly of Experts, a body that constitutionally has the power to remove Ayatollah Khamenei. The report also indicated that Rafsanjani's lobbying efforts were continuing to bring more clerics over to his side. Rafsanjani's aim, the website added, is the establishment of a leadership council, comprising of three or more top religious leaders, to replace the institution of supreme leader. Shortly after it posted the report on Rafsanjani's efforts to establish a new collective leadership, government officials pulled the plug on Rooyeh.Meanwhile, the Al-Arabiya satellite television news channel reported that a "high-ranking" source in Qom confirmed that Rafsanjani has garnered enough support to remove Ayatollah Khamenei, but an announcement is being delayed amid differences on what or who should replace the supreme leader. Some top clerics reportedly want to maintain the post of supreme leader, albeit with someone other than Ayatollah Khamenei occupying the post, while others support the collective leadership approach.Over at his blog on Comment is free, the Guardian's American editor at large Mike Tomasky writes:I think no one really knows what's going on in Qom. Maybe not even the principals themselves. Nevertheless, worth keeping an eye on. Remember: Dictators seem all-powerful until the day they're suddenly not. Then they seem doddering and old. Remember Ferdinand Marcos? Not that the situations are at all the same, but on this one particular point, Marcos serves as an apt reminder that the big fall hard sometimes.7.03pm: On the Tahlil-e Rooz item I posted at 6.18pm, a reader offers this analysis:I may be an incurable optimist but I think that this may indicate that maybe Larijani is thinking that the Rafsanjani faction has a greater chance of winning and is moving center from the hard-line position. I think that my hunch may be correct considering the fact that the demonstration in front of the UK embassy was scrapped. The main purpose of this demonstration would have been to display a show of strength in front of the reformers; this cancellation would be consistent with a shift to the center of some political figures traditionally assumed to be part of the Khamenei camp.I note with interest that my reader sees the conflict as playing out between Khamenei and Rafsanjani.7.12pm: On Comment is free, University of California-Santa Cruz political scientist Roger Schoenman compares the conflict within the upper echelon of the Islamic Republic regime to that which enabled the fall of the Romanian communists in 1989. He writes that police commanders are likely calculating the moral and legal consequences of further attacks on protesters.As the historical record shows, when the police are no longer willing to repress, nine days is enough to unseat a regime that lasted for over 40 years. What comes in its place, however, is not always clear.7.30pm: An unconfirmed report of out of Kermanshah from the National Council of Resistance of Iran.People have been officially warned that a gathering of more than three people is banned across town starting at 16:00 local time, threatening any breach from the directive will be dealt with a crushing response. Moreover, the State Security Force and the Basij have brought in their border guards (Iran-Iraq border) specifically to back up their forces stationed around the city and to confront popular protests.7.47pm: Darkness falls across Iran, and I'm getting reports from reliable twitterers of mayhem in Tehran. Caveat: These "ant's eye" reports are impossible to confirm. If they are true, keep in mind what seems like a big development from one person's rooftop might be an isolated incident.One twitterer says security forces have surrounded foreign embassies to prevent anyone from entering and seeking asylum or medical treatment.Another reports of street battles in east and west Tehran, and that security forces have blocked avenues from downtown Tehran to the north to prevent large gatherings. Again, people are crying "Allah-o Akbar" from their rooftops, and some are shouting "Death to Khamenei" and "Death to the dictator".A twitterer hears gunfire in north Tehran and sees small fires in the streets.8.31pm: Some fresh copy from Guardian writers:Washington bureau chief Ewen Macaskill writes up Obama's earlier remarks on Iran.Tomasky offers his take here. He said the omst important moment in the presser was when Obama took the question from Huffington Post's Nico Pitney, knowing he was relating a question from an Iranian.With the advent of television, politicians learned to go around the press and speak directly to the people. But "the people" always meant, you know, the people of his own country.Now, with social media, "the people" means the globe. It's kind of an amazing thing that this anonymous (so far) Iranian, sitting at home last night in Tehran or Shiraz or wherever it was, minding his or her own business, could convey a question to a journalist halfway across the world and that the question would end up being conveyed to the president of the United States.Massoumeh Torfeh writes on Comment is free that Iran has betrayed its young, who have responded with outrage.8.42pm: The Iranian interior ministry has rejected defeated reformist presidential candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi's claim that "irregularities" marred the June 12 election, the official Press TV reports.The ministry said his complaint, released Saturday, contained "apparent contradictions" and lacked hard evidence of tampering.9.00pm: Mir Hossein Mousavi is under 24-hour guard by secret police and no longer able to speak freely to supporters, film director and Mousavi spokesman Mohsen Makhmalbaf tells the Independent.9.05pm: A reliable twitterer reports that security forces will not release the body of Naser Amir Nejad, who was killed Saturday, unless his family pays a $5,000 fee and agrees not to speak out about his death.The twitterer says Amir Nejad, 23, was an Aerospace engineering student at the Science and Research Brance of Islamic Azad University.Earlier today CNN was reporting that parents of those killed in protests were being made to pay a $3,000 "bullet fee" -- an ostensible reimbursement to the government for the cost of the fatal bullet.9.36pm: This clip, filmed by what sounds like a young woman, whos police in Vanak square, Tehran, beating passersby.11.21pm: Conservative newspaper Kayhan, which is aligned with Ahmadinejad and other regime hardliners, posted an inflamatory article that essentially, but not quite directly, calls for Mousavi to be imprisoned or worse. Here are excerpts from a series of pieces with a headline roughly translated, "The people's wave of blood-vengence from Mousavi". Thanks Mazdak for the translation:More than tens [sic] of people have been killed and wounded. There has been great destruction of public property, lots of arson and hundreds of vehicles destroyed. That has been the result of two weeks of selfishness and illegal behavior from Mir Hossein Mousavi. Mousavi is the candidate of the radicals... All of these people came with the pretence that the law is important. Mousavi is projecting a false image of someone who wants to show that what he's doing is legal. After he got the negative vote of about 25m iranians, he has abandoned all of his claims of citizenship and legality and has shown his real face, which he had hidden behind these lofty slogans during the campaign....This candidate of the radicals, who claims to be a reformist, tried to invalidate the votes of 40m Iranians the day after the 12 June election, without showing any evidence and even though more than 40,000 of his agents were in the booths monitoring the vote....This illegal action led to the 15 June gathering in Azadi Square. This was done inspite of the fact that a day before all of this business Mousavi met with the supreme leader and had been advised that he has to do everything according to law....Four law professors tell Keyhan that Mousavi is responsible for the crimes that have occurred. Everything that has happened is what lawless people have done. According to Rule 498 of the Islamic penal law, if anyone, no matter his political affiliation, convenes a gathering with the purpose of threatening the country's security, if he is not considered a combatant against Islam (mohareb) he will be sentence to two to ten years.My translator, Mazdak, says the article leaves unsaid that if Mousavi is a combatant against Islam, he should be killed.11.25pm: (That's it for tonight, folks. Thank you everyone for reading and for contributing tips, translations and suggestions.)• This blog was amended on 2 June 2011. The original referred to the death of Neda Soltani during a demonstration in Iran. That is the name of a different individual. This has been corrected.