Standard Chartered is a bank that offers similar services to HSBC and Barclays – some customers hold standard savings accounts, credit cards and loans while it also has business and investment banking divisions. But it doesn't offer retail banking in the UK, concentrating instead on emerging and Asian markets. Its heritage in Hong Kong means it is as familiar a name on the high street as the main banks here.It is important to the UK because it has been listed on the London Stock Exchange since 1969 and London is the bank's headquarters. The City is also a key part of its investment banking business, while a significant part of its private and international banking operations are run from its London base. Oh, and the banks sponsors the shirts of Liverpool Football Club.One of the bank's regulators, the New York state department of financial services (DFS), has accused the bank of skirting US sanctions by running a rogue unit that schemed with Iran's government to hide more than $250bn (£160bn) in illegal transactions for nearly a decade. The DFS's report states: "For almost 10 years, [Standard Chartered] schemed with the government of Iran and hid from regulators roughly 60,000 secret transactions, involving at least $250bn, and reaping [Standard Chartered] hundreds of millions of dollars in fees. [Standard Chartered's] actions left the US financial system vulnerable to terrorists, weapons dealers, drug kingpins and corrupt regimes, and deprived law enforcement investigators of crucial information used to track all manner of criminal activity." It said it achieved this by a process called "wire-stripping".The process of changing banking codes to hide where a transaction has come from – often by altering the Swift code which identifies the beneficiary's bank. The DFS report cites an example it claims was contained within a Standard Chartered manual, which explained to staff how they should achieve this. The DFS report said the directive read: "Ensure that if the field 52 of the payment is blank or displayes [sic] any Swift code that it is overtyped at the repair stage to a '.' … (Note: if this is not done then the Iranian Bank Swift code may appear – depending on routing – on the payment message being sent to [the New York branch])."They are similar, but there is a big difference between the cases.Unlike HSBC and Barclays, Standard Chartered refutes the allegations. In a statement it says it "strongly rejects the position and portrayal of facts made by the New York state department of financial services" and points out that it has previously highlighted in its annual report how it is conducting a review of its historical compliance and that it has been discussing that review with US agencies, including the DFS, the department of justice, the Office of Foreign Assets Control, the Federal Reserve Group of New York and the district attorney of New York since January 2010.Following that enquiry, Standard Chartered said it "does not believe the order issued by the DFS presents a full and accurate picture of the facts. The analysis, that the group shared with all the US agencies, demonstrates that throughout the period the group acted to comply, and overwhelmingly did comply, with US sanctions and the regulations relating to U-turn payments. As we have disclosed to the authorities, well over 99.9% of the transactions relating to Iran complied with the U-turn regulations. The total value of transactions which did not follow the U-turn was under $14m."Until November 2008, the US Office of Foreign Assets Control rules had permitted, under limited circumstances and with close regulatory supervision, US financial institutions to process certain transactions for Iranian banks, individuals, and other entities. Pursuant to federal regulations, such transactions were permissible in some circumstances provided that they were initiated offshore by non-Iranian foreign banks and only passed through the US financial system on the way to other non-Iranian foreign banks. Such transactions are commonly referred to as U-turns.