My baba has been diagnosed with cancer, a rare kind that is spreading rapidly.We are lucky. Our family has supplementary medical insurance, on top of the standard government-issued coverage. “Think of the hell we’d go through if we didn’t,” says my brother on the day the diagnosis lands.Under the intense sanctions of recent years, the cost of cancer treatment in Iran has skyrocketed. A single course of chemo meds, imported from Belgium, costs us three million tomans – more than £600. Getting the drugs from the one special pharmacy in Tehran that carries them is a whole process of its own. Still, I’m told, it’s so much better than last year, when patients could only buy these particular meds on the black market at double the price, exclusively in cash.Of course, that was only for those with the money. There are many out there who don’t have enough insurance and simply can’t afford treatment. We worry for the potential next phase, if drugs are prescribed for which we don’t have the coverage. The ballpark figure hospital receptionists give over the phone is that cancer treatment costs around 140 million tomans. Sazman-e tameen-e ejtemaie (the social security organisation), which has a kiosk on the hospital’s ground floor, provides about half that amount to those in need. But there is so much need that goes unanswered.That first day we took my dad to the hospital, I saw a man at the register. “I need to immediately hospitalise my wife,” he was saying.The cashier gave him a receipt. “Go to the other side, pay the two million toman entrance fee, and then come back here.”Have you ever seen someone’s face freeze? Stop and turn to ice? The man’s did, as he explained that he had only 500,000. “Then I’m sorry, we can’t admit her.”And this was a public hospital. I’ve been spending half my waking hours at one or another hospital lately, and I see this kind of thing every day. In a mordant way, it makes me appreciate my situation. Yes, my dad may be sick, but I can afford to see him properly diagnosed and treated. For now, anyway. There are so many out there who don’t have that privilege. My father never made anything easy. From the time I was old enough to speak up for myself, we fought viciously. At times, I hated him passionately. And loved him dearly. He has the roughest exterior and the softest heart of any person I know. But he is a man scarred – by family tragedy, by war. And now this.I am angry. I’m angry that his students knew him for his smile while at home we were the recipients of his anxiety and rage. I’m furious that it is his troubles we get, while the rest of the world got the best of him ... and now there isn’t a “best” to go around anymore. But as I look down at him, see the fear in his eyes and the tubes in his frail body, it no longer seems to matter. He is my baba lying in a hospital bed with this disease no one can cure. And he might soon be gone. This is the second hospital he’s been admitted to in less than a week. The first, a small public facility downtown, was full of light. The architecture was old and cozy, and his room faced a beautiful courtyard garden.But his is an unusual case. So he’s been moved here. And we have to bless our good fortune that he was admitted so quickly. This is the premiere hospital in Iran for his condition, and there are people waiting to get in from all over the country. It’s not unusual here to see hungry people with big suitcases who can barely afford to hospitalise their loved ones, much less pay for food and accommodation in a city as costly as Tehran. And it reeks of death. The buildings are old but not in a cozy way; they are eerie and dark, and the cases here are almost all severe. The patients have hollow, empty eyes. I wonder how long it’ll be before my baba has hollow, empty eyes.His roommate, Mr Karimi, is a construction worker, farmer, and literature teacher from the north who recites beautiful poetry by heart. He has rough farmer’s hands and when he speaks, he is most eloquent. He and his friends laugh, sit around and talk and snack away on sunflower seeds together.One night when my baba was in terrible pain and forced to stay conscious for treatment, Mr Karimi recited poetry for him the entire time, having him repeat verses back to keep him awake. Mr Karimi was admitted last year and left the hospital in remission. Told to rest for six months, after just one he started traveling: to Qom, to Mashhad and then to Karbala in Iraq – all the holy sites he had vowed to see if he got cured. Now his cancer has returned.There is man who hospitalised his young wife the same day my dad was admitted. In the afternoons, I see him sitting in the back stairway, quietly crying.There are so many gravely ill patients here, the staff have no time to chitchat. They are serious and grumpy, except for a young nurse who works the night shift. She’s careful and attentive, and her eyes aren’t as glazed over as those of the jaded day staff. The entire unit works under the guidance of a renowned professor and researcher. A number of doctors work under him, and they each have a fellow (they use the English word, pronouncing it “fee-low”) – a young doctor in training who takes care of patients’ day-to-day care.Each floor has a mail carrier responsible for transporting the patients’ files from building to building, as well as the patients themselves. The one who works on my dad’s floor is Mr Yousefi. On days my dad needs to have tests done, Mr Yousefi puts him in a wheelchair and takes him around. My mom and I buy big boxes of pastries for the hospital staff every morning. It’s done wonders. The grumpy nurses are nicer to us. Mr Yousefi takes extra care of wheeling my dad. Wheeling my dad ...We have another problem on our hands: how to tell his parents. If my grandmother finds out he has cancer, she might have a heart attack. Then we’ll have to take care of two sick people, if she even survives the shock.Amou (uncle) Masoud has woven an elaborate story for the elders in the family. My father happens to have a rare blood condition that is unrelated to the cancer. Amou Masoud tells the elders that this condition has erupted again and that baba needs to be hospitalised for an extended period.It sounds stupid, but he’s so good at convincing them, my mother and I laugh and tell each other, “He’s almost convinced us.” Over time, most of our relatives guess what’s really happening, but they go along with the story for the sake of my grandparents.My uncle has told them the situation is dire. He’s told them its life threatening. He’s told them to pray. As bad as my dad’s situation is, I look at the support network around him and am filled with gratitude. Cousins and aunts are all helping us through this. They bring us food. My aunt who lives near the hospital cooks us lunch and dinner. On Thursday nights, we gather at her house for dinner and read from the Qur’an and the Matifah, the Shia book of prayers. We recite the Dua-e Tawassul, the plea for intercession. I remember being in the company of people reciting this prayer my entire life, and I never cared much for it. But now it’s taken on a completely different meaning.It’s not that I necessarily believe in the prayer. But I believe in a group of people, huddled together on a long, sleepless night, hoping, wishing and praying for my baba’s health. They care for his well being, and their tears show it. I am reminded of a verse by the great seventh-century poet Hafez: What do those who live carelessly on the shore know of our state?  Of the dark night, and terror of the waves, and the fearsome whirlpool? That is indeed the defining feature of my baba’s illness for those of us closest to him: the fear. It is not his death that I fear most, but rather the treacherous journey it will force us to make. The internal bleeding, the nightly emergency room visits, the bloating, the pain, the fever, the doctors’ uncertainty (“this is so rare ... we’re not sure”): they are all part of it. I remember my grandmother’s stories from childhood, of the prince who fought seven-headed goblins and walked through terrifying, murky woods filled with danger in search of a princess, of riches and glory. It all now sounds like a walk in the park compared to this. But we are surrounded by people familiar with our state, and in walking it together, the darkness and terror subside for a time.  All the men in our family have a Google Docs setup so they know whose turn it is to stay with my baba overnight (only men stay over, because of the other male patient in the room). My dad’s eldest cousin, Amou (uncle) Masoud, has assumed the role of crisis manager. He takes time off each day from work to come to the hospital and make sure everything is OK. He recruits new people for the night shift. You better not ta’rof him with a perfunctory offer of help, or he’ll have you in the Google Docs in no time. I look at this network and I wonder: what will become of my generation? A generation with more gadgets than siblings or cousins. When we lie in the hospital bed, who will take care of us?