The UN security council today approved a third round of sanctions against Iran with near unanimous support, sending a strong signal to Tehran that its refusal to suspend uranium enrichment is unacceptable and becoming increasingly costly.The vote was 14-0 with one abstention from Indonesia. Iran's UN ambassador Mohammad Khazee told the council just before the vote that the government would not comply with the "unlawful action" against its nuclear programme. "Iran cannot and will not accept a requirement which is legally defective and politically coercive. History tells us that no amount of pressure, intimidation and threat will be able to coerce our nation to give up its basic and legal rights." For the first time, the resolution bans trade with Iran in goods that have both civilian and military uses. It also authorises inspections of shipments to and from Iran by sea and air that are suspected of carrying banned items. The resolution introduces financial monitoring of two banks with suspected links to proliferation activities, Bank Melli and Bank Saderat. It calls on all countries "to exercise vigilance" in entering into new trade commitments with Iran, including granting export credits, guarantees or insurance. The resolution also orders countries to freeze the assets of 12 additional companies and 13 individuals with links to Iran's nuclear or ballistic missile programmes - and require countries to "exercise vigilance" and report the travel or transit of those Iranians. It imposes a travel ban on five individuals linked to Iran's nuclear effort. Most of the new individuals subject to sanctions are technical figures but one, Brigadier General Mohammad Reza Naqdi, is a prominent figure in the Revolutionary Guard military corps and is close to Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. The resolution identifies him as head of the state anti-smuggling headquarters engaged in efforts to get around previous UN sanctions. Britain and France, who co-sponsored the resolution, put off the vote from Saturday until today to try to get four non-permanent council members who raised a variety of concerns on board — Libya, Indonesia, South Africa and Vietnam. In the final vote, Libya, South Africa and Vietnam voted "yes" but Indonesia abstained. Diplomats credited the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, who visited South Africa last week, for helping to sway the Libyans and South Africans. Indonesia's UN ambassador Marty Natalegawa told the council that his nation had confidence in the International Atomic Energy Agency's ability to handle the dispute over Iran's nuclear program, rather than the security council intervening with further sanctions. "We must avoid more of the same," he said just before the vote. "Iran is cooperating with the IAEA. At this juncture, more sanctions are not the best cause." One concern raised by the four countries is the latest IAEA report on February 22 that said suspicions about most past Iranian nuclear activities had eased or been laid to rest. The Libyan and Indonesian envoys had stressed that this indicated Iranian cooperation, and questioned the need for additional sanctions. But the Americans and their European allies stressed that the report from the UN nuclear watchdog confirmed that Iran has continued to enrich uranium, in defiance of security council resolutions, and demanded that Tehran suspend its uranium centrifuge programme.