Jundallah, the Iranian Sunni group that claimed responsibility for today's suicide bombing which killed dozens of people, has a long history of attacks on civilian targets.Often said by Tehran to be supported by the US, Britain or Israel, it uses bases in nearby Pakistan to mount attacks in the border province of Sistan-Baluchestan, where there is a Sunni majority.The Iranian government says it has links to al-Qaida and has a separatist agenda; the rebel group itself – which is thought to have no more than 100 core members – has claimed to be fighting for equal rights in the overwhelmingly Shia Islamic republic. . According to some sources it has links to Pakistani intelligence.Not for the first time, Jundallah chose an important Shia religious holiday – Ashura, which marks the seventh-century martyrdom of the Prophet Muhammad's grandson Hussein – to strike.Its last big attack was in July on a mosque in the provincial capital of Zahedan, where Shia worshippers were celebrating Hussein's birthday. That was described as retaliation for the execution of the group's captured leader, Abdolmalek Rigi, and killed 28 people, including members of the elite Revolutionary Guards Corps.Last month the US officially designated Jundallah a foreign terrorist organisation, drawing a cautious welcome from Iran, which had previously accused Washington of supporting the group.Rigi was captured in a dramatic operation in February while on a flight from Dubai to Kyrgyzstan. Iranian planes forced the aircraft he was on to land in Iran. He was hanged in June. Rigi's brother was also executed on charges of terrorism.The US decision to ban Jundallah was interpreted as a conciliatory gesture by Washington, despite its failure to improve relations with Tehran since Barack Obama's inauguration. Iran has repeatedly accused the US of backing Jundallah. Media reports, citing former CIA officers, say there are links between the group and US intelligence. Washington denies the claims. Jundallah has used suicide bombings, ambushes, kidnappings and targeted assassinations.Iran has been concerned recently that deteriorating security inside Pakistan could create sanctuaries for Jundallah and help it co-operate with Pakistani Baloch insurgents. Earlier this year responsibility for counter-terrorism in eastern Iran was transferred from the army and police to the Revolutionary Guards.