Friday prayers at Tehran University normally serve as a showcase for the regime. It was from this pulpit that Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, told the hundreds of thousands protesting about the stolen election a month ago to stay off the streets. Mass protest and more bloodshed ensued. Yesterday's prayers were anything but a platform for either the supreme leader or his doomed president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who stayed well away.One of the ayatollah's bitterest rivals, the influential cleric and former president Hashemi Rafsanjani, was in the pulpit. Mir Hossein Mousavi, the candidate who claimed to have beaten Mr Ahmadinejad, was in the front row. Mehdi Karroubi, the reformist cleric, was also there. Mr Rafsanjani's words may not have been carried live on state TV, but they got out soon enough on radio, the blogosphere and Twitter in Persian and English. Together, the three men now form a public and formidable opposition bloc.Nobody knows what is going to happen next in Iran – least of all, one suspects, the main players involved. But two broad conclusions emerge from the continuing political turmoil. The first is that the supreme leader has lost his supremacy. In that disastrous sermon last month, the ayatollah shed a large part of his authority. He was no longer the guardian of the revolution, the keeper of its Islamic standards, or even the politician who shrewdly balanced one set of competing interests against another. Ayatollah Khamenei not only pitched himself foursquare behind a disputed candidate, by saying the margin of his victory was too great to have been manipulated. By outlawing a mass protest movement that was being clubbed, shot and tear-gassed off the streets, he cast himself adrift from millions of once-loyal citizens. He made a huge and perhaps irredeemable error by not staying above the fray.The second conclusion is that if the regime will not change, the power of its institutions will continue to fade. The importance of Mr Rafsanjani's sermon lay not just in what he said, although that was clear enough: acknowledging publicly that the country was in crisis, calling for unity and the release of political detainees. It was the way he grounded his attack on today's rulers in the founding values of the Islamic Republic and its former supreme leader, Ayatollah Khomeini. When Mr Rafsanjani said that Ayatollah Khomeini never broke his bond with the Iranian people, it was clear who had broken it. As one observer noted, it was almost as if he was angling for the supreme leader's job himself. Peace can be forcibly restored to Tehran's streets, but the challenge of Mr Rafsanjani's words will linger.