Does the sudden resignation of the top US military commander in the Middle East, Admiral William Fallon, signal that the Bush administration is planning to attack Iran?That suggestion was dismissed as "ridiculous" by the US defence secretary, Robert Gates. Fallon's departure, however, has set minds racing, coming a week after a profile in Esquire magazine portrayed him as awkward dove on Iran: If, in the dying light of the Bush administration, we go to war with Iran, it'll all come down to one man. If we do not go to war with Iran, it'll come down to the same man. He is that rarest of creatures in the Bush universe: the good cop on Iran, and a man of strategic brilliance.The Guardian says Fallon's exit has "put US military action against Iran back on the agenda when it had been generally assumed around the world that it was no longer a serious option". Its report quotes the former presidential candidate John Kerry as saying: "His [Fallon's] departure must not clear the way for a rush to war with Iran."The Times says Pentagon insiders claim the resignation was more the result of a "turf battle between him and General David Peteraeus". The New York Times notes that Fallon's public statements have fallen within the range of views expressed by Gates and Admiral Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and says his departure is only "perceived" to stem from differences over Iran.However, Marc Ginsberg, a former US ambassador to Morocco, smells a rat. Writing on the Huffington Post, Ginsberg says he thinks the Republican presidential candidate, John McCain, could have had a hand in Fallon's exit."Could be that McCain himself made it clear to Bush ... that he needed Fallon out before Fallon embarrased McCain, given Fallon's positions that were 180 degrees contrary to McCain's," he says.Steve Clemons, blogging on Washington Notes, says "rumours are running rampant that Bush called a war room gathering on Saturday ... and launched plans to hatch a strike of some sort on Iran this spring".However, he urges bloggers to stop hyperventilating about the prospects of a conflict with Tehran."My sources in the intelligence arena, in various command staff operations, near Gates and even in the White House, tell me that nothing structural has changed in America's stance towards Iran," he says. "The US is still engaged in an effort to get Iran to the negotiating table if it stops its nuclear enrichment activities."This will not stop fears of war. "Bush obviously wants to attack Iran and, as he did in the lead-up to the invasion of Iraq, he is sweeping aside respected senior officers who oppose his war plans ... what could be even more troubling is that Gates is seemingly playing ball with Bush and going along with this preposterous exercise," says the Bush Whacked League blog.* This is an extended extract from the Wrap, our digest of the day's papers.