No one should be naive about the possibility that Iran is building a nuclear bomb. In February, the world's nuclear inspector agency, the IAEA, listed seven outstanding questions about work which Iran had allegedly conducted on warhead design. In May, it claimed to have evidence about work dating back to 2003 on nuclear triggers. Next week we are promised another IAEA report that one western official calls a game-changer. But to date, it is equally true to say that the evidence for these claims has yet to be produced.As Richard Dalton and five other former ambassadors to Iran wrote in June, while the concerns of the international community are legitimate and Iran has a moral duty to answer them, nothing in international law or in the non-proliferation treaty forbids uranium enrichment. Nor does it necessarily provide a motive. Iran could be striving to become a threshold country, technically able to produce a nuclear weapon, without having made a decision to do so.Nevertheless the drumbeats are getting louder. Today we reveal British armed forces are making contingency plans for possible participation in an aerial attack on Iran's nuclear enrichment plants. This includes where to deploy ships and submarines equipped with cruise missiles. Last week the New York Times reported that the US will send more naval ships to the area and expand military ties with the six nations in the Gulf Co-operation Council. Israel sees the Iran nuclear programme as an existential threat and the defence minister Ehud Barak reportedly told Washington that if the US does not bomb Iran, Israel will. The two "windows of opportunity" for such an attack are provided firstly by conflicting estimates of how far the enrichment programme has got (enough to make between three and four bombs, but only a fraction of it enriched to levels which make weapon-grade material a reality) and second, by the supposition that they will soon be able to bury the stuff under a mountain in Qom, where no missile will get at it.The regional consequences of an aerial strike are daunting. It would be not one strike but many, with unforeseeable consequences. Heavy civilian casualties and an Iran reunited around its leadership are just two. Ground troops might well be needed to keep the Straits of Hormuz open. This would be war. Nor would it be one but potentially several, as missiles rained down on Israel from Lebanon and Gaza and Iran retaliated on targets in Iraq. Further, if the Iranian intention to construct a nuclear bomb was covert before such an attack, it would surely be overt after it. It is hugely important that negotiations are restarted before this nightmare becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.