Restoration of any kind of diplomatic links between the US and Iran would be a change of huge significance after nearly 30 years of deeply troubled relations.The two countries have been at daggers drawn since the 1979 Islamic revolution, when the shah, long backed by Washington, was overthrown by Ayatolah Khomeini.The slogan "Death to America" is often chanted at Friday prayers in Iran, while anti-US slogans, posters and grafitti are prominently displayed. The US was reported recently to be boosting covert action programmes against Iran.Back in 1979, the US embassy in Tehran was famously dubbed the "nest of spies" and 52 of its diplomats were held hostage for 444 days and were freed in early 1981, immediately after Ronald Reagan took over from Jimmy Carter. An abortive attempt to rescue them was made in April 1980, killing eight US servicemen.The US quietly "tilted" towards Saddam Hussein's Iraq during the bloody eight-year war with Iran, confirming in Khomeini's mind that America was the "Great Satan," hated too for its unstiniting support of Israel, whose invasion of Lebanon in 1982 was followed by devastating Iranian-inspired attacks on the US marine barracks and US embassy in Beirut.Relations plummeted further in 1988, when a US navy ship shot down an Iranian Airbus over the Strait of Hormuz, killing 290 civilians. Matters worsened again under President Bill Clinton, who imposed a total embargo on dealing with Iran by American companies.Hopes grew for better relations in 1997, when the reformist president Mohammed Khatami came to power, invoking Alexis de Tocqueville to explain the similarities between American and Iranian views of freedom. But a limited thaw - with an exchange of wrestling teams, freer travel to and from the US and an end to the US embargo of Iranian carpets and pistachios - failed to develop. Iran's conservatives opposed it in principle while the US demanded changes in Iranian policy on Israel, nuclear energy and terrorism. Iran condemned the 9/11 attacks on the US but in January 2002 President Bush included Iran - with Iraq and North Korea - in his "axis of evil" speech. Shortly after the invasion of Iraq in March 2003, Iran - badly shaken by the war -reportedly made an offer of a "grand bargain" with the US. That could have resolved outstanding issues including Iran's support for groups such as Hamas and Hizbullah, its nuclear programme, and cooperation against al-Qaida.Washington's failure to respond has been widely seen as a missed opportunity - and been blamed on Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld. Iran, now developing long-range ballistic missiles that could be used with a future nuclear warhead, is seen as challenging the US and its Israeli ally for hegemony across the Middle East, setting the agenda in Iraq, Lebanon and Palestine. In late 2006, the Baker-Hamilton commission recommended US dialogue with Iran. News of the opening of a US interests section in Tehran could be the start of that.