The Conservative MP Brian Binley is wrong about Iran. In his article for Cif yesterday, he uses the British government's handling of the Peter Moore case as proof of its appeasement policy towards the Iranian regime. The Foreign Office can be reproached for denying Iran's involvement in Moore's kidnapping, but this doesn't mean that it has a softly-softly approach to Tehran in general, nor that Britain has "a blinkered view" of Iran's negative role in the Middle East.Nevertheless, it is true that Iran is strengthening its influence in the Middle East. It is providing financial and technical assistance to Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza and has been accused of backing the Houthi rebels in Yemen. Nor can Iran's influence in Syria and Iraq be denied.However, Binley's depiction of Iran's support for the Taliban in Afghanistan is a gross exaggeration. When he claims that the "Tehran-backed" Taliban inflicted the bloodiest year of the conflict yet on British troops in 2009, he is overestimating Iran's influence in order to criticise the British government for inviting Iran to London's conference on Afghanistan later this month.In reality, Iran's relationship with the Taliban is far from clear. Iran helped the US and Britain with their first attacks on Afghanistan in 2001 and 2002 against al-Qaida and its Taliban supporters. In those days, when reformist president Mohammad Khatami was in power, Iran joined India, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan in a concerted front to help the US with its war against terrorists in Afghanistan.Iran's Shia regime and its support for Shia groups in the region have also made the Taliban Sunni extremists angry. Jundallah, an insurgent Sunni group based in south-east Iran – which has claimed responsibility for many military actions inside the country – is believed by the Iranian government to be a Pakistani Taliban-backed terrorist group. Yet recent reports that some members of Bin Laden's family are in Iran make it difficult to judge where Iran stands in Afghanistan today.Tehran will indeed be one of the biggest foreign policy issues for Britain in 2010, but the solutions Binley proposes would worsen the situation in Iran and help the Iranian government to crack down on the opposition movement.Binley is mistaken in thinking that the National Council of Resistance of Iran (NCRI) represents the Iranian opposition movement. It does not even represent most of the Iranians in exile. The NCRI and its president-elect Maryam Rajavi are not popular within Iran and its opposition movement. More support for the NCRI would only put Iranian protesters in danger, as it would allow Iranian officials to link them with the NCRI."A wider range of targeted sanctions" is the worst possible solution to relations with Iran. Having its embassy's local staff intimidated and imprisoned, and two of its diplomats expelled from Tehran, the British government has been facing a difficult time in Iran, too. By using the term "appeasement", Binley underestimates the difficulty of developing an effective policy towards Iran.The British government is now clearly aware that Iran is a tough issue to deal with. President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's government loves sanctions, loves to have the British Embassy in Tehran closed and is happy to let the nuclear issue divert attention from its human rights abuses. It's time for western politicians to be wiser and more attentive when considering policy towards Iran. British MPs should be careful when deciding how to support Iran's opposition movement. It's time for Iranians to struggle for their own future and hasty, harmful polices should be avoided by western politicians.