Much of what is taking place in Iran can be glimpsed only through grainy mobile phone clips. Six months on from an election which the defeated candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi called a coup d'etat, opposition leaders are either in prison, under house arrest or unable to operate freely. But nor have things gone swimmingly for their repressors. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has become a diminished figure. For many Iranians, he is the supreme jurist no more. The rape and abuse of detainees in prison caused widespread revulsion towards a government that proclaims Islamic values.As the regime sheds legitimacy, there is serious dissent among the conservative elites about the wisdom of continuing to back President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Each event on the Iranian calendar becomes another political hurdle which they collectively have to surmount. Students Day was the last. Ashura, the Shia festival marking the death of Hossein, grandson of the prophet Muhammad, may be the next.Faced with a domestic revolt that refuses to die, the hard core of the regime falls back on a policy that only can buy temporary relief – more arrests. State television's images of people it claimed were opposition supporters tearing up and trampling on a picture of the Islamic Republic's founder, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, had all the trappings of a set-up, and a pretext for more arrests. On a parallel front, the regime is going full throttle against the US, by announcing yesterday that three American hikers accused of espionage last month would face trial. After rejecting the nuclear offer to reprocess low-enriched uranium in Russia and France, Iran is set to face down the threat of what the US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, called crippling sanctions.It has become a cliche to say there are no good options about Iran. This does not mean that Washington is doomed to choose the worst option – barring military assault – each time negotiations fail. Giving diplomacy no more than three months to work, as opposed to sanctions on Iran which lasted for more than 20 years, may have been a mistake. So too was limiting the talks to the enrichment process alone. There are many other fronts on which Iran should be engaged, if US troops want to pull their troops out of either Iraq or Afghanistan. There is no escaping Iran's regional influence, malign or otherwise. Engagement with the various power centres in Iran does not automatically entail support for a regime that suppresses domestic dissent. It could be used to widen the cracks. Smart engagement could have proved a lot smarter than the sanctions that are about to be unleashed on a battered and weary nation.