 8.56am BST Welcome to Middle East Live. The blog is now primarily a forum for readers to share links and offer commentary on developments in the Middle East and North Africa. Please post your comments below.Here's a roundup of the latest developments and analysis:• Iran has accused Israel's prime minister Binyamin Netanyahu of “saber-rattling” after he claimed Iran's president Hassan Rouhani was a "wolf in sheep's clothing". Iran's deputy ambassador to the UN, Khodadad Seifi, condemned the remarks as “inflammatory”, Iran's Press TV reports. Meanwhile, Iran's conservative-dominated parliament has endorsed Rouhani's diplomatic overtures to the west. • Netanyahu, launched a sustained attack on Rouhani, deriding his recent charm offensive with western leaders as a "ruse and a ploy" that was designed to fool the international community into dropping its guard against Iran's development of nuclear weapons. Netanyahu sounded a starkly conflicting note from the hope expressed at this year's general assembly about Iran's willingness to negotiate over its nuclear programme. He said Rouhani "thinks he can have his yellow cake and eat it too."Yousef Munayyer, executive director of the Palestine centre in Washington, used a Wordle version of Netanyahu's speech to highlight's Israel's priorities.Netanyahu speech word cloud shows word usage. Iran occupies his mind while he occupies & barely mentions Palestinians pic.twitter.com/v3r8y6tDl7• Netanyahu's warnings are likely to be ignored even by Israel's biggest ally as Washington pursues the diplomatic approach, writes Simon Tisdall.Netanyahu's energetic attempts over the past three years to convince the great powers that Iran is the world's number one security threat, akin to but more dangerous than North Korea, thus seems to have run into the sand. Nor do previous veiled threats of Israeli military action against Iran's nuclear sites now appear to have any substance, as US opposition to any such action has stiffened with Obama's re-election and the technical and practical difficulties for Israel of mounting unilateral strikes have become clearer.• International inspectors have arrived in Syria to begin overseeing the destruction of President Bashar al-Assad's chemical weapons programme, kicking off a mission that must navigate the country's bloody civil war as well as the international spotlight. Twenty inspectors from the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons have about nine months to complete the task, which has been endorsed by a UN security council resolution that calls for Syria's chemical stockpile to be eliminated by mid-2014. It is the shortest deadline that the organisation has ever faced, and its first mission in a country at war.• Russia has expressed doubt that Western nations can persuade Syrian opposition representatives to take part in an international peace conference in Geneva in time for it to take place in mid-November. The doubts of Damascus's most important ally followed remarks in which the international envoy for Syria, Lakhdar Brahimi, said the target date of mid-November was "not 100% certain" and cited disunity among rebel forces. "Until recently we hoped our Western partners, who undertook to bring the opposition to the conference, could do it quite quickly, but they were unable to do it quickly, and I don't know whether they will be able to do so by mid-November," Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said.• Paris prosecutors have opened a preliminary investigation into the vast property portfolio of Bashar al-Assad's uncle, after two anti-corruption groups filed a complaint alleging he illegally acquired millions of pounds' worth of assets in France. Rifaat al-Assad, a former military commander, has been accused by the French anti-corruption campaign groups Sherpa and Transparency International France of corruption, money-laundering, embezzlement of public funds and misuse of corporate assets.• The UN has found "widespread" evidence of torture and ill-treatment in Libya's jails where it estimates 8,000 people are still being held over the conflict that toppled Muammar Gaddafi. The report recorded 27 cases of death in custody where torture was the most likely cause. The UN's human rights chief, Navi Pillay, said: “The situation of detainees in Libya is alarming and while there has been some progress, there is an urgent need to renew efforts to prevent torture, investigate allegations of torture and prosecute those responsible.”• Some of the 50 people jailed in Bahrain on Sunday for security offences were also convicted of spying for Iran and had planned "vandalism and rioting" with the backing of Tehran, the Bahraini government said. The 50 were sentenced to between five and 15 years in jail for links to February 14, an opposition movement seen by the authorities as a terrorist group working to overthrow the government.