10.25am: Iranian state television is reporting that 10 people were killed and more than 100 were wounded in yesterday's clashes."In the unrest leading to clashes 10 people were killed and more than 100 wounded," it said. "The presence of terrorists ... in yesterday's event in Enghelab and Azadi avenues was tangible."Another state television channel, the English-language Press TV, had earlier said 13 people died in clashes between police and "terrorist groups."Robert Tait, the Guardian's former Tehran correspondent, says the numbers could be well higher.You can follow the events of previous days here:20 June: protesters defy Khamenei19 June: Khamenei's hardline speech18 June: mass mourning17 June: crackdown continues16 June: day of unrest15 June: aftermath of disputed results12 June: election dayAs there are so many restrictions on journalists in Iran it is difficult to get information, so if you are in Iran and have news, please email me at mark.tran@guardian.co.uk or post updates or interesting links in the comments section below.And if you have taken any pictures of the latest events in Iran, or know anyone who has, please send them to pictures@guardian.co.uk. Please provide as much information as you can about your pictures including what they show, and when and where they were taken. Thanks.10.49am: There is particularly disturbing footage of a woman lying on the street after being shot. This is what an emailer writes:I'm writing to ask that you take the time to reference a young girl's needless death in tomorrow's blog. I didn't have the stomach to post the video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ys1u9QiS0eM , she literally dies on camera. We both know her death will be ignored by the media, instead they'll have the police complain of their '400 injured' or the '300 ransacked banks'. I understand if you too cannot post the video, it is snuff at its worst; but the world should know.10.54am: My colleague Matthew Weaver, who was live blogging yesterday, received many comments which he has forwarded to me. Here is one.I think the mood Matthew after yesterday (I was there at the demo, where the atmosphere was very tense and eventually turned violent), is a feeling that "it's all over". There is a feeling that this opposition movement has now fizzled out. The shouts of 'Allah o Akbar' at night are expected to continue and sporadic violent clashes on the streets will persist for a while after sunset. However, the general consensus is that there will be no more mass demonstrations or any organized opposition. Most people have resigned themselves to this line of thinking.11.01am: Another email on yesterday's clashes.Injured people are being taken to the foreign embassies instead of hospitals since hospitals are not safe any more. A new formula of tear gas is being used against the contestators. It's devastating, much stronger than the regular tear gas, with effects on the digestive appartus (stomach, etc.) and making the person very feeble for 2-3 days, not the classical burning effect of the tear gas. People are desperately looking for ways to protect themselves.11.04am: An interesting snippet from the Associated Press on US-Iran trade links. It reports that Iran spent nearly twice as much on US imports during Barack Obama's first months in office as it did during the same period in 2008, so despite trade penalties and tense relations, the two countries are still doing business. According to AP, the US exported $96m (£58m) in goods to Iran from January through April, compared to $51m during the same period in 2008m.11.16am: In a thoughtful piece, the Observer's foreign affairs editor, Peter Beaumont, pleads for a careful examination of Iran's unrest that goes "beyond the usual glib depictions of Ahmadinejad as nothing more than a dictatorial Holocaust-denier or Mousavi as a receptacle for hopes of a kind of liberal western reformation of Iran's revolution".He goes on: "The social and political tensions that have been building since the Islamic revolution have gained pace since the emergence of the Reformists as a serious political force. What they speak to are a set of concerns that can only be understood in an Iranian context. The problems encompassed include the pressing issue of how to reconcile the increasingly conflicted question of how people behave in private in their homes and in the more restrictive public spaces. There is the tension, too, that has been growing for over a decade between the concept of velayat e-faqih - clerical jurisprudence - and the desire for more meaningful democratic representation in the context of a socially conservative Islamic state."11.28am: The International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran says security forces are going into hospitals to arrest injured protesters. Doctors have been ordered to report protest-related injuries to the authorities, says the New York-based group, and some seriously injured protesters have sought refuge at foreign embassies - which chimes with what an emailer said earlier."The arrest of citizens seeking care for wounds suffered at the hands of security forces when they attempted to exercise rights guaranteed under their own constitution and international law is deplorable," said Hadi Ghaemi, spokesman for the campaign.11.38am: A European-iranian, currently in Iran has just emailed this. I should note that the Iranian authorities have confirmed eight deaths in last week's protests so the figure of 30 used in this message is considerably higher.There is chaos here... In my part of town, there were fires last night in order to prevent tear-gas being spread in the streets... People were holding up the shirt of a Basiji presumed to have been beaten, and set fire to it... We don't however know what is going to happen today... On another note, one of my relatives has a friend, whose sister works as a nurse in one of the bigger hospitals in Tehran. She told him that the bodies of the approximatley 30 people who were killed during last week's protests are in her hospital, and the regime refuses to give their families access to them, in fear of their names getting out, because that will probably cause a public outrage. Thing is, the families that are waiting ouside the hospitals, don't know if it's their children that are there or not... 11.54am: The issue of whether protesters are safe if they go to hospital is turning out to be a major concern. This on Twitter.dont go to hospitals, they dont help.. doctors who want to help please wear white on protest so injured can find you12.02pm: This is a vivid, touching - and at times funny - account of yesterday's demonstrations that Matt Weaver received and forwarded to me. It's long but worth reading. This is how the account starts.We gather up with my students on Saturdays for a private class. We cook and eat together, then talk of philosophy. This time there was no class. We only tried to keep up our morale. We were very determined but scared. That is how I can describe the most people who came out to attend the demonstration today. After the fierce speech at the Friday prayers, we knew that today we would be treated differently. We felt so vulnerable, more than ever, but at the same time were aware of our power, which, no matter how influential it is collectively, would have done little to protect us today. We could only take our bones and flesh to the streets and expose them to batons and bullets. Two different feelings fight inside you without mixing with one another. To live or to just be alive, that's the question.12.36pm: The hospital where the 30 bodies from last week's protests are located is the Imam Khomeini hospital in Tehran, our previous emailer has just told us.12.45pm: AP is reporting that the daughter and four other relatives of former President Hashemi Rafsanjani, one of Iran's most powerful men, have been arrested. That would be a major development and reflects the other aspect of what is going on. Apart from the grassroots protests, a power struggle is taking place within the elite. As Ali Ansari, one of the top experts on Iran, writes in today's Observer.Hashemi Rafsanjani and Hasan Rowhani reportedly remain in Qom seeking an emergency session of the assembly of experts - the constitutional body tasked with supervising the supreme leader - while at the same time encouraging senior ayatollahs to be more vocal in their protests. Similarly, those who support the president, such as the notoriously hardline Ayatollah Misbah-Yazdi, will be doing their bit to ensure no such protests emerge.1.04pm: The Revolutionary Road website has video of what seems to be largely orderly march down a main street in Shiraz today.1.09pm: Robert Tait says there are reports that a bomb has exploded in the past few minutes at Talaghani Street undergound metro station, close to the former US embassy. Reports suggest that there are many dead, though there few details or confirmation.1.12pm: Fars News, a mouthpiece for the Revolutionary Guards, is reporting that the BBC Tehran correspondent, Jon Leyne, has been given 24 hours to leave Iran for filing "false news and reports, ignoring impartiality, supporting the insurgents, trampling the rights of the Iranian nation, fanning the unrest and also provoking public opinion". "Personally, having gone through the same experience myself and having wathcing his dispatches, I am hugely unsurprised by this. I could see it coming a mile off," Tait says.Meanwhile, he says the Balatarin website says that families of those killed in street clashes are being asked to pay between 10m rials and 150m rials (£611 and £9,165) to retrieve their loved ones from the morgues.1.23pm: Britain has hit back after Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei accused "the evil British government" last week of interfering in the election."I reject categorically the idea that the protesters in Iran are manipulated or motivated by foreign countries," said David Miliband, the Foreign Secretary. "The UK is categorical that it is for the Iranian people to choose their government, and for the Iranian authorities to ensure the fairness of the result and the protection of their own people." He also said Iran was trying to distract attention from its internal difficulties.1.28pm: More from Robert Tait.An eyewitness involved in yesterday's demonstrations tells the Guardian that protestors have been chanting "Death to Khamenei" - an unprecedented event. Pictures have also begun to appear of demonstrators setting fire to banners attached to a bridge on one of Tehran's main boulevards bearing the supreme leader's picture.1.35pm: Here is video of those burning pictures of Khamenei.1.37pm: Obama has been very cautious in his comments, aware that Iran's hardliners can accuse him of interfering in its affairs, as the Washington Post reports. But Shimon Peres, the Israeli president shows no such compunction."Let the young people raise their voice for freedom, let the Iranian women ... voice their thirst for equality," Peres told a gathering of world Jewish leaders.If the protests continue, Peres said, "hopefully the poor government will disappear."1.45pm: The defeated reformist candidate, Mir Hossein Mousavi, has apparently written to Obama to express his displeasure at being lumped together with Mahmoud Ahamadinejad. Michael Ledeen, a leading neo-con, who received the letter from one of his sources, believes it to be authentic.The letter says: "In the name of the Iranian people, we want you to know that when you recently made the statement "Achmadinejad or Mousavi? Two of a kind," we consider this as a grave and deep insult, not just to Mr. Mousavi but especially against the judgment of the Iranian people, against our moral conviction and intelligence, especially those of the young generation that comprises a population of 31 million."1.53pm: In the Guardian's latest story of the crisis, Robert Tait writes: "The rallies left questions about Mousavi's ability to hold together his protest movement. He bewildered many followers by not directly replying to the ultimatum issued by Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's most powerful figure, on Friday to call off the demonstrations or risk being held responsible for 'bloodshed, violence and rioting.'"1.58pm: The BBC has confirmed that its Tehran correspondent, Jon Leyne, has been thrown out."With regret, Jon Leyne, the BBC's permananent correspondent in Tehran, has been asked to leave by the Iranian authorities," the BBC said. "The BBC office remains open."As Robert Tait pointd out it was inevitable especially as the Iranian authorities have singled out the BBC for criticism and have tried to block reception of its Persian service. Heavy irony here. The former Shah of Iran was furious at the BBC Persian service during the 1979 revolution. He accused the Beeb of bias against him and favouring Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Shah-friendly MPs at the time put a lot of pressure on the BBC World Service and the Persian service staff had to spend much time going through their output to justify themselves. What goes around comes around, as the saying goes.2.16pm: Chatham House, the thinktank, has published a paper casting doubt on the election result. Its main points are:- In two conservative provinces, Mazandaran and Yazd, a turnout of more than 100% was recorded.  - At a provincial level, there is no correlation between the increased turnout, and the swing to Ahmadinejad. This challenges the notion that his victory was due to the massive participation of a previously silent conservative majority. - In a third of all provinces, the official results would require that Ahmadinejad took not only all former conservative voters, and all former centrist voters, and all new voters, but also up to 44% of former reformist voters, despite a decade of conflict between these two groups. - In 2005, as in 2001 and 1997, conservative candidates, and Ahmadinejad in particular, were markedly unpopular in rural areas. That the countryside always votes conservative is a myth. The claim that this year Ahmadinejad swept the board in more rural provinces flies in the face of these trends.2.35pm: Mohammad Khatami, a moderate former president, has spoken out against the banning of protests in support of Mousavi."Preventing people from expressing their demands through civil ways will have dangerous consequences (for the country)," Khatami, a Mousavi ally, said in a statement, the semi-official Mehr news agency reported.2.41pm: More background on the rift between Rafsanjani and the Khamenei/Ahmadinejad axis from AP, which reports an "eerie calm" in Tehran.Rafsanjani, who was accused by Ahmadinejad of corruption on TV, heads two powerful groups: the assembly of experts, made up of senior clerics who can elect and dismiss the supreme leader; and the expediency council, a body that arbitrates disputes between parliament and the unelected guardian council, which can block legislation.On Friday, Khamenei praised Rafsanjani as one of the architects of the revolution and an effective political figure for many years. Khamenei acknowledged, however, that the two have "many differences of opinion." Now Rafsanjani's daughter has been arrested as part of a crackdown that has seen hundreds of people taken into custody.3.16pm: Rightwing Republicans - and some Democrats - have accused Obama of being too timid on the protests. But a respected Republican, senator Richard Lugar, has given the president some political cover. He told CNN that Obama or secretary of state Hillary Clinton should meet their Iranian counterparts to contain Iran's nuclear ambitions despite the protests.4.00pm: More evidence of tensions among the ayatollahs. Hossein Ali Montazeri, an architect of the 1979 Islamic revolution who fell out with the present leadership, said: "Resisting people's demand is religiously prohibited." Montazeri, who has been under house arrest for some years, called for three days of national mourning for those killed, in a statement on his website.4.40pm: The Iranian authorities have arrested 23 journalists and bloggers since post-election protests began a week ago, according to Reporters without Borders. Among those arrested was the head of the Association of Iranian Journalists, Ali Mazroui. The French group says Iran ranks with China as the biggest jailer of journalists.4.50pm: Muslim News, very usefully, carries remarks by the powerful speaker of parliament, Ali Larijani. who has criticised both the reformists and the hardliners. In his TV interview yesterday he seems to come down on the side of the latter. If that is the case, it does not bode well for Mousavi. Here are some of his comments.The issue cannot be taken forward by shouting fraud, stirring the mood, and dragging the issue to the streets. We must separate those who have burnt people's shops in the streets and harmed the police and Basij, who are the guardians of the country, from the critics of the election results. Some, who may not have even voted, are taking advantage of the current mood by creating unrest and disrupting public security. They must be stopped.He goes on to attack the British and Americans, for "making rude comments and trying to pose as supporters of human rights in Iran".5.17pm: That's all for now. Thank you very much for all your comments. Please keep them coming.