There are today more than enough signs to indicate that Iran wants to use its newly elected president, Hassan Rouhani, to break the stalemate over its nuclear programme and release the grip that sanctions are having on its economy. The recent exchange of letters between the two presidents; the decision to transfer the nuclear file from the Supreme National Security Council to the foreign ministry under the guidance of the respected diplomat Mohammad Javad Zarif – both point in the same direction. At home, too, Mr Rouhani appears to be true to his word, releasing Iran's most prominent human rights activist, Nasrin Sotoudeh, and easing the conditions of house arrest of the two leaders of the 2009 opposition movement, Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi.Mr Rouhani's licence to negotiate has, of course, to be scrutinised. One always has to be clear which factions in Iran are waving the olive branch. Mr Rouhani has prepared his trip next week to the UN by speaking first and foremost to the Revolutionary Guards. He told that bastion of conservatism to stay out of politics, although he was careful to soften the message by doffing the cap to their economic clout. The point was reinforced by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the next day. There were signs of a pushback: Fars News, which is close to the Revolutionary Guards, reported only the positive part of Mr Rouhani's message. It could also be said that the power vested in Mr Rouhani personally may yet turn out to be a poisoned chalice if the negotiations on Iran's uranium enrichment hit a brick wall. But for now, the leadership of the guards, which scuttled the initiatives of Iran's previous reformist president, Mohammad Khatami, has been told to stay quiet. The initiative is not new. The supreme leader had already given his blessing for direct talks with the US before Mr Rouhani's election. The difference now is that pragmatists in Iran have a man to represent them, and he appears to enjoy political cover.Nor is there much secrecy about the sort of deal that could be struck, or at least its broad parameters. Iran agrees to enrich uranium to a maximum of 5%; it ships out the more dangerous material enriched to 20% (a short step away from bomb-grade levels); and rejoins the additional protocol which it left in 2005, granting inspectors of the International Atomic Energy Agency unannounced access. In return, Iran's right to enrich for civilian purposes is acknowledged and the sanctions start to be lifted. The path to a deal like this is pitted with elephant traps. Establishing mutual trust and credibility will not be easy after an impasse that has lasted for 11 years. Some sanctions, such as the disconnection of Iran's banks from the Swift payment system, are easier to lift than others. The US Congress remains hawkish and convinced that it alone brought Iran to the table again. Why take the foot off Iran's throat, just as the pressure appears to be working, so the argument goes? President Barack Obama could use his presidential waiver on Congress-mandated sanctions, but Iran would have to be convinced first that his successor would not reimpose them. For Iran to make significant concessions, it needs to be given a clear road map. Its reinclusion into the global trading system, while remaining conditional on progress, must not be made so distant as to be unachievable. Mr Rouhani has been on this merry-go-round before. In 2003 he took Iran into two years of negotiations during which Tehran suspended uranium enrichment before talks broke down. Today, Iran's nuclear enrichment programme is more advanced. It can regain lost ground faster. It has kept its medium-enriched uranium below the quantities needed to make a bomb, announcing recently a 42% cut in this stock. By the same token, its ability to regenerate those stocks is greater.The opportunity to take relations with Iran out of this death spiral patently exists. It should be seized by Mr Obama, even though he may not have the political capital needed to push this through. But the stakes are too high to do anything else.