They are in a state of flux with a new administration in Washington. In a break with George Bush, Barack Obama is offering direct talks if Iran "unclenches its fist". Relations that were never very good in the past 30 years sank to a low ebb when Bush was in the White House, especially during the buildup to the invasion of Iraq and the subsequent occupation. Bush famously bracketed Iran with North Korea and Iraq in the "axis of evil" in his state of the union speech in 2002, a year before the US-led invasion in March 2003.Iran's nuclear programme is probably the thorniest issue. The US currently has a covert operations programme started by the Bush administration last year. It is designed to block any attempt by Iran to build a nuclear weapon by breaking its supply chain of essential parts from abroad and by applying experimental techniques to disrupt essential computer and electrical systems. Apart from clandestine activities, the US and its European allies have offered Iran extensive economic aid and an end to its international isolation for the past four years in return for a halt to its uranium enrichment programme. Despite four sets of UN sanctions, Iran – which insists its nuclear programme is needed to generate electricity – has refused to back down, but western diplomats hope that direct engagement by Washington will help to break the impasse.Iranian support for Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza – both considered terrorist organisations by the US state department – is another source of friction. In Bush's manichean worldview, the US was in the moderate camp, opposed by Iran and other extremist organisations. The one area where relations have improved is over Iraq. US officials say Iran has reduced the supply of roadside bombs to Iraqi militias, indicating a strategic shift by the Iranian leadership.In 2006, the Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, sent an 18-page letter to Bush, the first official communication between the two countries' presidents since Iran's Islamic Revolution of 1979. It was seen an overture to the Bush administration for better relations. Bush did not reply. The Bush White House reportedly received a credible Iranian offer of comprehensive negotiations in 2003 through its interests section at the Swiss embassy in Tehran. There was no response on that occasion either.The US would probably point to the seizure of the US embassy in 1979 during the Iranian revolution. Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, quickly became a bogeyman for America after Iranian students held 52 American diplomats for 444 days. The episode – including a botched rescue attempt – proved deeply humiliating for the US and contributed to Jimmy Carter's electoral defeat by Ronald Reagan in 1980. There have been no diplomatic relations between the US and Iran since 1979.Iranian grievances – the US is often described as "the Great Satan" – go back to at least to 1953, when the US and Britain supported and funded a coup against Mohammad Mossadeq, the democratically elected prime minister, to restore the monarchy. The US provided lavish financial and military support for the Shah even as his rule grew increasingly repressive. The Reagan administration backed Iraq when it invaded Iran in 1980, in the belief that Iraq would check the spread of radical Islam. Half a million Iraqi and Iranian soldiers as well as civilians are believed to have died during the eight-year war. In 1988, Iranian public opinion was inflamed when the US warship USS Vincennes mistakenly shot down an Iranian civilian Airbus, killing all 290 people on board.