As difficult as it was for President Hassan Rouhani to secure a nuclear agreement with world powers, it will be even more difficult for him to sustain popular support for one in Iran. In a new poll conducted by IranPoll.com, a Toronto-based opinion research firm, in cooperation with the University of Maryland, a majority (57%) of Iranians backed a deal.But this support rests on the assumption, held by most Iranians, that an agreement would result in better access to foreign medicine and medical equipment (61%), significantly more foreign investment (62%) and an improvement in living standards (55%), all within a year.If these expectations are not realised, Rouhani would be left trying to explain who had pocketed the benefits of the deal and what Iran had received in return for curbing the nuclear programme. This would be particularly challenging since 83% of Iranians think it is “very important” for Iran to continue developing the nuclear programme.The national telephone poll of 1,009 Iranians was conducted by IranPoll.com and Tehran University for University of Maryland 12-28 May 2015, with a margin of error of 3.2%. Iranian support for the country’s nuclear program has remained essentially unchanged across various polls conducted in Iran since 2006.The deal could introduce problems for Rouhani in other ways. Iran’s economy suffers from structural deficiencies that result mostly from mismanagement and corruption. Until now, officials have been able to blame Iran’s sluggish economy on foreign sanctions. But the situation after any agreement could pin blame for the underperforming economy squarely on the government.In reaction the nuclear deal, Ali Tayebnia, Iran’s minister for economic affairs and finance, acknowledged these challenges. “With the deal, we need a few months after the implementation of the agreed processes by Iran and the west before the full effects of the lifting of the sanctions can manifest. At the same time, people are worn down by the pressures of the past few years and expect a swift resolution to the country’s economic problems.” Iran is in dire need of foreign investment, particularly in oil and gas. While an agreement deal would lift many restrictions on such investment, it would not transform the situation overnight.Banks and other financial institutions have not forgotten the severe fines introduced by the US for evading sanctions, and while the threat remains of renewed sanctions – likely to be present in an agreement under so-called ‘snap back’ provisions – major multinational companies will be reluctant to accept the risk of investing in Iran.The most likely scenario, considering Iran now exports more than it imports and has a middle class with a taste for foreign goods, is that companies would see Iran as a profitable place to sell products rather than as somewhere to invest. While this would reduce the price of many goods in Iran, it could bankrupt many Iranian industries unable to compete and so increase unemployment.The initial “feel good factor” from an agreement deal, tapping the suppressed development capacities of a well-educated 75m strong population, might help Rouhani carry public support in the short term. But beyond that, there is no substitute for better economic management.Amir Farmanesh is president of IranPoll.com. Ebrahim Mohseni is research associate at the Center for International and Security Studies at the University of Maryland 