Iran's missile tests on Wednesday predictably grabbed headlines around the world and provoked the usual condemnations. A Bush administration spokesman, for example, said that Iran's government "only furthers the isolation of the Iranian people from the international community when it engages in this sort of activity." I wish that were true. There is no love lost between Iran and most of its neighbours, but this hasn't stopped Iran from emerging as the main beneficiary of the Bush administration's lamentable Middle East policy. The United States dispatched Iran's two biggest regional adversaries, Saddam Hussein and the Taliban in Afghanistan. The Bush administration's main man in Baghdad, Iraqi prime minister Nouri al-Maliki, happens to be a close political ally of Tehran's as well.Iran continues to make forward progress in its nuclear programme, and America's Arab neighbours are furious at the US for botching the occupation of Iraq and increasingly jittery that the Iraq debacle portends a broader American withdrawal from the region, leaving Arab governments to fend for themselves. And last but certainly not least, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict drags on, and with it the chances for comprehensive peace in the region. The US desperately needs a comprehensive new Middle East strategy for fixing this mess, and it starts with Iran. As Barack Obama correctly observed in his statement condemning Iran's missile tests: "Iran now poses the greatest strategic challenge to the United States in the region in a generation." The Bush administration's response to this challenge - feign diplomacy but tap the war drum and foment regime change in Iran - has obviously failed to change Iran's behaviour, let alone the regime. Obama has indicated that if elected president, he would chart a different course, one designed to simultaneously contain and engage Iran. He would present Iran with a clear choice: abandon sensitive nuclear programmes and support for terrorism in exchange for a more productive economic and political relationship with the US and the west, or keep doing those things and face heightened economic pressure and political isolation. The lynchpin of this approach is diplomacy, both with Iran and with key partners and allies. Obama supports tough, direct diplomacy with Iran with no preconditions - a position that both the Bush administration and John McCain have steadfastly rejected. As Obama has pointed out: "Not talking doesn't make us look tough - it makes us look arrogant, it denies us opportunities to make progress and it makes it harder for America to rally international support for our leadership." No simple solution exists for solving the Iranian nuclear problem. But the wisdom of Obama's proposed approach is its recognition that America must not only be tough - it must also be smart. That's music to my ears.