The Iranian blogger Hossein Derakhshan, a beacon for those fighting for freedom of expression in the Islamic nation, was sentenced to 19 years in prison today for alleged anti-state activities.Derakhshan, 35, widely known as the "blogfather" or by his online name, "Hoder," was arrested in late 2008 after returning to Iran following a period living in Britain and Canada, where he also has citizenship. He has been a contributor to the Guardian's Comment is Free website.A judiciary source said he had been convicted of co-operation with hostile countries, spreading propaganda against the establishment, promoting counter-revolutionary groups, insulting Islamic thought and religious figures and managing obscene websites.Recent reports said prosecutors in a Tehran revolutionary court, where his trial began in June, had requested that he be given the death penalty.Iran has a huge number of bloggers who continue to write despite the crackdown on opposition voices following last year's disputed presidential election.Derakhshan helped pro-democracy activists develop their use of the web, particularly blogging and podcasting technologies in Farsi to promote their cause. The Iranian authorities made him apologise for his dissenting views when he left the country in 2000, and censored his blog from 2004 onwards.News of his sentence was confirmed by an unnamed relative to the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran. (ICHRC). "Neither the family nor the lawyer knew about the sentence," the relative was quoted as saying. "They read the news online."Mashreqnews.ir, the conservative website that reported the sentence, referred to him as a "counter-revolutionary blogger". It said he was also ordered to repay funds to the value of £28,400. Derakhshan can appeal against the sentence.The ICHRC said it considers Derakhshan "a prisoner of conscience, prosecuted and sentenced solely for his opinions and writings", and called for his acquittal and release by the appeals court. It said that there are more than 500 prisoners of conscience in Iranian jails.In 2006, Derakshan made a highly-publicised visit to Israel — Iran's arch-enemy — and told an interviewer that he wanted to prevent an Israeli attack on his native country and wanted Iranians to understand that "Israelis are not evil".The Iranian authorities have meanwhile shut down two pro-reform newspapers — Andisheh-e No daily and Bahar Zanjan — for publishing articles in which they had insulted officials, another paper, Shargh, reported today. They were the latest of several newspapers banned since the election.