The draft sanctions resolution on Iran agreed last night by the five permanent members of the UN security council – and that includes its two most important sceptics, Russia and China – can only be read one way: the deal that Iran announced on Monday to swap about half of its nuclear fuel for enrichment in Turkey would not be enough to deflect a new set of punitive sanctions. The deal breaker, in Russia's and China's eyes, was Iran's insistence that it would carry on producing 20%-enriched uranium, ostensibly to create fuel for its medical research reactor. As this was the point of the fuel swap in the first place, it undermined Iran's argument that the enrichment was for civilian purposes only. If Iran continued its own enrichment programme, there would be no non-proliferation advantage to exporting the process.The draft resolution can also be interpreted as a diplomatic slap-down by the major powers to the negotiating efforts of other countries. But in this new multipolar world, Barack Obama can ill afford to do this. Turkey is emerging as a major diplomatic power in the Middle East; Turkey and Brazil, the other broker of the fuel swap, are both non-permanent members of the security council and signatories of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. Japan, too, shares a commitment to find a diplomatic solution to the nuclear standoff with Iran. Together these nations have assumed the role of honest broker abandoned by Britain, France and Germany.So the draft resolution is unlikely to be the end of the matter. Politically, Iran's offer may not have been enough to split the consensus that the US fashioned in the security council. But technically, the deal agreed on Monday is more or less identical to one Iran rejected in October, according to initial assessments of experts in the Federation of American Scientists. Much is made of the fact that when the offer was originally framed, 1,200 kilograms of low-enriched uranium represented the majority of the feedstock Iran had. Today, it represents less than half. In other words, Iran has enough feedstock to make a bomb, even if the fuel swap with Turkey goes ahead.But if you look at the process from a five-year perspective, it makes little difference. Iran's ability to make a bomb depends on its centrifuges, not only on the amount of feedstock it has. And Iran's insistence that it will continue enriching to 20% can also be viewed as a sop to national pride. There is no sign, as yet, that Iran intends industrial production of medium-enriched uranium. This is a game of blind man's bluff, but the Turkish deal still represents the closest we have come so far to the start of a resolution to this crisis.