If Tehran tries to renegotiate the draft nuclear deal agreed in Vienna on Wednesday, it could all fall apart. But before we list the pitfalls that lie ahead, it is worth contrasting where we are today with what was on offer a year ago. At the previous round in Geneva, Iran produced a scrappy, typewritten two-page document called the None Paper. It should have read non-paper – jargon for an unofficial negotiating document – but the content was truer to its mispelled title than its authors intended. It indeed contained nothing, because Iran was only offering talks about talks. Compare that with the deal on offer today: an agreement to ship three-quarters of its known stockpile of enriched uranium to Russia for reprocessing as a nuclear fuel that could only be used in a civilian reactor. Nuclear inspectors are also about to arrive at the previously undisclosed enrichment site at Qom on Sunday, and there will be a further attempt to restart talks on freezing the enrichment programme at the end of the month.Many factors could have prompted a rethink: the unfinished business of the presidential election in June; the weakening of the authority of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei; unrest in Pakistan and Afghanistan spilling over the border; the fact that Iran had been caught building a parallel enrichment operation at Qom; or simply that Iran now has more enriched uranium with which to trade. But one significant factor is regime change in Washington. In a year, the policy on Iran has moved from refusing to talk unless enrichment was stopped, to engagement. If this produces dividends, it will show that Barack Obama has obtained more from Iran in a few hours of talks than George Bush did during eight years of rhetorical confrontation.Now the caveats. The Vienna deal only buys the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) time. It does not halt enrichment, and it will take Iran's centrifuges only about a year to make up the 1,200 kg of low-enriched uranium (LEU) that the country is to surrender to Russia. The IAEA cannot be certain that the Iranians do not have more LEU squirrelled away under another mountainside. Nor are international inspectors sure of getting all the required information when they arrive at Qom.But if a deal materialises, it will do much to temper Middle East passions. It will establish a process which will bind Israel's hands, and its plans for an air strike, as much as it does Iran's. It will build a measure of mutual confidence which would ease the tricky talks that lie ahead on freezing enrichment – a process that Iran regards as a national right. It might even establish a model for other countries contemplating building a nuclear cycle of their own.