Ali, a 60 year-old man wearing a navy blue coat and a neatly trimmed beard, stands in a bread line near north Tehran’s Tajrish square. “This is the hundredth time,” he says, reacting to news of the latest multi-billion dollar embezzlement scandal within state-run banking, which led to the arrest of12 people.“A million cases like this never come to light. What’s worse, they’re selling off all the oil for their own benefit.”A young man standing in front of Ali enters the discussion. “Did you read the papers? There was an antiques collector who spent five years collecting pieces from Khorasan province, worth a total of 180 billion tomans (around £42m million UK). The police nabbed him the other day and are now reporting that all of the antiques were fake.”“...so they could sell it to a Turkish businessman,” says another young man who works as a hair stylist.Such conversations are common in Iran’s bakeries, where people from all walks of life spend long periods of time crushed close together in long, tight lines. The intimate surroundings offer a rare opportunity to vent political frustrations and exchange rumors with strangers. Although it can be hard to verify the news distributed in bread lines, customers rarely ask each other to cite sources. They simply sift through the disinformation to find grains of truth about the way the nation’s secretive power structures function. “During Ahmadinejad’s time, we were saying there would be some thieving. It will keep happening,” Ali says. “We weren’t born yesterday. [President] Rouhani and Hassan and Hossein and Taqi, they’re all of a piece. Now we have to bring someone in from the outside who can fix up the country. Like Ukraine. I was here in the Shah’s time. Before, ministers and politicians didn’t have the right to interfere in commercial affairs or have jobs outside their civic duties. But now that the mullahs run things, what can a suspended state employee like me do? Can I stop the son of Khamenei or Rafsanjani from doing whatever he wants?”The conversation takes a sudden turn toward the labor market. For Ali, a state employee, the income from his main job simply isn’t enough to support a household. Those who manage to find additional work struggle to stay productive and motivated.“When a worker like me has to take on a second job, he ends up shirking his first job,” Ali says. “In the afternoons, I go to another job and spend the next day resting in the office. A great deal of people share my story. The cumulative effect is that the country makes no progress.”The hair stylist seems less interested in discussing the finer points of Iran’s bureaucracy. “The presidents of the banks are all thieves,” he says, reverting to the previous subject. “The more I see that everyone around me is turning into a thief, the more I feel like an idiot for not doing the same thing.”A man who has made it to the end of the line and bought his bread makes his way out of the bakery, passing underneath the large metal racks used for cooling and cutting sangak bread. Under his breath, he grumbles about the bakery skimping on sesame seeds. A 55-year-old woman speaks up. “Everyone up there does whatever they want. They raised the price of bread from 800 to 1000 tomans, they made the portions smaller, and now they’re being stingy with the sesame seeds too. Prices up, portions down. If you say anything they tell you sarcastically to go make a formal complaint. Who’s going to listen to these complaints? Should we spend a year in the courts trying to convince a judge to arrest a baker for spreading too few sesame seeds on his bread?”“Sweetie,” says the woman’s younger sister, “A few days ago the ta’zirat [a special branch of Iran’s police that deals with financial crimes] conducted an investigation at one of these chain restaurants for overselling by 540 million tomans, and guess what the police fined them? 5,400 tomans! I swear on the Holy Qur’an!”The customers laugh bitterly and shake their heads. Ali pursues another topic.“Nobody in this country really knows the full extent of what’s happening,” he says. He mentions the Tehran City Council’s plans to change the name of the northbound stretch of Africa Street to Nelson Mandela, even though signs bearing the original name were only installed six months ago. “They’ve totally lost their minds.” “People weren’t calling it ‘Africa’ to begin with,” says the older of the two sisters. “Everyone was calling it ‘Jordan.’ So now they’re calling it ‘Nelson Mandela.’ It’s so long that you won’t even get to say the whole thing to a taxi driver before he drives off to pick up someone else.”Ali laughs heartily. “Well, they have to entertain themselves somehow,” he says. “They don’t have any say in how [Mayor] Qalibaf runs the city, so they concern themselves with things like the name of this or that street.”The same cynicism emanates from conversations in a much more crowded bakery in Bahman Square, in the old south Tehran neighborhood of Naazy Abad. Women easily outnumber men here, and the people close enough to the door to see the bakers placing dough into the tanoor oven are getting impatient: “Make it quick, sir! We’ve been waiting here for three hours,” one customer says.After several verbal prods, one of the bakers, a flour-covered man of about 30 with an uneven beard and an apron loses patience with the crowd.“If you’re tired, go to Vanesta and wait there. So you’ve been standing here three hours? I’ve been on my feet all day, and in front of an oven, no less!” he shouts in a Kurdish accent.An old man in line asks everyone to chant a religious blessing, and they do - even those who had just been complaining. The tension subsides.Two middle-aged men dressed in black - likely in anticipation of chehelom, the Shi’i religious observance that occurs 40 days after Ashura, discuss the Iranian pilgrimages to holy sites in Iraq.“They’ve completely closed the Iranian border, and still a million people have gone from Iran to Karbala,” one of them says. “We’ve got such loving people. They just couldn’t take all the insecurity, all the corruption, all the ISIS stuff.”The elderly man who a few minutes earlier asked everyone to send a blessing chimes in: “It’s safer now that the Revolutionary Guards are there, in Iraq. Airspace security there is basically Iran’s responsibility now. Haj Qasem (Soleimani, head of the Revolutionary Guards) isn’t afraid of anything. Did you know Haj Qasem was born in Naazy Abad?”Despite the fact that Qasem Soleimani was born in a southeastern city of Iran called Rabord, the women nod approvingly.“My grandson and daughter-in-law went together,” the old man continues. “They called today and said that everyone is carrying around Haj Qasem’s picture with them.”The conversation drifts toward the recent rise in prices. A woman of around 30 blames Ahmadinejad: “He tricked the people with his subsidies,” she says. “Everything got a hundred times more expensive and even after three years, subsidies haven’t increased whatsoever. All of this was set in motion before Rouhani.”“Ahmadinejad set us back 100 years,” the elderly man interjects in agreement. “And we already need 400 years to make real progress. That makes 700 altogether. Forget about it, it’s a total loss.”“They’ve ruined everyone,” another middle-aged man chimes in. “These bread lines used to be so joyful and full of energy. People would talk and laugh with each other, but now people are so preoccupied with surviving that no one talks.”“But this is just what the government wants - for people to give up,” quips the woman who blamed Ahmadinejad. “They want people to be so concerned with just getting by that they don’t have the time or energy to worry about what’s going on up above. Someone will say that they’re going to increase the workers’ salary by 14% next year because inflation will rise another 14%. I’m a teacher myself - where’s my 14%? It’s not even the new year yet and the price of bread is already up 30%. Just imagine how much more expensive everything else is going to get. Then they’ll talk about 14% inflation. Does Rouhani even have the brains to fix a problem like that? The Central Bank published statistics saying that inflation is over 34% right now.” As the conversation continues, a customer who has purchased her bread carries it away. When she reaches the street, a piece slips out and hits the asphalt. She quickly bends down and gathers it up, dusting it off and stuffing it between the other pieces under her arm. Bread that has touched the ground is considered dirty and is not supposed to be eaten. A few people at the back of the line notice this, cast each other knowing looks, and smile bitterly. “For 60 years it’s been like this, madam,” the elderly man says to the teacher. “Both in the Shah’s time and now, there are few jobs, high unemployment, all the prices go up, and people’s heads get so caught up in the day-to-day that the politicians just go about their business. At the end of the day, both old men like me and teachers like you have to worry about the price of bread.”Iran Standard Time is a series of personal looks at life in the Islamic Republic today.