After the dramatic buildup, Tuesday's speeches at the UN did not disappoint. Iran's newly-elected president, Hassan Rouhani, arrived in New York at the head of the biggest charm offensive in the 34-year history of US-Iranian estrangement.And neither in his speech, nor Barack Obama 's earlier, did the historic opportunity of repairing that damage slip from view. By the end of play, both presidents had committed themselves to direct dialogue, assigning their foreign ministers to oversee the task.Each made important symbolic steps. Mr Obama's was to officially admit for the first time the CIA's involvement in the overthrow of a democratically elected government in Tehran in 1953. Mr Rouhani's was to declare that peace with the US was within reach. When addressing Mr Obama, he used the word president in English, not Farsi. Unlike his belligerent predecessor who grew used at these occasions to lecture rows of empty chairs, Mr Rouhani eschewed all mention of Israel, although he clearly alluded to it, challenging the assassination of Iranian nuclear scientists and the occupation of the Palestinian territories. If two-thirds of his speech was aimed at shoring up his credentials at home, one third was addressed to his western audience. And the message was that Iran can do business, as long as it is allowed to continue enriching uranium for exclusively and transparently peaceful purposes.Iran's presidents past and present have gone to extraordinary lengths – Mr Rouhani writing in the Washington Post and Mohammad Khatami in the Guardian – to put two basic messages across. The first is that Mr Rouhani has full authority to negotiate on Iran's behalf. Every centre of power is behind his drive to reach an agreement about Iran's nuclear programme, or at least will not impede it. Had the supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei wanted to toss a spanner in the works, one speech to students would have sufficed. He has not done that. Rather, he has endorsed diplomacy to which he has attached the label "heroic leniency".The second message is that the stakes are high. The implication of the articles and the accompanying pardon of 80 political prisoners is that if this moment is squandered, the consequences will be widespread. Inside Iran, it would be another hammer blow to the reform movement. Failure would shatter the authority of the president, who was elected in a free and fair vote. Outside Iran, it is no exaggeration to say that three theatres of war, could be affected by these negotiations: Syria, Afghanistan and Israel-Palestine.The possibility of an historic breakthrough deal was not lost on Mr Obama. He used language aimed consciously at appealing to Tehran, by stressing a relationship based on mutual respect. This was a good start by both leaders on what might yet be a long and arduous journey.