You report Tony Blair as "admitting" that the "intelligence Saddam possessed a WMD programme 'turned out to be incorrect'." It depends on what intelligence the former prime minister was reading (Iraq: the nightmare he didn't see coming, 1 September).Saddam's son-in-law, Hussein Kamel, who was the former director of Iraq's military industrial programme, defected to Jordan with his brother in August 1995, and there was debriefed by US and British intelligence, alongside UN WMD investigators, about Saddam's weapons programmes."I ordered destruction of all chemical weapons. All weapons, biological, chemical, missile, nuclear were destroyed," Kamel told them. "Were weapons and agents destroyed?" asked the investigators. "Nothing remained," he replied. This interview was even reported in the Guardian (1 March 2003).When asked by the then Labour MP Llew Smith, who opposed the war, a few days after the invasion began about the Kamel interview, Blair said, "Following his defection, Hussein Kamel was interviewed by the United Nations Special Commission and by a number of other agencies. Details concerning the interviews were made available to us on a confidential basis. The UK was not provided with transcripts of the interviews."We know, however, that Blair was fully conversant with the content of the interviews, citing verbatim extracts to parliament. He selectively told MPs a few days before the invasion: "Kamel also revealed Iraq's crash programme to produce a nuclear weapon in the 1990s. Iraq was then forced to release documents that showed just how extensive those programmes were."Blair can assert all he likes that the "intelligence" turned out to be incorrect. It depends on what intelligence he chose to believe.Dr David LowryStoneleigh, Surrey• I am always suspicious when journalists write of admissions rather than claims by politicians. So it is with Nicholas Watt writing that Blair "admits to shedding many tears at the loss of so many lives" in Iraq. If Blair was making a claim that diminished rather than enhanced his reputation, then to say he had "admitted" to something would be appropriate. But if he is making a claim that humanises himself, in spite of all that we now know, then to say he has "admitted" to anything is to participate in his self-exculpation.Mark ElfDagenham, Essex• That Blair didn't anticipate the chaos that occurred following Saddam's overthrow demonstrates his intellectual paucity with regard to any understanding of Iraqi history. The millions who marched against Blair's war were clearly better educated.Ged PeckLuton, Bedfordshire