1.50pm: This afternoon's Iraq inquiry hearing could be good - because it features someone who doesn't seem to have been involved at all.Lord Turnbull is giving evidence and he does not even appear in the index in 30 Days, Peter Stothard's account of what was happening in Downing Street as Tony Blair was taking the country to war.Turnbull does get six mentions in Alastair Campbell's 794-page diaries, but two of those relate to Campbell running the marathon and one refers to Turnbull having a cup of tea spilled over him.So, why should this be interesting? Because Turnbull was cabinet secretary, supposedly Britain's most powerful civil servant, from 2002 to 2005. He should have been deeply, deeply involved in the decision to go to war. And it appears that he was marginalised.Turnbull and other senior civil servants have complained in the past about Blair's decision to bypass the traditional Whitehall decision-making process and run the country instead by so-called "sofa government". Last year Turnbull himself told a Lords inquiry:The source of a good deal of government needs to be nourished, nurtured and strongly supported by the Cabinet Office. Trends have been identified which in some way threaten this great institution and system, in particular the growth in profile of the prime minister … The danger I would want to avoid is the do-it-all prime minister.Today Turnbull will be speaking to a sympathetic audience. Two members of the inquiry - Sir John Chilcot and Sir Roderic Lyne - are former civil servants and Lady Prashar used to be the first civil service commissioner. From previous hearings we know that they have doubts about "sofa government" and I expect they will want to question Turnbull about this at length. They may also invite Turnbull to explain what he means about the dangers of having a "do-it-all prime minister" (which sounds like a certain TB). As I said, it could get interesting ....2.04pm: Turnbull starts with a description of the role of the cabinet secretary. He says the Cabinet Office is there to support the cabinet. It's not like a usual government department, because it does not have much money.When he made his pitch to Blair to get the job, he explained that there were three aspects to the job: being cabinet secretary, being head of the civil service and being "accounting officer" for intelligence spending.Turnbull told Blair that it would better to have a separate intelligence coordinator. That happened.Turnbull arrived in Downing Street in September 2002. By that time, strategy was set.Two documents arrived on his desk when he arrived. One was the Iraq dossier. He was a "consumer" of that, not a "producer" of it.The cabinet secretary also has a role where he thinks "wisdom is being missed". Turnbull does not elaborate.When he arrived, he says, he thought the process was working properly.2.10pm: Sir John Chilcot says David Manning talked about a "fatigue factor" at work in Downing Street.Turnbull says he's not sure that that applied in September 2002.There was not a sense that 'we're struggling and things aren't going well'. There was a sense that things were going well.If David Omand, the security and intelligence co-ordinator, had asked for more staff, he would have been given more staff, Turnbull says.2.13pm: Turnbull says the Department for International Development was asked to "hold back" on discussion with the NGO community about post-war planning because the government did not want to imply war was inevitable.At one stage Clare Short, the international development secretary, complained she was not getting information from the military. That was sorted out.Turnbull says some things could have been done "earlier". He does not specify what.2.17pm: Sir John Chilcot asks about the relationship between Omand, the security and intelligence co-ordinator, and John Scarlett, the chairman of the joint intelligence committee.Turnbull says Omand was senior. But Scarlett chaired the JIC and reported to ministers.Omand dealt more with strategic issues. He was Scarlett's "line manager", Turnbull says.2.19pm: Sir Lawrence Freedman asks Turnbull when he officially started.The first Monday in September 2002, Turnbull says.Freedman says that by that time decisions had been taken to recall parliament and publish the dossier.Turnbull says he knew Blair wanted to do that. Turnbull had not part in the preparation of the dossier.A previous version of the dossier started in March, Turnbull says. Turnbull says Scarlett is described - he does not say where - as "refreshing" the WMD chapter.Freedman says there was a "fresh start" in September.Turnbull refers to a point raised yesterday by Lady Prashar. She suggested there was something wrong intelligence being merged with policy. Turnbull says he did not see any "propriety" issue here.Turnbull accepts that the difference between the dossier itself (the intelligence) and the ministerial foreword (the policy) could have been made clearer.2.25pm: Freedman asks if the Cabinet Office should have had more ownership of the document.Turnbull says with hinsight that might be the case.Freedman asks if Turnbull thinks the document was "hardened up".Turnbull says he did not follow the drafts.As a "consumer" of the document, he thought it was "the authoritative version".2.27pm: Freedman asks Turnbull if he was concerned that Alastair Campbell, a special adviser, had such a "significant role".Turnbull says:I took comfort from the fact John Scarlett was leading this.When the final presentation work took place, Turnbull did not attach that much importance to it. It was not as if No 10 drafted the document and then sent it back to the JIC. It was drafted together.The JIC "thought that they had control of the substance and the content", Turnbull says. Freedman says the issue is one of where power lies within the system.Turnbull says Lord Butler thought it was unhelpful having two special advisers - Campbell and Jonathan Powell - having executive power over civil servants. Butler said he was trying to "make honest men of them", Turnbull says. He says in future it would be a mistake to have special advisers being given these powers.2.31pm: Turnbull says there was a danger that getting rid of Saddam Hussein would make Iran more powerful. But this question was not asked at the time.He is implying that it should have been, and that the war has strengthened Iran, but he does not say this explicity.Lyne picks him up on this. Why was this question not asked at the time?Turnbull says he was not in office in early 2002. He is talking on the basis of what he has read, "as a historian".Lyne asks Turnbull is saying that Britain was not in a position to take a review of strategic options because a particular strategy had been chosen.Turnbull says that by late 2002 a strategy had "coalesced". There was never any oportunity to say, for example, that Iran was the real problem.Lyne says this is very interesting.2.42pm: Turnbull said the cabinet strategy was set by September 2002. Ministers were very pleased that the Americans were going to pursue the UN route.Freedman says Britain was not sure at this stage whether it was going to make a minimum or a maximum military contribution.Turnbull says that is not his understanding. Originally there were three options. By the end of July it was decided the UK would go for "option 3" - the full military contribution, Turnbull says.Freedman says he thinks that was not the case.Turnbull says at a meeting on July 23 the "most likely" option was going to be the biggest of the military options.But what if there had not been a UN resolution, Freedman asks.Turnbull says that without a resolution, the process would have failed. It was not "plausible" that the cabinet, the Labour party and parliament would have accepted war in those circumstances, he says.2.42pm: Chilcot says he wants to turn to some "boring" stuff. He takes Turnbull back to the organisation of cabinet committee.Turnbull says the system worked. There was a group dealing with Iraq. It was not sofa government. It was a professional forum. They had the right people in the room, "with one possible exception".But it was not a formal cabinet committee, he says.Turnbull says, for the sake of good order, people should be included, even if they were going to be difficult. He thinks Campbell's description of Clare Short yesterday as untrustworthy was "very poor". But he concedes Short could be difficult.Blair wanted things to move quickly, Turnbull says. He did not want to spent time on "conflict resolution" between colleagues.Prashar asks if this group received papers. Turnbull says it did.2.47pm: Turnbull says there was also an ad hoc group on Iraq. It was set up on 20 September. An ad hoc group is an official group set up within the Cabinet Office machinery, he says.This group was heavily influenced by what happened during the first Gulf War. For example, it received papers on transport and shipping. Officials did not want to repeat what happened in the first Gulf War, when a British commercial plane got stuck in Kuwait.2.49pm: Chilcot asks about the official level machinery. He wants to know who was bringing everything together.Turnbull says various departments submitted papers to the ministerial group.Chilcot asks about the "culture". Was the enough challenge, enough "invitation to challenge" at ministerial level?Turnbull says: I don't think the culture encourages challenge enough. He says he has seen this in other spheres, such as in the run-up to the banking crisis and in relation to climate change.Getting drawn into a prematurely achieved consensus is a danger of Whitehall life ... Once the minister had coalesced, people said there was a settled policy.2.55pm: Chilcot asks if Blair got enough advice about the post-conflict problems.Turnbull says there were problems in the US and the British "massively underestimated how bad it was".The British also made some "incorrect assumptions". It was assumed that because the Americans agreed to go down the UN route, they would allow the UN to have a role after the war.When George Bush said the UN would have a "vital role" in post-conflict Iraq, he was "fobbing us off", Turnbull says.The British and Americans also wrongly assumed that Iraq had a strong public sector, Turnbull says.2.59pm: Chilcot asks if anyone planned for the worst-case scenario.Turnbull says there was planning for a humanitarian disaster.But the number of troops required to topple Saddam was smaller than the number required to fill the gap once he left, Turnbull says. That was a major miscalculation.3.00pm: Turnbull says that if Britain had stuck to "option 2", a limited military intervention, Britain would not have been the occupying power.He says he is not sure if people realised this at the time.We seriously failed to see what was the real problem. The real problem was security. We probably spent too much time on [humanitarian and food issues].3.03pm: Chilcot says the inquiry heard an argument this morning from Nemat Shafik, the DfID permanent secretary, that it was because the planning before the war this was so good that a humanitarian crisis was averted.Turnbull says he does not accept this argument.3.06pm: Freedman asks how much of Turnbull's time was spent in relation to Iraq.Turnbull says:It was not the biggest part of my job, by any means.He was the "line manager" for 30 permanent secretaries. He also worked on the delivery and reform agenda.So it was not Turnbull's highest priority, Freedman asks.Turnbull says it was not the thing that took up most of his time.Once hostilities started, a war cabinet was set up - based on what happened in the first Gulf War. There was a daily meeting that would receive an intelligence report from Scarlett about the way the fighting was going. David Manning chaired a COBRA meeting that took forward decisions taken by the war cabinet.Freedman asks Turnbull what his role was.Turnbull says he had to sort out problems and take things forward.3.12pm: Chilcot says he going to take a break. The committee is going to return at 3.30pm. In a moment, I'll flag up the highlights. It's been surprising revealing.3.16pm: Here are the main points so far:* Turnbull said that by July 2002 a decision had been taken that if Britain was going to make a military contribution, it was going to adopt "package 3" - the large contribution, with troops on the ground. Other witnesses have suggested that this decision was not taken until later.* He said that if Britain had made a smaller contribution, it would not have had the problems associated with being an occupying power. (See 3pm.)* Turnbull said Britain was "fobbed off" by George Bush when Bush promised a "vital role" for the UN in post-war Iraq. (See 2.55pm)* The British "massively underestimated" how bad American planning for post-war Iraq actually was, Turnbull said. (See 2.55pm)* Turnbull suggested that more thought should have been given before the war to the idea that toppling Saddam would boost the power of Iran in the region.* The Department for International Development was asked in late 2002 to "hold back" from talking about plans for post-war Iraq with NGOs because the government did not want to suggest war was inevitable. (See 2.13pm)* Turnbull said that Alastair Campbell's decision to criticise Clare Short as "untrustworthy" yesterday was "very poor". She was difficult, but not untrustworthy, Turnbull suggested.(See 2.42pm)* He said Blair should have done more to encourage people to express views that challenged the consensus. He said this was a general problem in Whitehall. (See 2.49pm)* Turnbull said the distinction between the intelligence analysis in the September dossier and the policy being set out by Blair should have been clearer. (See 2.19pm) He also suggested the Cabinet Office should have taken charge of the document. (See 2.25pm)3.32pm: They're back. Turnbull is talking about the views of members of the cabinet. He says Robin Cook was the only person to argue that the policy of containment was working.Turnbull says it's a shame Cook is not her now. He was right.What the Iraq Survey Group showed was that Robin Cook was absolutely spot on.3.36pm: Turnbull says there came a point where he decided to get "better discussions" going on in cabinet. Up until that point ministers did not even use PowerPoint. He seems to be talking about "better discussions" in relation to all topics, not just Iraq.3.38pm: Lady Prashar asks about the "undercurrent of disquiet" within the cabinet. She quotes from a complaint aired by Clare Short in her book.Turnbull says Short's complaint was justified. She was angry about being excluded from the key committee.He says papers to cabinet were a "rare phenomenon" even in the 1980s. Instead there were papers being submitted to cabinet committees.John Prescott was a "staunch defender" of the cabinet committee system. When he chaired committee, papers were submitted, Turnbull says.Turnbull says the absence of papers reflected the nature of the Blair government. The arguments did not take place in cabinet. They took place elsewhere.Chilcot asks if Turnbull is implying that Blair ministers used "competitive briefings" as a means of getting their way.Turnbull says Prescott used to hate briefings being used in this way.Did this style of government impact on the quality of decisions, Prashar says.Turnbull says he thinks it did. But for a long time things went very well for the government, he points out.3.44pm: Turnbull says around 2004/2005 he tried to get ministers to use the cabinet committee machinery more.Prashar asks if the lack of challenge was a problem.Turnbull says there were furious arguments in relation to issues like the euro. But they did not take place around the cabinet.3.45pm: Chilcot asks when it became clear that Robin Cook would resign.Turnbull says Cook did not go on about Iraq week after week. He "kept his counsel almost to the end". In his resignation letter, Cook cited the failure to get a second UN resolution as his reason for quitting.3.47pm: Turnbull says there was no point where members of the cabinet told Blair he had got the wrong approach.Blair had "demonstrated leadership and taken his colleagues with him".None suggested a serious change of direction, Turnbull says.They were all very conditioned by the intelligence presentation. They all had between February 2003 - some started in September 2002 ... they all went to see John Scarlett .. and [the briefings were] consistent with the dossier, becasue we had not at that stage lost faith in it.Freedman says this is interesting. It suggests the JIC had an influence on cabinet decision making.Turnbull says they were not regular briefings. It was a "special programme of briefings" for cabinet ministers and others. Iain Duncan Smith (the then Tory leader) also received ones. Details were set out in the report from the intelligence and security committee. Turnbull says that when the weapons inspectors failed to find anything, "it was interpreted as evidence of his recalcitrance, not his innocence".Freedman says this is what the "dodgy dossier" was trying to show. It was meant to prove that Saddam was cheating.3.54pm: Freedman asks about relations between Blair and key members of the cabinet.Turnbull says key members of the cabinet were "pretty supportive". John Prescott, Gordon Brown and Geoff Hoon were "all on board". They did not speak against the policy at cabinet.3.56pm: Sir John Chilcot asks how the legal advice about the war was presented to cabinet.Turnbull says Lord Goldsmith, the attorney general, provided a longer version of his legal advice. He took it to Blair. He said you could "make a case" for war on the basis of the first resolution, but it would be better to have a second resolutioin. At that stage he could not provide a definitive view. They had to find out if there would be a second resolution. And someone would have to warrant that there was a "definititve breach" of the UN resolution.Ten days later Goldsmith provided another view. It was not a summary of his earlier view. Events had moved on.In the cabinet system, the attorney general is the "last court of appeal". Once he has ruled, that's it. Turnbull says that's what happened, "with one or two exceptions".That's interesting. What does he mean by that? He does not explain what the exceptions were.Turnbull says Clare Short later tried to use the argument that Blair had not published the full law officer's advice. But Blair took the view that the final, short statement, was his legal advice. The longer opinion produced earlier was not the final legal advice.Lady Prashar asks Turnbull to if the cabinet ever had the chance to discuss the early draft.Turnbull says ministers did not see that. The convention is that ministers see the attorney general's final, legal advice.Chilcot says that at that stage the attorney general did not routinely attend cabinet. Subsequently, the convention changed. Now the attorney general does attend all the time. Turnbull thinks this is a mistake, because of a potential conflict of interest.4.07pm: Turnbull is talking about post-war Iraq.The Bremer decision on de-Baathification removed the people we thought we would be working with.Turnbull says the loss of security proved "crippling". It became impossible for British officials on the ground to work because the risk was so great.He says Britain was a "10% shareholder". But the British carried full responsibility for what was happening in their area. The south east region was a sub-division of ORHA, the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance.The British had got into the postion where they had "responsibility" but not "power", he says. This was as serious problem.That was more damaging than the lack of money, Turnbull says.4.12pm: Freedman says the Ministry of Defence was going to launch a "lessons learnt" exercise in 2003. But it was dropped because it was felt that was not the right moment.4.19pm: Sir Roderic Lyne asks if there was a genuine attempt to resolve the situation without war.Turnbull says from September all Blair's statements were about disarmament. Blair stressed Saddam could save his regime if he complied with UN demands.If Saddam had cooperated fully with the weapons inspectors, he could have saved the regime, Turnbull says.Turnbull refers to Blair's statement to Fern Britton on the BBC. "What on earth" was it about, Turnbull asks. The inquiry will have to ask Blair.Turnbull also refers to other documents suggesting going to the UN was an option.Turnbull says his personal hypothesis is that Blair started as a "regime changer". He thinks it was not just Bush how was persuaded to go down the UN route. Blair was persuaded too, Turnbull says.Turnbull says that from September 2002 Blair did stress disarmament, not regime change.Did he seriously believe that if he had not gone the UN route, or if he had been rebuffed, did he seriously believe that he could take the country into a non-UN joint operation with the US? That's what you've got to ask him.Turnbull says that when Blair first discussed this after Crawford, he was told he had to create a coalition.4.25pm: Freedman asks if Blair ever suggested the UN route was just a pretext.Turnbull says no. But then he adds: "Maybe I'm too trusting."He says he was not one of Blair's close confidantes.Did he have doubts about the policy, Freedman asks.Turnbull replies: "Not as much as I should have done."He points out that the one minister who did challenge the intelligence, Robin Cook, was the minister who, as foreign secretary, had been in charge of MI6.4.28pm: Freedman asks what the impact was on cabinet when it became clear in February 2004 that things were going badly wrong.Turnbull says February 2004 was a turning point. The murder of American engineers, and the burning of their bodies on a bridge, made it clear there were serious problems.It took virtually four years to get on top of the problem, he says.Freedman asks what the impact was on the civil service.Turnbull says Abu Ghraib had the worst effect. People felt "sullied". It was a "very disgraceful revelation". We were in a coaltion with people who had different views about the treatment of prisoners, torture. It made it apparent how difficult a partnership this was.Turnbull says there may have been knowledge about this in the system. But he "saw it on the news like other people".4.36pm: Chilcot asks if Turnbull has any final suggestions.Turnbull says the public perception is that those who died in the war died in vain because no WMD was discovered. He thinks there is very little public knowledge as to what actually happened.Most people would not know who George Piro was, Turnbull says. (That's right - I didn't know.) He was the FBI agent who debriefed Saddam Hussein.Saddam told Piro that, as soon as he had sanctions lifted, he intended to restart his WMD programmes.But Saddam did not want the Iranians to know that he had no WMD, Turnbull says.Therefore getting rid of [Saddam] turns out to be a worthwhile thing to have done.Saddam was playing a game that was "too clever by half".The British public has never been given a tutorial on the findings of the Iraq Survey Group and the evidence gathered by Piro, Turnbull says.Chilcot closes the hearing. There is lots of remarkable evidence to digest. I'll start summarising it in a moment.4.49pm: This afternoon the inquiry has released three documents, a letter dated 5 March 2003 from Sir Kevin Tebbit, permanent secretary at the Ministry of Defence to Turnbull stressing the importance of getting UN cover for the invasion, and two letters from the DfID permanent secretary to Turnbull. They are in the written evidence page on the inquiry's website.I'll turn back to Turnbull now.4.53pm: Here are the key points from the second half of the session.* Turnbull said he believed Blair was originally a "regime changer" and that Blair was only persuaded in 2002 about the necessity of involving the UN. Turnbull said that, in view of the way Blair always stressed that he only wanted to disarm Saddam as the war approached, he could not understand why Blair told Fern Britton last month that he would still have wanted to remove Saddam if he had known Iraq had no WMD. (See 4.19pm)* He said that getting rid of Saddam was "a worthwhile thing to have done" - because Saddam intended to resume his WMD programme following the lifting of sanctions. (See 4.36pm)* He hinted that there was some doubt about Blair's commitment to involving the UN. He said he thought Blair was sincere about not just using the UN as a pretext. But then Turnbull added: "Maybe I'm too trusting." (See 4.25pm)* After the invasion the British were put in a position where they had responsibility for what happened in southern Iraq, but not the power to influence it, Turnbull said. (See 4.07pm) * He said Clare Short was entitled to complain in her book about the way cabinet government operated under Blair. (See 3.38pm)* The government was going to hold a "lessons learnt" exercise in 2003, but shelved that because the time was not deemed appropriate. (See 4.12pm)* Turnbull said Robin Cook was "absolutely spot on" when it came to assessing whether Saddam really had WMD. (see 3.32pm) Other ministers accepted what they were told in a series of special briefings provided by John Scarlett, but Cook - perhaps because, as a former foreign secretary, he was used to dealing with MI6, was more sceptical.5.13pm: Here is the key quote from Turnbull about his theory about Blair starting as a "regime changer". Turnbull said that from September 2002 Blair stressed that his policy was about disarming Saddam. Then he went on:The question then is, what on earth is this statement to Fern Britton all about, where he has says "if you had known he had no weapons of mass destruction, what would you have done?", "I would have found some kind of way of mounting the argument". You'll have to put that point to him.And also, coming to the earlier periods, there are remarks that have been pointed out where he talks in rather regime-changish language after Crawford, and even in the inner papers that you've probably seen. At one stage talking about going to the UN is an option. My hypothesis is that he starts as a regime changer and he's picking up his alliance with Bush whose public policy through the Iraq Liberation Act is to depose the regime. That's what he's thinking of doing. And then it is not just Bush who is put onto the UN route, but Blair also.5.25pm: Here are the full quotes form another key exchange.Freedman: In any of your conversations with the prime minister, did he give you any indication that he found the disarmament route, the UN route, something of a pretext? Turnbull: No. Maybe I'm too trusting. I read these statements. Week by week, he was saying disarmament is the objective.5.39pm: One more quote. This is from the exchange at 4.07pm, when Turnbull said the south east region of Iraq was a sub-division of the US-run Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance and Coalition Provisional Authority.We had to do everthing through them. That's where the money came from. And one of the major constraints was getting CPA Baghdad to get the money to [CPA in the south]. This is the key lesson. Don't get into a position where you have responsibility and accountability, but you don't have power. That's exactly the position we were in.5.48pm: That's it today. The inquiry heard this afternoon that from July 2002 the government had already decided on making a large military contribution to any invasion of Iraq and that Turnbull thought Tony Blair was orginally a "regime changer". Yesterday Alastair Campbell told the inquiry that Blair was not backing regime change when he met George Bush at Crawford in April 2002. What was interesting about today's evidence was that Turnbull suggested exactly the opposite.Thanks for the comments.sdfd