In opposition, Nick Clegg had some harsh criticism for the way that Gordon Brown's government restricted the ability of the Iraq inquiry to uncover the truth. Clegg's appointment as deputy prime minister seemed to promise a new attitude of openness and at the weekend he seemed to be promising to put this into practice. In particular, he promised that the inquiry will only be prevented from publishing documents for reasons of national security. But it looks as if nothing is going to change any time soon, if at all.What Clegg said the Hay festival on Sunday – as Today programme listeners will have heard this morning – was true as far as it went, but his language about how to solve the problem is intriguing. He said that the inquiry's openness would be the key to determining its legitimacy and: "The battle that needs to be fought is to make sure in the final Chilcot report the presumption is towards real, meaningful, thorough disclosure." He added that "the challenge is to make sure there is real disclosure when they publish their findings." But Nick, you are the deputy prime minister. It's up to you.It's actually the Cabinet Office, where Clegg is based, that is, in his words, "suffocating" the inquiry and turning it into a "cover-up". At present, the inquiry is severely limited in what it can reveal. Under the protocol that the inquiry "agreed" with the Cabinet Office last autumn, it is limited not just in terms of what it can publish, now and alongside its report, but also in what it can refer to, during public sessions and in its report.The inquiry is likely to begin public hearings again in the next few weeks. But we are not learning as much as we should. The chairman, Sir John Chilcot, has said that "the great bulk of our evidence is in tens of thousands of government documents", which show "what really went on behind the scenes before, during and after the Iraq conflict". In the hearings that took place before the election, Chilcot and his colleagues repeatedly complained that the government had refused to declassify key documents, which in turn restricted what they could reveal in witness sessions.This left the way clear for witnesses to give their own partial – in both senses – accounts of what happened. Sir David Manning, who was Tony Blair's foreign policy adviser, gave a lengthy account of his March 2002 meeting with Condoleezza Rice that neglected to mention he told her – as shown by a leaked memo – that Blair "would not budge" in his support for regime change. Alastair Campbell, when asked whether Blair had written to George Bush in 2002 offering unconditional support for war, disputed the question and avoided answering it.The twin issues that Clegg needs to set out clearly are how much is going to be published and when? Will we get to see the vast bulk of the documents or just be told about a few of them? Will the evidence be released now – freeing the inquiry and keeping witnesses to the whole truth – or will it be tacked on to the report of an establishment inquiry whose findings will grab the headlines?It seems that Clegg does – or did – understand these issues. I first wrote about this in November and Clegg ambushed Brown on the issue a few weeks later, just after the public hearings began, accusing Brown of "suffocating" the inquiry. He seemed to understand the issue was that the inquiry had to ask permission for each and every disclosure, with nine separate reasons for refusal and with the government ultimately having a veto. He challenged Brown to withhold information only on grounds of national security. In January, Clegg said that the inability of the Chilcot team to properly question witnesses meant it was being "gagged". He also claimed it would be a "cover-up" if secret documents relating to Blair, who gave evidence the next day, could not be discussed.On Sunday – under questioning from Philippe Sands QC that the inquiry should learn from – Clegg agreed there should be a "presumption of publication" and that national security would be the only reason for blocking publication of any documents. These are significant developments, and you can hear the audio recording here. But Clegg was far less clear about when anything may be released, putting a worrying emphasis on publication alongside the inquiry's final report and citing unspecified difficulties in "trying to unpick" the way the inquiry works. And the Cabinet Office has told the BBC – having failed to give me any clarification – that it is not going to change the protocol. If that is true, nothing will change. Documents will still be suppressed for reasons other than national security.As Sands pointed out on the Today programme, it is within the power of the government to set the inquiry free today to do what it has already said it wants to do. It can change the protocol. The inquiry already has all the documents. It could, in theory, start to publish the most important papers straight away. It would be up to the government to tell the inquiry pretty quickly what should be withheld. This would not be a problem for the inquiry, particularly if the reasons for suppression are limited to national security, but would be a nightmare for an establishment that loves secrecy.Also on Today, former minister Lord Falconer, who regularly pops up to defend his old friend Blair, sunk the knife into Clegg, perhaps without meaning to do so. He said, rightly, that Chilcot's problem is primarily one of timing, in that it takes the government so long to decide whether anything can be published that the opportunity to question witnesses has gone. On the issue of what should be suppressed, he said: "I don't think the deputy prime minster is criticising the nine categories at all."So what exactly is Clegg proposing? Where clarity was needed, there is great confusion. Has the deputy prime minister been nobbled? Have the Sir Humphreys told him "you can have full openness, but on our terms, and not yet"?