Andrew Gilligan has returned to haunt the government on Iraq. His revelations in the Sunday Telegraph and today's Telegraph tell us a lot about the attitude of the military before and after the invasion and provide more evidence that it was planned from early 2002, whatever Tony Blair said. But they are perhaps as significant for what they tell us about Sir John Chilcot's Iraq inquiry. They are a humiliation for the inquiry, which – as I write – has not put a single piece of new evidence into the public domain.I was accused at the weekend (by John Rentoul, who gets most things wrong) of having been vociferous in demanding an inquiry but being quick to call it a whitewash. I don't think I've used the "w" word, but I have always been sceptical about what a new inquiry might achieve. In March, before the Chilcot inquiry was announced, I wrote here that "there will be new leaks and new disclosures, to the point where a secret inquiry will look like a sideshow". Chilcot may be putting a brave face on things but his inquiry is indeed in danger of becoming the sideshow.For all its faults, the Hutton inquiry published a mass of information. Chilcot says his committee has seen a mountain of documents but his inquiry's "evidence" page is blank – probably because it has been set up to hold transcripts rather than documents. As I have written, the Cabinet Office's protocol for the publication of government documents requires prior permission and lists so many reasons for refusal that the inquiry has perhaps decided not to bother.In some ways it is reassuring that Chilcot argues that witnesses in the hearings should not bother lying because "the stuff is there on paper anyway". But he also says that what witnesses will say is only "personal views, perspectives, accounts", which entirely undermines the format of his inquiry. Is Chilcot really saying that the least important part of the inquiry will be public, while the main evidence will remain secret?Those of us who have seen the findings of previous inquiries undermined by subsequent leaks will want to see the documents on which questions are based. That is true transparency. You could argue that witnesses would not bother telling the Butler review, of which Chilcot was a member, that the aim of government policy was "to enforce Iraqi disarmament", given that the review had access to a mass of documents (since leaked) showing that this cover story was cynically bolted on to a plan to support the US in its desire for regime change. But witnesses did say exactly that and Butler and Chilcot believed them.Chilcot may now be saying that he understands what really happened, that it does not match the official line, and that on this basis, he is confident that he is close to the truth. (I say this on the basis that someone given documents that back up the official version should be slow to conclude that he has the whole story.) I remain, however, concerned that Chilcot still appears not to realise that the protocol for disclosing information to his inquiry allows the government to withhold papers.Chilcot says: "We have complete access to the entirety of the government's records from top to bottom throughout the nine years."Yet the protocol says "no such information may be withheld, with the exception of information HMG holds which is covered by an existing duty of confidentiality".I have repeatedly asked the inquiry whether any information has in fact been withheld on this basis but have had neither confirmation nor denial. Perhaps they don't know…The Telegraph, on the other hand, is putting a lot of new information into the public domain. It has published extracts from two of the papers on which it has based its stories. It does have to be said that the first of these, "Stability Operations in Iraq", was published last year on Wikileaks, but the whole effect of what Gilligan has done is to add to the sum of public knowledge.I disagree with Matthew D'Ancona, writing in the Evening Standard, about the significance of the disclosures. He argues that Blair avoided Donald Anderson's question, at the Commons Liaison Committee. Anderson asked: "Are we then preparing for possible military action in Iraq?" Blair answered: "No." He may have added: "There are no decisions which have been taken about military action," but he answered Anderson's question in the negative at a time when the government was indeed planning for possible military action.Perhaps Chilcot is right. When witnesses do give evidence, maybe they will realise that the game is up and, to quote Chilcot, do not "try to dissemble or withhold". Witnesses may well feel that they are in a race to tell the truth, before a former colleague shows them up. Also, Chilcot may be about to publish a whole raft of documents – after all, he did take up my suggestion of seeing Blair early on – but the signs are not good. And even if he does, he is now playing catch-up. Once again, leaks rather than inquiries are making the running on the Iraq story.