Is Nouri al-Maliki becoming Iraq's next dictator and, if he is, does anyone in Washington care? The second half of the question is easy to answer. The Pentagon wanted to keep 8,000 troops in Iraq after withdrawal. But Maliki made it clear there would be no US troops after the agreement expired on 31 December 2011. The state department also planned for an embassy up to 16,000 strong, and a CIA station 700 strong, but the Iraqi strongman made short shrift of a sizeable US civilian presence, by insisting that his office take direct responsibility for approving every US diplomatic visa. Washington could use the soft power of military supply contracts, but is unwilling to do that. Maliki is allowing Iranian overflights to resupply Assad's embattled regime in Syria. Washington still does not want to know.As to the first part of the question, Maliki's authoritarianism has some way to go before it reaches the proportions of Saddam Hussein's terror. But the charge sheet is growing: the night of the US withdrawal, troops and tanks led by Maliki's son surrounded the houses of his vice-president Tariq al-Hashemi and two other members of the Sunni-dominated Iraqiyya coalition. On Sunday Hashemi was sentenced to death in absentia, for masterminding death squads against rivals. Confessions were tortured out of three of his bodyguards, one of whom died from his injuries. Iraqiyya, which won the most seats at the last election in 2010, is not the first victim of Maliki's power grab.As Toby Dodge, a leading Iraqi scholar, has chronicled, Maliki gained complete control over Iraq's security forces, subverting the formal chain of command, moving the office of commander-in-chief into his office, and creating provincial command centres, commanded by generals who were handpicked by him. Under him, the Iraq special operations forces, described as the best in the Middle East, became a praetorian guard, dubbed "Fedayeen al-Maliki". The same goes for the intelligence services and the judiciary. Having seen off those Sunnis who downed their arms and tried politics in 2010, Maliki's next target will be the Kurds, whose autonomy he will threaten, and then the Sadrists. The end product will be a centralised state not unlike Vladimir Putin's Russia. Like Putin, Maliki practises a form of competitive authoritarianism. This employs the toolkit of a democratic state (a parliament, set elections, a constitution) for a purpose that is anything but – the maintenance of power at all costs, torture and death squads included.It should therefore come as no surprise that al-Qaida, which was decimated when Sunni tribal chiefs turned against it, is back in business. Maliki's quest for domination could drive his country back into civil war.