Brian De Palma has described his latest film, Redacted, as "a fictional documentary". It is a term that, while seemingly oxymoronic, also feels grimly appropriate, since it is set in Iraq and depicts a war that many would argue was itself based on an untruth."Redacted" refers to the process of editing to prepare for publishing, and the term is often used to describe documents or images from which sensitive information has been removed.The film was inspired by the true story of a 14-year-old Iraqi girl who was raped, shot in the face and burned, along with other members of her family, by US soldiers two years ago.In plotline, at least, Redacted recalls De Palma's Vietnam-era Casualties of War. But that film was made 14 years after the end of the conflict.The films Hollywood made about Vietnam - Apocalypse Now, Platoon, First Blood - served to provide some historical perspective on that particular military misadventure. Redacted is one of a clutch of films - Paul Haggis's In the Valley of Elah and Nick Broomfield's Battle for Haditha are others - that are being released in the midst of a continuing war that is the first major military conflict to have unfolded in the multimedia age.The young soldiers who came to Baghdad and Basra arrived armed with weapons of mass communication: mobile phones that could record video footage and internet-enabled laptops. If television brought the Vietnam war into the living room, the Iraq war is being brought home through mobile phone footage uploaded onto YouTube and the soldiers blogs. It is the preponderance of such material online and its paucity in the mainstream media that inspired De Palma.Redacted is, then, like Paul Haggis's In the Valley of Elah, an example how filmmakers are borrowing from other genres and media. The mockumentary is not new, as those who recall Spinal Tap and The Blair Witch Project will confirm. And more recently, Cloverfield and Diary of the Dead have both strained for authenticity by claiming to be the products of found footage.But what De Palma and, to a lesser degree, Haggis have done is different. In Haggis's film, mobile phone footage recorded by Tommy Lee Jones's soldier son in Iraq brought the brutal truth about the war home to his father. De Palma's film owes something to the 2006 documentary The War Tapes, which gave a soldier's-eye view of Iraq through footage three troopers filmed themselves.In Redacted, De Palma offers a collage of styles and clips: a soldier's personal video, news footage, an Iraqi insurgent website and even the beheading of an American soldier. Since the film's backers were worried about legal problems, the director was forced to change some details about the actual events.De Palma had wanted to end the film with a photograph of the actual young girl who had been raped, but he was forced to show a staged photograph, prompting complaints that his own film had been "redacted".In order to get the film made, De Palma filmed on a budget of only $5m (£2.5m), using unknown actors. The director has been utterly unequivocal as to his reasons for making the film, telling journalists: "I did this film because I believe that if we as a country are going to cause such disorder we must also be prepared to face the horrendous images that result from these events."He must wonder if he should have bothered, as the critical and commerical response in the US has been, to say the least, mixed, with one rightwing critic dubbing it "the worst movie I've ever seen. I mean, the out and out worst, most disgusting, most hateful, most incompetent, most revolting, most loathsome, most reprehensible cinematic work I've ever encountered."I saw the film earlier this week. Having read advance notices, I knew I should expect Redacted to be distressing viewing, and I imagined that it might be a film to admire for its directorial flair. But while it is unquestionably distressing, Redacted is not only an indictment of how war can brutalise young minds; it also offers a damning verdict on the mainstream media's reporting from Iraq.In part, this is because of the use of embedded journalists. While this is perhaps necessary, given the dangerous situation in Iraq, it means the media have to rely on the military for access. In Vietnam, the media were not controlled to the same degree, and thus the media's reporting from that war was, some claim, influential in turning the American public against the war."In Vietnam, we saw the images and the sorrow of the people we were traumatising and killing," De Palma has said. "We saw soldiers wounded and brought back in body bags. We see none of that in this war."The US army also recently forbade its soldiers access to YouTube - emails and videophone messages still get through - but even now, some disturbing clips are available online.In one, a couple of American soldiers persuade young Iraqi children to say "Fuck Iraq" and "I love pork". "Aren't you a Muslim?" one of the soldiers asks a young boy. "I thought Muslims weren't allowed to eat pork ... Doesn't that make you a dirty little heathen bastard Muslim?"Elsewhere on the internet, you can watch Corporal Joshua Belile singing a self-penned song called "Hadji Girl" about a soldier who falls in love with an Iraqi girl but then is ambushed by the family when he goes to meet them. In the song, Belile sings that he "hid behind the TV / And I locked and loaded my M-16 / And I blew those little fuckers to eternity". James Blunt this ain't.De Palma's film concerns a group of soldiers who one night, drunk, high and horny, leave their compound and, with pre-planned precision, rape and kill a teenage Iraqi girl.I had worried that using a collage of different styles would make it hard to emotionally engage with the film, but in fact the technique works brilliantly well, not least because as well as the US soldiers' video footage, De Palma also recreates Islamist websites where the kidnapping and killing of Americans is celebrated."What I'm trying to do," the director has said, "is to make the viewer aware of the techniques that are used to present, supposedly, the truth to them."They sit there and watch their television screens, and see these embedded reporters and infomercials from Iraq, and how well things are going in Iraq, and they think that's the truth. In anything on television, somebody is selling something - whether it's a product, whether it's a policy."Colby Buzzell is a 31-year-old former soldier in the US army whose My War blog has been turned into an acclaimed book. When he spoke to me, from his home in California, he told me that during his time in Iraq he had witnessed similar incidents to the one with the Iraqi boys being made to say "I love pork", but that this was mostly a function of being bored; and also: "Sometimes you don't even know what you are doing, what you have become."It is that process of dehumanisation that De Palma captures in Redacted. "The media has just got lazy," Buzzell told me, "so you have the soldiers doing the job that the reporters should be doing."De Palma's critics have claimed that his film gives succour to America's enemies. The Fox News presenter Bill O'Reilly claimed the film "will incite young Muslim men ... to act on their hatred. If just one of those men straps on a bomb vest and murders people, that is on Brian De Palma."Buzzell, who spent one year in Iraq for the army, disagrees, saying "there is nothing more American than questioning our government", while De Palma himself has said: "The true story of the war in Iraq has been redacted from the mainstream corporate media. The pictures are what will stop the war. If we get these pictures and stories in front of a mass audience, maybe it will do something."Redacted is not a perfect film, but it is essential viewing, for it reminds us that, five years on from the invasion of Iraq, we are still not being given the full picture.