The other day I was invited on a press trip to Baghdad. This is an unusual development. I'm used to invitations to see plays touring the East Midlands, to a night of laughs at the Chuckle Hut in Newcastle-under-Lyme. But Baghdad? Car-bomb-spattered, borderline-civil war-ridden, westerner-jeopardising Baghdad? I called the PR. The idea was that I accompany a British director, now working in the Middle East, to scout out Iraq's burgeoning theatre scene. It's the kind of offer I'd usually jump at. But on this occasion, excitement found itself sharing space with trepidation and fear.I asked for assurances. Can you promise I won't get beheaded? Don't worry, he said, we have a really good production manager on the ground. This wasn't the balm I'd been looking for. Were I to be bundled into the boot of Muqtada al-Sadr's Mondeo, I don't see how the ability to source excellent theatre lighting could save me. Oh, and you'll be accompanied, said the PR, by an excellent war photographer. A war photographer? This guy really knew how to put a coward at ease.I was surprised at my own timidity, but then no one ever confused an arts critic with Kate Adie. I was arrested in Tehran once, photographing anti-US graffiti while attending the Fajr theatre festival. But when the revolutionary guard realised my detainment might leave Mitchell and Webb's new show disastrously under-reviewed, I was released without charge. In Port of Spain, I was held up at knifepoint while researching an article on a Caribbean version of Handel's Messiah. But the assailant, perhaps in solidarity with my trenchant coverage of David Hare's latest work, gave up the fight empty-handed.Otherwise, well, the comic Daniel Kitson once called for me to be violated during his standup show, and Tim Minchin's violent fantasies about my colleague Phil Daoust have been immortalised in song. But name-calling is an occupational hazard I can live with. It's only with this Baghdad invitation that I've asked myself: how big a risk would I take in the pursuit of theatre? I am still undecided.Next week: Lyn Gardner