NBC News has opened an internal investigation into reporting by its top on-air talent, Brian Williams, following revelations of false statements by Williams about a combat experience in Iraq and new questions about his reporting on hurricane Katrina.The news came as Williams’ predecessor as anchor of NBC Nightly News, Tom Brokaw, denied a report floated by anonymous sources to the New York Post that he had called for Williams’ resignation.The NBC News president, Deborah Turness, a former ITV executive, confirmed the investigation in an internal memo to staff. “This has been a difficult few days for all of us at NBC News,” the memo said. “As you would expect, we have a team dedicated to gathering the facts to help us make sense of all that has transpired. We’re working on what the best next steps are – and when we have something to communicate we will of course share it with you.”Turness’ memo said that Williams had “apologized once again” to Nightly News staff. The memo made no mention of any disciplinary action. “Yesterday, Brian and I spoke to the Nightly News team,” Turness wrote. “And this morning at the Editorial Exchange, we both addressed the wider group. Brian apologized once again, and specifically expressed how sorry he is for the impact this has had on all of you and on this proud organization.”The crisis for the news network began after US veterans of the Iraq war challenged Williams on Facebook about an account Williams had repeated in various venues of being in a US army helicopter that was forced to land in Iraq in 2003 by incoming fire from the ground. Williams has since called the account a “mistake”.“Sorry dude, I don’t remember you being in my aircraft,” wrote a soldier, Lance Reynolds, who was joined by former fellow soldiers on Facebook in challenging Williams’ account. “You were absolutely right and I was wrong,” Williams replied on Facebook to the group, blaming “the fog of memory over 12 years”. Williams and at least one other NBC employee were in a separate US army helicopter at the time and filmed apparent gunfire damage to a helicopter that was hit.Williams made an on-air apology on Wednesday night during NBC Nightly News. “I made a mistake in recalling the events of 12 years ago,” he said. “I want to apologize. I said I was traveling in an aircraft that was hit by RPG fire. I was instead in a following aircraft.”As the week ended, questions began to be raised about accounts Williams has given of his experiences reporting other stories, especially what he has said about his time in New Orleans after hurricane Katrina. The New Orleans Advocate ran a story questioning statements Williams has made about conditions in the city following the hurricane and questioning his account of seeing a man “float by face down” from his “hotel room window in the French Quarter”. The Advocate followed up the story with a second report that depicted such as scene as possible, with pictures of the area around the hotel at the time appearing to show water covering the streets.