Cif last week published a number of pieces about the unhappy fifth anniversary of the Iraq war, but I couldn't help feeling that amidst all the many different arguments, large sections of the media - our media - had gotten off rather lightly.Often referred to as the fourth estate, Oscar Wilde happened to believe that even this designation underestimated the ability of the mass media to set the public agenda and influence our attitudes:"In old days men had the rack. Now they have the press. That is an improvement certainly. But still it is very bad, wrong, and demoralizing. Somebody - was it Burke? - called journalism the fourth estate. That was true at the time, no doubt. But at the present moment it really is the only estate. It has eaten up the other three. The Lords Temporal say nothing, the Lords Spiritual have nothing to say, and the House of Commons has nothing to say and says it. We are dominated by journalism."Five years ago, as Tony Blair was about to take us to war against Iraq after spending several months trying to terrify us all about Iraq's supposed WMD capabilities, and the Tory leadership disgracefully neglected their role as the opposition to actually scrutinise the government's pathetically weak case for war - what was the response of some of our national newspapers, those "watchdogs (pdf)" for democracy, the guardians of the public interest?All our quality newspapers have columnists who are paid to share their thoughts with us and provoke discussion. Often different columnists on the very same paper will adopt positions contrary to each other. That is not what I want to discuss here. Instead, I want to look back at the editorial positions that some of our newspapers adopted.Newspaper leader columns (or editorials) are understood to represent the official view of the newspaper concerned. So, on the eve of war, just how cautiously did they treat the rush to bomb and invade, how sceptical were they of the refusal to allow Hans Blix and his team of UN inspectors sufficient time to verify whether Iraq still possessed any WMDs? How strongly did they urge that all practical avenues be explored thoroughly before taking the extremely grave decision to go to war - a war that would clearly have dramatic consequences for millions of people?The Sunday Times - our biggest selling "quality" Sunday paper - came out firmly in support of war (along with - entirely coincidentally, of course - every single UK Murdoch title):"Avoiding war means allowing President Saddam to keep his weapons of mass destruction. It would encourage other rogue dictators to reach for the nuclear trigger. So war it has to be. And soon."The Sunday Telegraph's position, meanwhile, was neatly summed up in the very title for its leader piece "It is time now to do" in which it went on to ridicule arguments questioning the legality of the forthcoming war of aggression as "pure cant".A week later, in another editorial, the Sunday Telegraph demonstrated how a newspaper can - if it is not careful - look like an extension of the government's press office when it swallowed a claim made about a cruise missile attack allegedly on a site where Saddam Hussein was said to be holding a meeting right at the very start of the war: "It appears that Saddam Hussein was injured in the attack but, alas, not fatally so ... "And what about the Observer - a paper with a fine liberal tradition and which had famously opposed Anthony Eden's collusion with France and Israel in the invasion of Egypt in 1956? Just a couple of weeks ago, its leader column entitled "Five years on, the hard lessons we must learn from Iraq" noted that: "It was inevitable that allied forces would be caught up in a bloody vortex of nationalist reaction and religious feuding."Five years ago, however, admittedly under a different editor, it took a rather different position: "Victory will eliminate the threat of Saddam Hussein and make the world safer ... "I recognise that the above examples are by no means exhaustive and that there were some honourable exceptions in the daily press, including the Independent, the Guardian and the Daily Mirror, but the Sunday Times, Sunday Telegraph and the Observer were - and remain - our three biggest selling quality Sunday newspapers.They should have been asking searching questions about our government's actions; they should have been - in view of the outright deceit and scaremongering involved in the run up to the war - encouraging our MPs to rebel against the party whips who were demanding they vote in parliament in support for war.I was originally going to end this blog by saying that these newspapers failed in their duty to the public. But I wonder now if it may not be better to simply disabuse ourselves of the notion that these newspapers - or at least the corporate owned ones - have any such duty in the first place?