There's a lot of big-think, big-picture stuff I could be saying about Iraq today, looking back over the whole arc of the thing, but I'll leave that for another time, or leave it to you all to debate among yourselves.What I wish to raise this morning is this question: what conditions would have to obtain for the US to have to resume combat operations there one day? Because this is the bottom-line question, right?We have a society there that, as David Brooks catalogued yesterday, is in much better shape than two or three years ago: more commerce, more retail, more basic public services (though certainly still wanting) and so forth. Good.And yet we know the politicians can't form a government, and we know that violence is just lately on the rise. Back in 2006-2007, as Congress debate the question of a "date certain" for withdrawal, Republicans said that if the baddies know the pull-out date, they'll obviously start planning mischief for immediately thereafter, while Democrats said, well, you gotta pull out sometime (and our base wants us out, although that part they didn't much say).So here we are - we're at that date. And we see nervous-making signs that the private Shia militias are maybe going to step up the violence. What level does it have to reach for the US to be drawn back in again, at the level of combat? (It's worth remembering around 50,000 troops will remain and will presumably be on call if things get really hairy.)Americans are a forgetful bunch. Certainly Obama, and probably pols from both parties, will just as soon Iraq not be an issue any more. So, in the normal American style, we'll just forget about it and hope it goes away. Then, if we wake up one morning and there's a Shia fundamentalist regime in charge...But obviously we can't let it come to that, and won't. I'm far from an expert on this, but I'd rate the odds that we might have to resume combat operations one day as not all that long. One of the best American sources to read on this is Tom Ricks, who has a blog at Foreign Policy and knows his stuff cold. He wrote yesterday:Bottom line: The Iraqi mess is far from over, and I don't think the Americans have extricated themselves. The best we may have done is reduce the American presence sufficiently to let natural political forces begin to work and Iraqi politicians to break through the current stalemate. This is likely to be a violent process.I wrote my pessimistic assessment before I read Ricks, so maybe I know more than I think! Of course, one needn't know the details about Iraq per se. Just human nature.