It did not take long for the Iraqi prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, to revert to type. On the day the last US combat troops left the country, he turned against his vice-president Tariq al-Hashimi, accusing him of what he has himself long been suspected of – ordering the bombings and assassinations of his political opponents. Mr Hashimi was not just a leading Sunni Muslim in a Shia-dominated government. He was the linchpin of the political deal stitched together by the US last year, under which the Iraqiya coalition, which won the largest number of votes in the last election, agreed to participate in government.Mr Hashimi fled to the relative safety of Kurdistan, before denouncing the charges as a coup, but he joins a growing list of internal exiles – all of them Sunni. Apart from Mr Hashimi, the deputy prime minister Saleh al-Mutlaq has been ordered not to turn up to parliament again. The Awakening Council, the Sunni fighters who turned on al-Qaida, have been left in the lurch. Iraq appears set to return to the sectarian mire.Anyone but a US president in a hurry, determined to slam the door shut on Iraq, could have seen this coming. At least 30 people connected to the leader of Iraqiya, Ayad Allawi, had been arrested in recent weeks by security forces under Mr Maliki's personal control. The sweep was ostensibly aimed at former members of the Ba'ath party, and sparked by intelligence from Libya that a coup was being planned. But this became a convenient excuse to move against the Sunni leadership. Mr Allawi, a secular-minded Shia who convinced many Sunnis that he could protect their interests, was instinctively opposed to last year's deal with Mr Maliki but was strongarmed into it by the defection of key figures in his own party. Yesterday he had every right to tell his party: I told you so. He was also right to accuse Mr Maliki of being a dictator in the making and of pushing his country to the verge of another sectarian war.Nowhere is this more likely than in Anbar province, the site of the worst atrocities of the war – Falluja, Ramadi, Abu Ghraib prison. Iraqiya's inclusion in politics was key to the fragile stability that allowed America to withdraw. But for the same reasons, its exclusion now bodes ill for the future. The idea that Sunnis might reclaim some of their lost power through Mr Allawi's alliance is history. The ministry created for him is not even functioning. Mr Maliki has abandoned all pretence that a coalition exists. Hand in hand with arrests and assassination, the mood in the Sunni regions has darkened. Last week Diyala province became the latest to declare autonomy. Iraq is fissuring once more, and may never be one country again.