Investigations about the Iraq war should be conducted by international officials, not British ones (Iraqi prisoners 'abused at UK's Abu Ghraib', 6 November). It is dismal news that the Ministry of Defence is about to appoint a former CID officer to investigate what appears to be a large body of evidence of very serious crimes in British detention facilities.British former officials have ably shown they do not have the independence to come to honest conclusions about the war. Serving and former officials at the Chilcot inquiry all describe their private misgivings about the war and their inability to make any kind of meaningful expression of their misgivings.And the current Iraq inquiry seems unlikely to make up for the deficiencies in moral courage of the Butler and Hutton inquiries. The government has chosen for the Chilcot inquiry a few senior bureaucrats from ministries linked to the security services. Check out the FAQ on its website – it makes a commitment to impunity for their witnesses, some of whom were directly responsible for the atrocities, whose investigation will now be entrusted to a CID man.Eddie ThomasLondon• MI6 chief John Sawers expressed the attitude of Britain to torture thus: "Torture is illegal and abhorrent under any circumstances, and we have nothing whatsoever to do with it." David Miliband, the former foreign secretary, made similar remarks in the past. Your report details allegations of systematic violation of human rights and torture of Iraqi prisoners by British personnel in a British detention centre. This contradiction can only be resolved by a public inquiry. An internal MoD enquiry, if it does not produce a whitewash, will blame one or two people lower down the chain of command, and that is not commensurate with the seriousness of the allegations.Those in the Iraqi army and police, trained by the Americans and British, who have been involved in torture, must have concluded that torture was acceptable, knowing what they know about the abuse of prisoners in US and British detention centres; all that is needed for them to torture with impunity is hypocritical remarks and deniability by their Iraqi politicians. We haven't exactly set them a good example.Dr Adnan al-DainiExeter• The recently released video footage of foul mistreatment of Iraqi prisoners by thugs in British uniform does not, unfortunately, surprise me but it makes me ashamed to be British. Nothing justifies this. And we are surprised that many Muslims are radicalised and want to harm us? I am astonished the number is not greater.Giles SwayneCambridge