8.48am: Today, for the first time, we're going to hear from the armed forces. The Iraq inquiry is taking evidence on the military preparations for war and it will be quizzing Admiral Lord Boyce, the chief of the defence staff from 2001 to 2003. Boyce will be appearing alongside Sir Kevin Tebbit, permanent secretary at the Ministry of Defence from 1998 to 2005.Two issues could be particularly interesting. Sir David Manning told the inquiry on Monday that Tony Blair first asked for military options in June 2002. (The transcript of his evidence is here, and the relevant passage starts on page 35.) The inquiry is bound to go into this in much more detail. As Andrew Gilligan pointed out in the Sunday Telegraph recently, Blair was not exactly very candid about this in parliament. On 16 July 2002 Donald Anderson asked him directly if Britain was "preparing for possible military action in Iraq". Blair replied: "No. There are no decisions which have been taken about military action." It would be nice to hear what Boyce thought of that answer, but the inquiry have not been asking questions like this, so we are unlikely to find out this morning.The other issue which could produce some fascinating evidence relates to the legality of the war. It has been reported that Admiral Sir Alan West, the first sea lord at the time, was so worried about the war being illegal that he sought his own private legal advice on the matter. What did Boyce think of all this? Perhaps we will find out.It starts at 9am.9.00am: Sir John Chilcot opens with a reminder that these sessions are about the way policy was developed and implemented. In the new year they will begin to take evidence from ministers. It will be then that the inquiry will consider the legal issues. But the inquiry will ask Boyce and Tebbit about that today, he says.Today's session will cover up to the invasion. More military officers will speak tomorrow. Next week the inquiry will deal with the conduct of the war itself.There will be further sessions where specific questions, like those relating to equipment (a key issue for the relatives of soldiers killed), will be discussed.9.03am: Sir Roderic Lyne starts the questions. He goes back to late 2001. Britain went into Afghanistan. As far as Iraq was concerned, the containment policy was beginning to "creak". In the US people were beginning to talk about "doing Iraq" after Afghanistan. At what point did the MoD start thinking about the contingency of full-scale military action against Iraq and discussing it informally with officials in the US?Boyce says that in the later part of 2001 he heard talk from the Americans about Iraq. "We absolutely did not want to get involved in such conversations." No contingency planning went on in relation to Iraq. The MoD was heavily preoccupied with Afghanistan.Lyne asks about the first four months of 2002. After President Bush's "axis of evil" speech, did the situation change?Boyce says in the spring, "as one was hearing more and more from the Americans [about Iraq]", the British did start to think about this in a small, informal group. That started around April.9.07am: Lyne asks how the MoD contributed to Blair's briefing for Crawford and the options paper presented to Blair around that time.Boyce says the military thought things should be done through the United Nations.Tebbit says "there was no such thing as military planning in the MoD as such". But it was clear that the "axis of evil" speech meant the Americans were considering military action. Tebbit knew from his own visits to the US that the neocons were pushing for military action. In the papers prepared for Blair's visit to Crawford "we needed to consider that option". The papers said that Britain should not rule out participating in military action. There were contributions from the MoD, the Foreign Office and the Cabinet Office. They were policy papers, not military planning documents. The papers made it clear that any military action would only take place after the UN arms control route had been "exhausted", only when there was public support, only when there was an international coalition and only when it was clear what would happen after the invasion.Lyne asks if the MoD wanted Blair to extract anything specific from Bush in relation to military planning.Tebbit says that would be going too far. "There were no recommendations."Lyne asks if the MoD was "plugged into" American military planning. Tebbit suggests the British were not.And Tebbit has just come up with the first good piece of Iraq inquiry jargon of the day - the "pol-mil community".Chilcot asks him to explain. Tebbit says that refers to policy makers who balance military and political considerations.9.13am: Sir Lawrence Freedman asks if the planning cell was established after the Crawford summit.Boyce says the MoD started "ramping up" its planning after Crawford. Thinking started in May. But it was constrained to a "very small group of people" in London.Freedman asks Boyce to explain what the options were.Boyce says the "lower level" was based on what was in theatre. A medium operation would have involved the deployment of a brigade. A larger one would have involved a divisional-sized deployment. The MoD needed to work out how long it would take to get troops into the area.Freedman asks Boyce to confirm that the MoD was not directly discussing this with the Americans at the time.Boyce says that's correct. The MoD had people at the coalition HQ at Tampa in the US. But they were dealing with Afghanistan. They were not planning for Iraq.Tebbit says it should not be assumed that the government was looking for a military option. There's a difference between military planning and political planning, he says. It is natural for the armed forces to want to understand what might be needed because of the time it takes to prepare a "force generation process". For Boyce, it would have been necessary to prepare for the possibility of such a move even if he did not expect to have to go to war.Tebbit says it's important to understand there was no "military pressure" for war. The work was "very, very preliminary". It was a "ground-clearing thinking stage".9.21am: Freedman asks when the planning started to get more serious.Boyce says in late June or July the Americans agreed that the British should come into their planning cell at Tampa. That enabled the British to start considering their potential contribution.Freedman asks Tebbit if he discussed this with his counterparts in the Pentagon.Not at that point, Tebbit says.Tebbit says "late May" was when Geoff Hoon, the defence secretary, would have first heard of the preliminary planning being done within the MoD.Freedman asks if the British knew from the Americans when an operation might take place.Boyce says it was in September that the Americans first suggested that they wanted to do something at the end of the year or in January 2003.9.24am: Sir Roderic Lyne says Sir Christopher Meyer told the inquiry that the Americans were expecting a divisional-sized force from the British in 2002. Where did this American assumption come from?Boyce says in the spring of 2002 the Americans were told that Britain would only send forces if the government had gone through the UN route. But the Americans did not believe that. Figures like Rumsfeld assumed that Britain would join the operation regardless.That's interesting. I'll post the full quote when I get a chance.Boyce also says he does not know where the Americans got the idea that the UK would send a large force from. Tebbit says the British faced a dilemma. They could not commit themselves to war, but if they did not sound as if they were committed, they were liable to be excluded from the planning.9.29am: Lyne asks about the plan for the British to invade through the north.Boyce says it was never assumed that Britain would lead the attack from the north.Boyce also says he was only talking about strategic planning. He was banned from talking to a senior logistics official about this by Geoff Hoon, the defence secretary, because Hoon did want people to think the MoD was plannning for definite action.Boyce says that being able to talk to the logistics offiicials is important. But, without being able to involve them, all he could do was "high-level planning".It is not clear yet whether Boyce thinks that not being able to involve the logistics experts at this stage was a mistake. I think he's suggesting it was a mistake, but I can't be sure. Perhaps it will become clearer later.9.34am: Boyce says that, if the British were to get involved, he was in favour of going in with a large force.9.36am: Tebbit says that in 2002 it was not clear that the US had a clear rationale for military action. I think he's talking about mid-2002.Tebbit says British officials wanted to "deepen their engagement" with the US to ensure that the conditions he mentioned earlier (see my post of 9.07am) were being taken seriously.Lyne asks Tebbit if he had concerns about the way the policy was going.Tebbit says: "I think that was indeed that case." In July 2002 everyone involved tried to make sure those conditions were being pursued. But the environment in Washington made this "hard". The military planning track involved a dialogue between Donald Rumsfeld and the central command at Tampa. The Washington chiefs of staff were less involved. The system of "well-structured" discussions between the state department and the Pentagon and other agencies that had existed at the time of the first Gulf war was not evident this time round.Boyce mentions the "dysfunctionalism" of Washington. He says that he would find himself briefing his American counterparts on what was happening in different parts of the US adminstration. Rumsfeld was not sharing information.Lyne asks Boyce if he had a good dialogue with Rumsfeld.Boyce says he did not speak to Rumsfeld very often. But Boyce did deal directly with General Tommy Franks, who was in charge war planning at US central command. Boyce says that if you were talking to Franks, you were talking to Rumsfeld, since the two men spoke five times a day.9.44am: Tebbit says: "This was a difficult structure in Washington to penetrate."9.45am: Sir Roderic Lyne asks about Blair's meeting with Bush at Camp David in September. This was the meeting where Blair urged Bush to go down the UN route. Lyne says the military were in a "vacuum" at this point. The MoD had presented options to Blair, but had not had any instructions.Boyce says it was "very frustrating" that, having made the planning, he could not implement this, in terms of getting people into the right place or making the right purchases. He says that his advice was that "every day" he was held up, that meant another day before he could deploy.(So, Boyce was unhappy. That answers my question. See post at 9.29am.)Tebbit says it was decided that the UK would not expose the full-scale option to the Americans at this stage because Blair was stil committed to the UN route.Tebbit also reminds the inquiry that there were concerns that troops would have to be held back in the UK to deal with the fire officers' strike.Lyne asks if the Americans actually needed the British.Boyce says: "Yes, they could have done it without us, but I think they very much wanted us there."If it was not essential to deploy a land force of some size, why were the British so keen to send a division out there?Boyce says that only a force of that size would have given the British some influence on how the campaign was conducted.Lyne asks if the British did have influence.Boyce says he thinks the British did. The Americans wanted to invade at the end of 2002. But they delayed because of the British.9.55am: Sir Lawrence Freedman asks about British influence. Possibly Britain's "peak influence" came in the summer of 2002, when Blair helped to persuade Bush to go to the UN. But at this point the British were not promising the Americans a large force. That suggests that Britain's influence was not related to the size of the force it was going to deploy, he suggests.Tebbit says that by September the British were talking about a large deployment.Freedman says a decision about a large force had not been taken then. Tebbit accepts that a decision had not been taken, but he says the planning was by then assuming a large deployment.Tebbit says that he is not talking about a public announcement about a large deployment at that stage. He is talking about the assumptions being made within the government planning process.Tebbit says there was a "lack of clarity" in the overall plans. In the "contingent discussions" with the US, the British wanted to know whether the Americans had a "winning concept". Until the chiefs of staff felt the Americans had a "winning concept", covering the post-war scenario, they had reservations.Freedman asks about funding.Tebbit says there was never any problem with the Treasury denying funds for this operation. But there was a problem with the MoD's budget as a whole. "At no stage did the chancellor of the exchequer withhold the funds [needed to carry out the operation]," he says.10.02am: Boyce says the UK had a quite a lot of influence in the aftermath planning because of the size of the British force.Tebbit says the UK learned in 1990 with Desert Storm that "unless you had boots on the ground, you did not have serious influence on US planning". That applied in 2002, he suggests.Freedman asks if Downing Street was reluctant to authorise planning for the "full package" (ie the full troop deployment).Boyce says the MoD could "go overt" and start planning more openly after the UN security council passed resolution 1441 in November 2002.10.05am: Freedman asks when the full chiefs of staff discussed Iraq.Boyce says individual chiefs of staff were engaged right at the start. But only a small team outside that group was involved. He thinks it was first on the agenda for the chiefs of staff meetings in May and June.Freedman asks if the chiefs were "of one mind" on this.Boyce says they all wanted a land, air and maritime contribution.Freedman asks if the army wanted to send a large force.Boyce says he does not remember any reluctance from the chief of general staff (or head of the army, then General Michael Walker).10.11am: Tebbit says some people have argued that oil was the cause of the war. "That's completely untrue." But the MoD did have to make plans to secure the northern oil fields, to stop Saddam setting them alight and to ensure that Iraq had the capacity to earn revenue after the war.10.14am: Freedman asks if the MoD had any concerns about invading through the south, rather than the north.Boyce says there was less space in the south.Tebbit says during December 2002 the chiefs of staff started thinking about Britain invading from the south. It was by then becoming clear that invading through the north, which would have involved going through Turkey, would not be possible.10.18am: Lady Prashar asks if the Americans were taking the British contribution for granted.Tebbit says he went to see the Americans in July 2002. Until then it was not clear that that was what they were going to do. There were "different groups at work in Washington with different views", he said. At the state department, Richard Armitage, the deputy secretary of state, thought the UK conditions (see 9.07am) were "absolutely right". But others thought that Iraq would fall easily. They were listening to Ahmed Chalabi and the Iraqi National Congress and they thought democracy would flower after the invasion.Tebbit says the effect of 9/11 on the US was "absolutely massive". In some ways it was bigger than Pearl Harbor. The Americans felt that they would never again allow a dictator to attack them. There was a strong belief in the need for "pre-emption".Prashar asks if the British should have negotiated harder on their conditions.Tebbit says it's difficult to answer that question. It's important to remember that Blair thought this was the right thing to do. "It is very easy to say with the benefit of hindsight that perhaps we should have pushed harder." (That quote seems to be aimed at Sir Christopher Meyer.)10.26am: Boyce repeats the point he made earlier about the Americans not taking Britain's "conditions" seriously and assuming that Britain would be involved in the attack anyway. He says that Rumsfeld only "got it" and understood that Britain's support was conditional in March 2003, when he had his outburst and suggested that the US did not need the UK anyway.The Americans also assumed that everything would be fine in Iraq after the invasion, he says.10.29am: They've just stopped for a 10-minute break. While they're away, I hope they sort out the audio feed, which was just starting to pack in. In a moment, I'll post a quick summary.10.31am: Here are the main points so far:• Boyce said that it was "very frustrating" not being allowed to make detailed logistical preparations for war until November 2002. He says he was told not to involve the MoD's defence logistics organisation by Geoff Hoon, the defence secretary, because Hoon thought people would assume the war was inevitable if news of that got out. (See 9.29am and 9.45am.)• Gordon Brown, as chancellor, did provide sufficient funds for the war in Iraq, but not for the MoD as a whole, Tebbit said. (See 9.55am.)• The Americans assumed that Britain was going to join the invasion anyway, regardless of what was being said in public about the UN and other conditions. (See 9.24am.)10.42am: This is what Boyce said when he was asked about not being able to get his logistics officials involved in planning in September 2002:It was very frustrating. I was not allowed to do that. In other words, having refined our theoretical strategic planning, I could not take the next step, which was to implement it and to start doing the necessary purchasing and bringing things forward, getting people in the right sort of place. This was all very much, as I said earlier on, in order not to make any signals that we were doing overt military planning while the UN negotiations were going on, leading up to the resolution that happened in November.10.50am: And here's the quote from Boyce about the way the Americans assumed the British would send troops regardless of whether there was any UN involvement:No matter how many times you said to senior American officers, and indeed Mr Rumsfeld, that we were not committing our forces until we had been through the proper UN process, and had been through parliament as well, there was a complete reluctance to believe that. It was a case of: "Yeah, I know you've got to say that, but come the day you'll be there," was the attitude.10.54am: They're back. And the audio feed seems to be working. Hooray.10.55am: Boyce says that the "late stage" at which he was given authority to start getting the logistics ready left him with some "very short timelines". But he was confident that troops were properly equipped by the time war started in March.Sir Roderic Lyne asks if the troops had had time to train properly.Boyce says that some of them had had training in the Gulf.10.59am: Tebbit says "rigorous systems" were in place in relation to procurement for the war. There were 250 "urgent operation requirements". They were all completed in time. The press had "treated it like a sport" when it came to finding ways of criticising the MoD, he says. On body armour, he says 25,000 sets were delivered by February. More was delivered after that. But ultimately it was up to the commanders on the ground to decide if they had what they needed. The biggest difficulty was to do with NBC protection: nuclear, biological and chemical protection. Some of the equipment was out of date.It was a very intensive process. But all the commanders in the field signalled that they were ready before the war started.11.03am: Sir Roderic Lyne asks if commanders said they were happy with their kit when they were debriefed after the way.Tebbit says he thinks that they were.He says that the MoD got the same amount of equipment into theatre as it did at the time of Desert Storm in half the amount of time.Lyne asks about problems with the tracking systems. Did stuff get lost?Tebbit says: "It must have happened on occasions, yes. The volumes were extremely high." But that does not mean that the troops were not "properly equipped".Lyne asks about the lessons that needed to be learnt. Did Tebbit and Boyce draw the conclusion that the systems worked as they were meant to work?Tebbit says that concerns about MoD logistics have already been raised in a Commons select committee inquiry. The asset tracking system was "not up to the task" of coping with the variety and volume of equipment being distributed. But that does not mean that troops were not properly equipped.Tebbit says that there are other issues to take into account in relation to readiness, such as the weather and the time soldiers are kept waiting.11.08am: Sir Roderic Lyne asks Boyce if he was properly consulted by Blair and if he was given clear political instructions.Boyce says he was happy with this. He saw Geoff Hoon, the defence secretary, daily and he saw Blair frequently. "I never felt that I was being excluded from any [aspects relating to the military planning]", he says.He had to provide "as realistic" a view as possible. He never felt that he was being shut out, "not by the prime minister anyway".That's an interesting aside. I wonder who he's referring to.Lyne asks Tebbit if coordination in Whitehall worked as well as it should have done.Tebbit says it did within the MoD. But he thought the UK interagency process could have worked better. He discussed this with David Manning, Blair's foreign policy adviser, and there was talk of setting up a new inter-departmental planning structure. It was "quite difficult" to ensure that other departments were "as aware as they needed to be" of their role, particularly after the way. The Foreign Office eventually set up a planning unit.Boyce says that at his chiefs of staff committee, which was meeting more often, were very senior representatives from the Foreign Office, from the Department for International Development and from the Home Office, where appropriate.Tebbit says that at the end of 2002, when it was becoming clear that the northern role was not going to work and when it was clear that the UK might not secure a second resolution, he had a discussion with Hoon as to whether this was the point to take "broader stock" and to consider whether the policy was right. There was a discussion by ministers in mid-January that was "very important" in this respect.(Tebbit is hinting here that he asked Hoon to think again about going to war. But he does not put it as explicitly as that.)11.17am: We're on to the legality issue now. Boyce says that this was a very important issue for him, not least because Britain had signed up to the International Criminal Court, "somewhat against my better instincts".He says he would have been prepared to issue an order saying British forces would not engage if parliament had voted against the war.Lyne asks what this would have done to US-UK relations. He says the Americans understood that "if parliament said no, we would not be going".Lyne asks Tebbit if Britain could have pulled out at the time of the Commons vote in March. Tebbit says there could have been "serious damage" to the US-UK relationship.Right up until the end, the British were making it clear how important the UN framework was and how important Commons approval was, Tebbit says.11.21am: Sir Roderic Lyne asks if the UK had to stick with the US "right or wrong".Tebbit says that's not the case. Lyne asks if the benefits of going along with the US outweighed the drawbacks.Tebbit says he would not put it as narrowly as that. It's important to remember the threat posed by WMD, he says. The decisions were taken because "the prime minister believed this was the right thing to do".11.24am: Sir John Chilcot comes back to the legality. He says Boyce asks for a legal opinion saying the war would be legal. He asked for that and he got it. Was that right?Boyce confirms that that was correct. He got a statement from the government law officer.Tebbit says he wrote to the cabinet secretary in early March. He said there would have to be a ministerial meeting at which Boyce would receive legal authority for the war. He says the cabinet secretary was going to arrange this anyway.11.27am: Boyce says in November 2002 the Americans made a formal request for Britain's "option three" – a large-scale contribution.11.29am: Sir Lawrence Freedman asks about the briefings that took place before Blair decided to commit troops to southern Iraq. Invading from the south would be more dangerous than invading from the north, he suggests. How did ministers evaluate these threats?Boyce says there was a normal threat assessment. One of the key concerns involved making sure the oil fields were not sabotaged.Freedman asks what ministers were told about potential casualties.Boyce says he cannot recall what they were. But what happened at the end of the day was "a lot less" than what eventually happened. The MoD was convinced that British soldiers would encounter biological or chemical weapons at some point. Tebbit says he is not sure if these figures have been released. He says the assessment was that casualties would not be higher than in the Gulf war a decade earlier. It was thought that Saddam would not use biological and chemical weapons early. But it was assumed he would use them "as a last resort".Tebbit says the UK was still looking for "more clarity" about US post-war intentions at this stage.11.37am: Sir Lawrence Freedman asks about the intelligence received shortly before the war saying Saddam's WMD had been disassembled by this stage. The inquiry heard this in evidence last week.Boyce says they assumed they would encounter biological or chemical weapons.Tebbit says that he checked his notes from the time after hearing this information given in evidence last week and they do not show that he was told about this at the time.11.40am: Boyce says the British thought the Iraqi army needed to be maintained after the war. The British were also concerned about "not trashing the joint", or maintaining Iraqi infrasctructure, as he explains.Freedman asks about troop deployment.Boyce says he was happy with the UK deployment. But he was concerned about the "anorexic" nature of the US contribution. "Once the battle had been won, we did not have the boots on the ground to consolidate," he says, in reference to Baghdad, not Basra.Boyce says he expected to be in Iraq for three or four years at the least.Freedman says the planning did not reflect this. Boyce says the planning just looked six months ahead.11.44am: Tebbit says the UK could not start planning for the post-war situation until the MoD knew what its area of responsibility would be. That did not become clear until January 2003.He says there was a general expectation that there would be a "massive" humanitarian disaster. There was not so much concern about governance being a problem.11.47am: Freedman asks how good inter-agency cooperation was.Boyce says he was not happy with the way the Department for International Development operated, "particularly as led by Clare Short". On the ground DfID officials were refusing to help.Tebbit says DfID believed a second UN resolution was essential. And their focus on poverty relief meant "they were not sure whether the Iraqi people were quite poor enough [to deserve aid]". Tebbit recalls DfID that if they waited, the Iraqis soon would be poor enough to qualify for DfID support.DfID did come on board after Blair intervened. But it was "very late in the day".11.51am: Tebbit says that Donald Rumsfeld secured control of post-war planning in the US. That made it hard for the British to keep track of what was being prepared.11.53am: Sir Lawrence Freedman asks when the MoD started to worry about quite serious violence erupting after the way.Tebbit says the scale of violence that emerged surprised everybody, including Iraqis.11.55am: Tebbit says the British did not support the decision taken by Paul Bremer, head of the Coalition Provisional Authority, to impose de-Ba'athification - the sacking of Ba'ath party members from their state jobs.He says the British were pressing for a "vetting policy" that would have allowed more Iraqis to stay in their jobs. Boyce says some American generals frequently said they wanted more troops on the ground. Rumsfeld said no.Tebbit says that when Geoff Hoon went to Washington in February, he stressed the need for a UN mandate that would emphasis the importance of Iraqis playing a role in the reconstruction process. He says the British had some influence because the Americans accepted the need for some UN engagement.12.00pm: Lady Prashar says David Manning said the American military did not see peace keeping as their responsibility. Was Boyce aware of that?Yes, he says. Prashar asks if he told the prime minister.Yes, says Boyce.12.03pm: Sir Martin Gilbert asks about the meeting Blair chaired to get DfID involved in post-war reconstruction. How did inter-departmental cooperation work?Tebbit says different Whitehall departments have different cultures. The MoD could not get other departments to share the "urgency" felt in the MoD.Chilcot closes the session. I'll post a quick summary of the main findings in a moment.12.13pm: There was more good stuff in the last hour. I've posted a summary of the best lines from this morning at 10.31am. Here are the top lines that came out later.• Boyce criticised Clare Short for not allowing Department for International Development officials to play a full role in post-war reconstruction. Tebbit said one DfID argument was that the Iraqis were not poor enough. He told DfID at the time that if DfID did not get involved soon, the Iraqis soon would be poor enough. (See 11.47am.)• Tebbit said the MoD's asset tracking system was "not up to the task" of monitoring all the equipment being sent to the Gulf. He implied that this was something that the MoD has already admitted. But he insisted that troops were properly equipped. (See 11.03am.)• Boyce criticised Donald Rumsfeld, the US defence secretary, for the "anorexic" nature of the US troop deployment. (Rumsfeld thought that modern strategy would allow the Americans to win the war with fewer troops than they would have deployed for a mission of that kind in the past, and he also thought that they did not need to be in Iraq in large numbers after the invasion because everything would be peaceful.) Boyce also said Americans commanders wanted more troops. (See 11.40am and 11.55am.)• Boyce confirmed that he wanted an assurance that the war was legal. He also revealed that he had doubts about Britain signing up to the International Criminal Court. (See 11.17am and 11.24am.)• One British army brigade was only ready the day before the invasion started. I did not get this, but the Press Assocation has picked it up. Lyne asked Boyce to confirm (which he did) that the 7th Armoured Brigade, aka the Desert Rats, did not reach full operting capability until 19 March 2003.12.36pm: Two final thoughts.• Why were the Americans so sure that Britain was going to take part in the Iraq war regardless of what happened at the UN? John Rentoul, who is running a one-man campaign to rebut anti-Blair bias in Iraq inquiry coverage, is really going to have his work cut out once the blogosphere gets its teeth into that one. Boyce's remark was fascinating, although Boyce himself could not explain why the Americans were so confident that the British would definitely come on board in the end. Was it just naive optimism? Or had they received some kind of secret assurance? I'm sceptical of conspiracy theories, and I don't pretend to know the answer, but I do note that the inquiry seems very interested in the comment from Sir Christopher Meyer last week to the effect that he was told by a senior US figure in early 2002 exactly how large the UK contribution was going to be. The prediction turned out to be almost spot on. Asked how this could be so, Boyce told the inquiry today they would have to ask the Americans.• The "planning for war" allegation is too simplistic. The conventional complaint about Blair is that, while in public he claimed to be striving for a peaceful resolution to the Iraq crisis, in private he had already told Bush that Britain would support the war. But we've heard evidence today, and from Sir David Manning on Monday, that presents a rather more complicated picuture.First, Boyce and Tebbit argued today that offering to put "troops on the ground" was essential if Britain wanted to influence US policy. In other words (and this is my phrase, not theirs) you had to tell the US that you were going to go to war if you wanted to have any hope of stopping them going to war. And, second, Blair and Hoon left detailed military prepartion quite late. Referring to the situation in mid-2002, Boyce said today: "I was not allowed to speak to the chief of defence logistics. I was prevented from doing that by the secretary of state for defence because of the concern of it becoming public knowledge that we were planning for a military contribution which might be unhelpful in the activity in the UN to secure a security council resolution." Boyce said he found this frustrating, leaving Blair open to the charge of being too reluctant to prepare for war, not too eager.That's enough for today. Thanks for the comments.