A decade ago, I took part of the initial invasion of Iraq. It is long enough ago, now, that the memories have lost their sharp intrusiveness; they no longer hover at the edge of my consciousness and push in at unexpected moments. My memories of the invasion are also now shaded by context and colored by what has happened since; they do not exist in a vacuum.I didn't support the war.The Rakkassans – 3rd brigade of the 101st Airborne Division (air assault), the unit my military intelligence company was attached to – had been brought home from Afghanistan, where they'd been hunting Osama bin Ladin, so they could head to Iraq with the rest of the division. The reasons for invading Iraq seemed disingenuous, at best. But as a soldier, it was not my place to decide: our democratically elected civilian government chooses how to employ the military. As an Arabic linguist, I also believed I could help not only my fellow troops, but also innocent Iraqi civilians.And though pundits now like to pretend it didn't happen this way, there were Iraqis who greeted us joyfully. Little girls gave me flowers. Everyone willing to come up to talk to a female American soldier in those first weeks wanted me to hear their personal stories of suffering under Saddam Hussein, their families' tales of woe under the Ba'athist regime.I began to believe that even if we hadn't come for the right reasons, perhaps we were doing the right thing. The people I met were full of hope for a better future. When what came to be known as the insurgency began to take root during my deployment, it was difficult to hold on to that sense of hopefulness. My comrades – including the man who became my husband – were getting injured; my own life seemed more at risk than during the invasion. And it was increasingly difficult to see the Iraqis as people rather than enemies.Then, my unit's time in Iraq was done. I came home to an America that seemed foreign: everyone was fat and on a purported diet that forbade eating bananas, while news of celebrities trumped stories on the wars. As a woman, I felt invisible – I didn't fit the stereotypical image civilians had of veterans. When groups of us went out to celebrate our safe homecoming, bartenders would offer "the guys" a free round of beers, assuming the women were wives or girlfriends.When I mentioned that I was just back from the war, some people asked me if as a woman I were "allowed to carry a gun", while others asked if I were in the infantry (still banned by regulation). It was obvious that my fellow citizens had no concept of what women troops were experiencing. Even then president Bush, my commander-in-chief, flatly stated:"There are no women in combat."It was a shocking invalidation not only of my service but of the women who been taken prisoner of war, wounded, and injured.As I struggled to help my husband recover from the penetrating traumatic brain injury (TBI) he had suffered, while simultaneously watching from afar as the situation in Iraq worsened, it became clear that our government was tragically unprepared for both the wounded warriors coming home and the occupation of Iraq. The Department of Defense (DoD) and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) have spent much of the past decade playing catch-up, trying to learn how to best manage those tremendous challenges in the midst of actually handling them.The military developed and put into practice a counterinsurgency doctrine that remains controversial – those who subscribe to it have either "seen the light" or "drunk the Kool-Aid", depending on one's perspective. Which camp prevails may determine the focus and direction of the military for a generation.Women's contribution in the theater have led the DoD to rescind the policy that previously barred them from serving in ground combat jobs or units, a tremendous advance. And the DoD and VA are both developing vast bodies of knowledge about diagnosis and treatment of TBIs and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), known as the "signature wounds" of this conflict. Like many war-driven military medical advances before, these advances will make their way into civilian society as well, to everyone's benefit.Yet, when I talk about my experiences in Iraq, people often ask, "Was it worth it?"The question still makes me pause and fumble my words. Was the tremendous sacrifice of blood and treasure a worthwhile investment for the United States? Are the Iraqi people better-off today than they were a decade ago?My answer, which feels like a cop-out even to myself, is that we may not know for a generation or more. Yet, I bridle instantly at suggestions that troops died "in vain", for they sacrificed themselves not for policy but for their comrades-in-arms; all are remembered and honored.Was it worth it for me, on a personal level? Definitively, yes.I learned who I am at my core, discovering previously unplumbed depths of courage. Seeing how rural Iraqis live gave me a profound appreciation of how lucky I am to live in modern America, and a rich understanding of how tremendously privileged we are.And I met my husband, the father of my children, in Iraq. As we traveled together on his long and difficult road to recovery, we found meaning in our sacrifice by connecting to the larger community of veterans and turning to help those who came after us. The war instilled in me both the obligation and the strength to continue serving in new ways.