Nouri al-Maliki is not listening. He is not listening to America, which put him into the office he now holds, nor to Iran, which helps maintain him there, nor to other Muslim countries. He is not listening to Iraqi Sunnis, who have pleaded with him to show at least a modicum of fairness in his dealings with their bruised and marginalised community. He is not listening to other Shia political leaders, who realise, some of them belatedly, that his policies have led directly to the crisis in the north.The narrative he prefers is one of encirclement, betrayal and abandonment. He has attacked Saudi Arabia, the Gulf states, and Turkey, accusing them of scheming to destroy Iraq. He has accused Sunni politicians and tribal leaders of siding with Isis, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. He has sacked the commanders who failed in the north, ordering that one be court martialled, without proper inquiry into the causes of the collapse.He wants to cast the dire situation in which Iraq finds itself in black and white military terms, with himself as an embattled commander in chief poring over the map as he plots the countermoves he hopes will reverse the battlefield situation. No doubt he recalls the events of 2008 when, against American advice and without even telling the British just outside Basra, he poured troops into that city and defeated Muqtada al-Sadr's Mahdi army. Mr Maliki is not a soldier, the Mahdi army was not much of an army, and this solitary triumph in any case hardly qualifies him as a Napoleon or Frederick the Great. Yet he reportedly spends most of his day on army matters. Some of his aides have picked up on his tone and taken to dressing in fatigues.The military balance in Iraq may already be shifting, with Isis's lines of communication and supply stretched, and the government hold on a largely Shia Baghdad not seriously threatened. The danger now is that Mr Maliki, having governed in such a sectarian way, will fight his war in an equally sectarian manner. What he wants from allies abroad is not advice, criticism or political recommendations but military help without any strings attached. So far he is not getting that, at least from the United States. President Obama is sending 300 military people in as advisers and intelligence gatherers. As and when the government begins to re-take towns and cities, the president may hope to use them to restrain Iraqi forces from the heavy handed use of fire power, or from putting into the fray inexperienced and angry Shia militiamen who might not distinguish between insurgents and ordinary Sunnis.Mr Maliki seems to want to fight Isis without help from the Sunnis, tarring all of them with the same brush of complicity. That there has been some complicity is clear. Some rump Ba'athists and some tribal leaders joined Isis, or at least stepped aside. Sunnis have been provoked but they also have a lot of explaining to do. But this is still a deeply counter-productive approach. The Iraqi prime minister should be seeking to get more Sunni Arabs and Kurds on the government side on the battlefield.Yet the frigid line up earlier this week when Shia and Sunni political leaders gathered to make a joint call for Iraqi unity told another story. After the photocall, the prime minister and the Sunnis drifted off without a word to each other. Whether Mr Maliki's obstinacy has already led the United States to conclude that he should go is not yet clear. Some reports suggest this is now the American view, but America's leverage in Iraq is very limited. It would need to be the Iranian view as well, with further agreement on who should be his successor. Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the leading Shia cleric, has said he is against any measures that would set aside the deadline for the formation of a new government. If that means that he believes Mr Maliki must very soon either change or go, he is right.