Watching the Chilcot inquiry into the Iraq war is like watching a car crash in slow motion. Very, very slow motion.It is supposed to be a "lessons learned" inquiry, but it has shown itself unable to admit to its own mistakes, let alone learn from them. This week, inquiry chairman Sir John Chilcot had the chance to start again, with a new attitude to openness under a government with less interest in hiding the truth. Once again, he hid his head in the sand.The inquiry's public hearings started up again on Tuesday after a four-month break that was expressly designed to stop voters finding out anything that might influence the way they would vote in the general election. The inquiry is bound to arouse less public interest now than when Labour was in power, and if it continues to reveal as little as it has, people will lose interest fast.But it could be worse than that: if it continues to allow a procession of establishment witnesses to rewrite history from their own perspective, the inquiry will be a disaster.This morning, before the first witness session, Chilcot made what were described with no degree of overstatement as some "opening remarks". Did he signal a significant change of tack, away from a format that has been widely criticised for its lack of transparency and bite? Only if you consider that secret hearings where the panel is free to ask what it wants are better than public hearings where they are hamstrung by secrecy.The main thing we learned from Chilcot's opening statement is that he is very complacent about the way things are going, in spite of all the criticism. He also revealed that the panel held what are described as "hearings in private with British officials, diplomats and military officers to take evidence on those issues, such as intelligence, which cannot be heard in public". We will apparently find out more shortly about who these people are, but perhaps nothing of what they said. There is no hint even of a redacted version of the transcripts being published.In addition, it emerges that the inquiry has held further unpublicised "meetings with less senior service personnel, civil servants and diplomats who have served in Iraq". There is no explanation of why these people were apparently seen in secret. Perhaps they were whistleblowers.The inquiry has published a list of its witnesses for public sessions over the next month or so, and a timetable for the next two weeks. For the most part, it is the usual list of military types and figures from inside the establishment. Only a few witnesses are likely to challenge the government line – for example, former chief UN weapons inspector Hans Blix, or former diplomat Carne Ross. Both men have been critical of the decision to go to war on these pages lately. Blix will no doubt want to challenge Jack Straw's highly misleading account of what he was doing in early 2003, just days before the war started. Many people thought that he should have been given the opportunity to do so a lot earlier. Ross will also have some very interesting things to say, not least about the inquiry itself, of which he has been very critical.But the issue that cannot be ignored – unless you are Sir John Chilcot – is the inquiry's failure to publish more than a handful of the "many thousands of documents" which the inquiry has seen. The reason Chilcot will not make too much of an issue of this is that many people will say, "we told you so." It is a problem he made for himself when he signed up to the Cabinet Office protocol, which allows government departments to restrict what can be released.Chilcot had the opportunity to make a stand on this point when he referred to "a number of documents" that have been declassified and published by the inquiry. This morning both the BBC and Sky unkindly pointed out that this number was 33. But Chilcot said that it would, literally, be more of the same: "We will continue to take that approach."Chilcot told us that more documents have been released to "support this morning's hearing" and, indeed, some have and they are quite interesting and revealing, if you are interested in the contribution that British police advisers made to the security situation in postwar Iraq. It may show that the new government is prepared to be more open than the previous one.But the damage has been done. The issue that Chilcot is ducking is that of the many documents that were not allowed to be published at the time of earlier hearings with the big players like Tony Blair and which remain suppressed. The inquiry is not being very transparent about this, despite Chilcot's assertion that: "We are committed to being open and transparent about how we are approaching our task and the information we are receiving."I have repeatedly asked the inquiry to give "any information" about outstanding requests to government departments for clearance to publish such documents. The latest response was a cut-and-paste job from its website, stating that the inquiry will "publish material on the website as the inquiry progresses where this helps increase public understanding of its work". Again, the issue is being dodged.It seems that both Chilcot and Nick Clegg have settled for an arrangement whereby the inquiry will be allowed to publish some of the evidence alongside its eventual report, which is still scheduled for "the turn of the year". In the meantime, the inquiry has still not decided whether to have a further round of hearings in the autumn, in which it might recall figures like Tony Blair, who most people feel ducked and dived through some fairly feeble interrogation during his appearance in January. You do have to ask what would be the point of such recalls, if the inquiry is unable or unwilling to confront Blair and others with the evidence, much of it leaked, that contradicts their version of events.What worries me most about the hearings is that they provide the opportunity for government witnesses to put a gloss on the real evidence: to rewrite history. We have to hope that the inquiry will remain focused on evidence rather than spin, but when Chilcot says, as he said on Tuesday morning at the reopening, that the hearings have given the inquiry "a complementary perspective to the papers which the government has provided", I begin to worry that circles are being squared.The establishment's approach to Chilcot has been to stitch him up with secrecy and restrictions and dare him to challenge them. On the back of this, it is using public hearings to gloss over real evidence while daring Chilcot to cry foul. On the first point, Chilcot has shown how very pliable he is. Draw your own conclusions as to the second.