One line of questioning has been conspicuously absent from the Iraq inquiry. Two words have never been mentioned. But as the parade of witnesses reaches its climax with Tony Blair's appearance on Friday, the inquiry team has its best chance to put the omissions right.The first missing word is resistance. The inquiry has heard much about the violence which has racked Iraq since the invasion. There have been frequent references to insecurity, the breakdown of law and order, and instability. "Insurgency" has been mentioned. Yet in every case, whether it is in the questions or the witnesses' replies, these concepts crop up as part of a narrative which puts the blame for the chaos on Iraqis.The notion that Iraq's post-war violence was provoked and initiated by the occupiers has been brushed aside. It is certainly true that Iraqis, with some help from foreign Arab volunteers, were responsible for the car bombs and suicide attacks which killed tens of thousands of civilians. The sectarian murders which took thousands of other lives and led millions to flee their homes were perpetrated by Iraqis.But these horrors only began on a significant scale in 2005. The initial blood-letting came from the invaders, and for the first two years of the occupation they were responsible for the bulk of the killing. Those of us who covered that period will not forget it as easily as the inquiry team has done. In the days after Saddam Hussein's statue was toppled, I remember watching desperate fathers dig up recent makeshift graves in the grounds of Baghdad's main children's hospital for the bodies of loved ones killed by US troops at checkpoints. These were not casualties of the wartime bombing, but of nervous soldiers after the regime had already fallen. Three weeks later I was in Fallujah after US troops, billeted in a local school, had killed more than a dozen unarmed demonstrators.Away from Baghdad over the next few months US troops were firing on villages suspected of sheltering men who were attacking US convoys. In April 2004 they subjected Fallujah to a ferocious three-week bombardment. Civilian casualties continued to mount, and by the second anniversary of the invasion the independent assessment group, the Iraq Body Count, calculated that the occupiers had killed 2,654 civilians, more than four times the number of victims of car bombs and suicide attacks. The US was detaining tens of thousands of Iraqi men, usually stripping them in front of their families in nighttime raids, thereby further fuelling Iraqi anger and hatred.Even if the invasion had been legal, with unambiguous UN authorisation, Iraqis would have had the right to resist a foreign occupation. Yet the notion of resistance has not been acknowledged by the inquiry. It is as though the inquisitors (not the best word for these elaborately polite and long-winded questioners) accept the same parameters as the men they are interviewing. Saddam was hated by most of his subjects. Therefore an invasion would be welcomed.The idea that vast numbers of Iraqis would hate to see foreign troops in their country is apparently too radical for this inquiry. So too is the fact that the Iraq war was the climax of a decade of liberal interventionism that blithely assumed outsiders know better what other nations want. The point was well illustrated during Alastair Campbell's testimony. Asked about the huge march through London in February 2003, a month before the invasion began, Blair's spin doctor said he recognised the pressure the protest's size was bound to put on the prime minister. To strengthen Blair's resolve, he arranged for three Iraqi exiles to meet him on the day of the march and urge him not to back away from invasion. The inquiry team listened meekly, apparently accepting Campbell's false premise that every Iraqi exile, and by extension every Iraqi in Iraq, supported the invasion. The idea that you could be against Saddam but also against a foreign invasion did not seem to occur to them. Neither Campbell nor the inquisitors showed any awareness that many Iraqi exiles took part in the London protest.Criticism of the invasion rests on a host of factors – its lack of legality, the manipulation of intelligence, and the lies that were served up to justify war. But the bill of indictment must also include recklessness (the second word the inquiry has missed). If an invader makes no attempt to assess the scale and endurance of potential resistance but assumes an occupation will be easily managed, that amounts to culpable irresponsibility. However easy the seizure of a foreign capital city and the toppling of a dictator might be, Blair and his advisers should have done far more to calculate the cost of trying to run a proud country once its regime was changed. This was not a failure of planning. It was a failure of political common sense. Even if the occupation period had been better planned, resistance was inevitable.So let me suggest eight questions which should be put to Blair on Friday:1. Did you at any time before the invasion ask to meet Iraqi exiles who opposed it and inquire into their reasons?2. Did you know that Britain had occupied the country for many years in an earlier period, and was not popular?3. Were you aware that vast numbers of Iraqis, including those who hated Saddam, blamed Britain and the US for the sanctions which ruined their living standards in the 1990s?4. Did you ask your advisers in the Cabinet Office, the Foreign Office, and the intelligence services to assess the state of Iraqi opinion on whether a US- and UK-led occupation would meet resistance, even if it were authorised by a post-invasion Security Council resolution?5. Did you receive any assessments from within Whitehall that Iraqis would resist occupation and, if so, did you discuss these assessments with the cabinet?6. Did you ever ask whether French opposition to an invasion might be linked to the fact that they, unlike Britain and the United States, had an embassy in Baghdad throughout the 1990s and this helped them to see how risky and unpopular a western-led occupation would be?7. Did you receive any assessments from Whitehall that an occupation would act as a recruiting tool for al-Qaida and attract hundreds of foreign jihadis to attack US and British troops in Iraq?8. Did you receive assessments that it would increase the threat of terrorism in Britain itself?The charge is that Blair took this country to war not just illegally and unnecessarily, given that Saddam was not an imminent threat, but that he acted with criminal carelessness. Good intentions and the belief that one is right are not a sufficient defence against the charge of recklessness. Actions have to be judged by their predictable consequences. Friday's hearing is the moment to stick that to the man who put so many British and Iraqi lives at risk.