Wait. Didn't this war end once before? It did, at least rhetorically. Can you guess the date on which President George W Bush, crotch protruding before the eyes of the world, declared the end of major combat operations in Iraq?It was well before they ended, which was today, in fact. But I invoke the image not only to chide Bush, but to make a point.Presidents like to announce the ends of wars that can be put, as we say in America, in the "W" column. But Tuesday night in his prime-time Oval Office speech, Barack Obama could not say that the war in Iraq was a win. He could say only that it was over. If nothing else, making the announcement did permit him to remind Americans that he was keeping a promise he made to them as candidate, a point on which I thought he might have put just a bit more emphasis.It was a better speech than his previous and only other Oval Office address, the one on the BP spill. Maybe that's mostly because of context. He gave the BP speech while the oil was still gushing out. At least in this case, we'd all seen the footage of the tanks rolling away from Iraq and into Kuwait. But I thought it was a bit more than just context. He had to say something about the divisions in the country over the war, and he had to acknowledge his own opposition to it. At the same time, a president can't just up and say that a war wasn't worth fighting, which would be interpreted as his saying that 4,427 people had died for nothing. So, there was a line to walk, and it seemed to me he walked it well. Mentioning that he'd spoken to Bush that afternoon was effective – a suggestion that maybe we could put some of those divisions behind us.Alas, many other divisions remain. The attempt to link the war's end to the economy was less successful than the rhetoric about the war itself, for the simple reason that most Americans see no real link between the two. This points to yet another political failing of the Democrats. The war cost $1tn. That reads quickly and is only 10 characters. But read it again. A trillion is a thousand billion. That's real money. And mostly paid for off the books. This was one of the great scandals of the war. It did have a negative effect on the economy, and 98% of Americans have no idea because the Democrats didn't make sure they knew. Obama mentioned it. But this wasn't the place to drive home such a political point.Perhaps the economic sections of the speech were intended to set the table for tougher language to come in the next two months as the campaign season gets into full swing. This speech was an occasion to try to lower temperatures. But as November approaches, he needs to raise them among his partisans, who are feeling utter despair right now. That will mean taking some of the points made politely in this speech and making them very impolitely. A question hanging over Washington right now is whether he has that fight in him.And, by the way, Bush declared the war over on 1 May 2003. Bush declared it over. Obama actually ended it. That wouldn't be a bad political line either.