 11.03pm BST We're going to wrap up our live blog coverage for the day. Here's a summary of where things stand:• US secretary of state John Kerry met with the president of Iraqi Kurdistan to urge the Kurds to renew their commitment, increasingly in doubt, to the government in Baghdad. • 90 US troops, mostly special operations forces, arrived in Baghdad to help establish 'joint operations centers' with the Iraqi military, the Pentagon said.• US president Barack Obama spoke with UK prime minister David Cameron on the crisis in Iraq and on fighting in Ukraine, according to the White House.• Religious minorities in Nineveh province in the north feared persecution at the hands of insurgent militants associated with Isis.• The UN said its estimate of 1,075 deaths in 17 days in Iraq this month was probably an underestimate. By some counts, lethal violence in Iraq is at its highest levels since 2006. 10.25pm BST Egypt's broadcasting regulator said the country has barred three private Iraqi TV stations from its main satellite system after Baghdad complained that their coverage was stoking sectarian tensions, Reuters reports:Al-Baghdadia, Al-Rafidain and Al-Hadath TV stations were all barred from the state-owned Nilesat, which broadcasts across the Middle East and North Africa, the head of Egypt's broadcasting regulator Free Zone said.The three channels have been off the air in Iraq and Egypt since last week. They often took a pro-Sunni, anti-Iraqi government line that appeals to the country's Sunni minority, although al-Baghdadiya in particular had investigative programming that attracted a broader segment of the population. Read the full report here.  10.09pm BST Muhammed Abdel Aziz, 42, works as a businessman in al-Ghadier district in Baghdad, A father of six, he tells the Guardian's Mona Mahmood (@monamood) about leaving Baghdad for Turkey:This is the third exodus for my family within the last eight years. I had to flee to Kirkuk in 2006 to escape the sectarian fighting after the attack on the shrines in Samara. Two years later, I had to run to Syria because of the death squads. And now, I'm taking my family to Turkey because of the militias and rebels and I won't come back at all.Abdel Aziz had to apply for a Turkish visa online – which cost him 10,000 Iraqi Dinars – because the embassy closed its doors after their employees were kidnapped. Abdel Aziz and his family will travel by road from Baghdad to Kirkuk to Irbil, and then to Turkey. The three-day trip will cost him $1,000. Abdel Aziz is selling all of his furniture to be able to leave by early July. I live in a very risky area in Baghdad and every day you hear someone is kidnapped by the militia. The militias are working with the military forces and chasing people to kidnap them. The Imam of the mosque in my neighbourhood was taken two days ago with 20 men who were praying with him. We still don't know what happened to them. My cousin warned me not to go to the mosque any more.The Righteous League are deploying heavily in different areas of Baghdad and it is hard to escape them. As a Sunni man if I go to the liberated western provinces in Iraq, they are now under air strikes by Maliki forces and we might see US planes soon doing the same. The Shia people can go to the southern provinces if the rebels liberate Baghdad. We as civilians are always the victims. I already lost my nephew who was a policeman. He was killed in Mosul a month ago. I can't afford to lose any other member of my family. 9.29pm BST Mosul's religious minorities are facing what researcher Cale Salih calls "one of the most serious existential threats in their long histories," as Isis further establishes its hold on Nineveh province. The Yazidis, primarily ethnic Kurds who practice an ancient religion derived from Zoroastrianism, have been long familiar with Islamist fundamentalist groups who've threatened their existence:Everyone considers us infidels,” said Samir Babasheikh, whose father, Baba Sheikh, is the Yazidis’ spiritual leader. “Sunnis and Shiites are killing each other even though they are both Muslims, so imagine what they will do to us, people from a completely different religion.”Read the full piece here.Updated at 9.34pm BST 9.23pm BST US president Barack Obama spoke with UK prime minister David Cameron on the crisis in Iraq and on fighting in Ukraine, according to the White House, Reuters reports.Meanwhile, in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, British defence secretary Philip Hammond met with Saudi Crown Prince Salman bin Abdulaziz to discuss Iraq, according to the state news agency SPA, AFP reports:Hammond's stop in Jeddah is the first on a Gulf tour that will also take him to the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Kuwait, amid uncertainty triggered by the Iraqi crisis.Prince Salman holds the Saudi defence portfolio, and the two men discussed "cooperation between the two countries and ways to strengthen it, in addition to regional and international developments," SPA said.The tour provides an "occasion to discuss the need to find a political solution for the crisis in Iraq," a diplomat in Saudi Arabia said.  8.54pm BST Ra'ad Adel, who owns a tourism company in the Mansour district of Baghdad, told the Guardian's Mona Mahmood (@monamood) that an increasing number of people are fleeing the country:People are so scared and desperate to leave the country as soon as possible. They are ready to pay any price to get the ticket in time. [...] A lot of military elements are leaving the country too.Most of the people are heading to Lebanon and Turkey because they can get the visa at the airport, but 5-6 flights also head to Irbil and the same number to Turkey and Georgia.Adel told Mona that many customers are seeking a Europe-wide Schengen visa, despite its high costs. He also described his hesitancy to submit customers' passports to embassies, out of fear that the embassies will suddenly close, stranding his clients. "It is a huge responsibility that I'm not willing to take," Adel said. Four people got the Schengen visa recently which usually takes 40 day to get, two of the customers went to Belgium and the two others left to Germany. The cost of the visa is $12,000. The embassy charges little money for the visa but the tourism companies charge people a lot. Some of the embassy staff have a deal with tourism companies and they share profits. For example a visa to Egypt might costs $1,200 while the embassy would charge only 36 Iraqi Dinar.The tickets price is jumping rapidly as the number of the tickets at the airways office are running out in record rime and people run to the black market. The ticket to Irbil which used to cost $100, now goes for $300 on the black market. 8.44pm BST Last week we took questions from readers about Iraq. Now we have answers, from our team of editors and correspondents. You can read the full Q&A here. Here are two entries:As its name suggests, Isis has ambitions in Iraq and Syria (though the Arabic name it uses – "al-Sham” – suggests the wider Levant, (which could be taken to include Lebanon and perhaps also Palestine/Israel.) Isis publications and propaganda stress that it wants to establish a caliphate (Muslim Sharia rule) that would replace the existing nation states in the areas it aspires to control. It already boasts of having wiped out the map of the modern Middle East that was drawn up in the secret Anglo-French Sykes-Picot agreement of 1916.There is some nervousness that it might also target Jordan, another “artificial” state that was created by Britain in the aftermath of the first world war. It was Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian, who established al-Qaida in Iraq, a forerunner of Isis. Still, Jordan is far more stable and homogenous than Syria or Iraq, and its security forces are extremely effective. Jordan also enjoys strong backing from both the United States and Saudi Arabia. Lebanon is also seen as a target of Isis, as well as the scene of a Sunni sectarian struggle with the Shia Hizbullah movement, a close ally of Iran.– Ian Black (@Ian_Black), the Guardian's Middle East Editor'Isis is largely self-funded. It commandeered the oil fields of eastern Syria and is selling oil to the Syrian regime. It has raided archeological sites in Syria, and also raided Syrian state-owned enterprises and sold the loot to the Turks. Iraqi and US officials believe it may have more than $2bn in cash and assets, particularly after the raids in Mosul and Tikrit. All of its weaponry has been stolen from military arsenals in Syria and Iraq.– Martin Chulov, Middle East correspondent for the Guardian (@martinchulov) Read the full Q&A here. 7.48pm BST Guardian US national security editor Spencer Ackerman (@attackerman) reports:"Pentagon press secretary Rear Adm. John Kirby announces that today, four teams comprising approximately 90 US troops, mostly special operations, arrived in Baghdad to help establish the 'joint operations centers' with the Iraqi military announced last week by President Obama."Spencer's report continues:That contingent of 90 joins 40 troops, organized into two teams, that had already been in Baghdad as part of the military component to the US embassy. This force of 130 is the first wave in Obama's new Iraq deployment of up to 300 troops, who he vows will not engage in combat. These teams are in Baghdad as "assessors," Kirby told reporters Wednesday, who will give Washington a better sense of what the previously routed Iraqi military needs; the situational picture of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isis); and what follow-up US military needs the Iraqis require."It's not meant to be a long-term permanent mission," Kirby said.Updated at 7.49pm BST 6.50pm BST The Guardian's Mona Mahmood (@monamood) has spoken with Kareem Ibrahim, a friend of Kirkuk's assassinated city council chief, Munir al-Qafili:The situation is truly tense in Kirkuk now after [al-Qafili's] assassination [...]. Al-Qafili's car was confronted by a car loaded with unknown gunmen who opened fire and killed him immediately. I feel sorry for him, he was a peaceful man and had no problem with anybody. In fact, al-Qafili got his post by unanimous agreement between Arabs, Kurds, Turkmen and Christians in the city, not by elections.We feel things are getting out of order in Kirkuk and there is a wave of violence targeting Turkmen people in particular for reasons we can't understand ...Updated at 10.42pm BST 6.29pm BST As our live blog coverage continues, here's a summary of where things stand:• Iraqi Kurdistan president Massoud Barzani told a visiting US secretary of state John Kerry that there was a "new reality" in Iraq as Kurdistan closed its first major oil export sale. • Kerry visited the northern city of Irbil to urge the Kurds to participate in a new government that Kerry has said the prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, would convene next month.• The UN said its estimate of 1,075 deaths in 17 days in Iraq this month was probably an underestimate. By some counts, lethal violence in Iraq is at its highest levels since 2006.• There were reports of civilian deaths in air strikes in al-Qaim at the Syrian-Iraqi border. Witnesses told the New York Times the Syrian Air Force carried out strikes.• There continued to be conflicting reports as to which side controlled the oil refinery at Baiji. There were reports of air strikes there killing more than a dozen.• Gunmen killed the city council chief of Kirkuk on Tuesday, the AFP reported, citing a police commander and a doctor.• The Iraqi cabinet voted to withhold pay to government employees in areas overrun by militants until after hostilities ended.Updated at 6.33pm BST 6.17pm BST The New York Times correspondent CJ Chivers, in Iraq, has spoken with witnesses in al-Qaim, in the Euphrates river valley at the Iraqi-Syria border, about air strikes there Tuesday morning:Witnesses say airstrike this morning in al-Qaim, near Syrian border, hit market, killing many civilians. #iraqThe Anbar Daily blog describes an "aerial bombardment by Syrian regime planes of a number of border positions in Al-Qa'im including the town's central marketplace."The Iraqi military has said it has retaken some border crossings, but those claims, considered to be unreliable, have not been independently confirmed.Anbar residents tell of airstrike also in Rutba. This & strike in al-Qaim, they say, was by Syrian Air Force; not independently confirmed. 6.04pm BST The Iraqi cabinet voted Tuesday to withhold pay to government employees in areas overrun by militants until after hostilities end, AFP reports, picking up on earlier reports in the Arabic-language press:"Employees in areas not subject to government control" will have their salaries held back and "distributed to them... after the end of military operations," a cabinet statement said.Civil servants in major areas of five provinces overrun in a militant offensive led by [Isis] may not have been receiving salaries already due to difficulties on the ground.But the decision formalises that, and means these state workers may be without pay for an extended period, adding to a litany of problems of living in conflict-hit areas.The convening of a new government next month — which Kerry insists is Maliki's intention — could add a further twist. Full report here. 5.57pm BST Gunmen have killed the city council chief of Kirkuk on Tuesday, AFP reports, citing a police commander and a doctor:Munir al-Qafili, a well-known and respected official, was shot dead on his way home in the east of the city.Kirkuk lies at the heart of a swathe of disputed territory that Kurdish leaders want to incorporate into their autonomous region in the north.Sunni Arab opposition to the claim has helped fan a spectacular offensive that has seen militants seize a large swathe of northern and north-central Iraq, include several mainly Sunni Arab towns in Kirkuk province.Kurdish forces took control of Kirkuk after the flight of Iraqi security forces in the face of the Isis advance. Full report here. 5.52pm BST Men still smoke in the streets, women drive cars, and no on can confirm any beheadings – but some Mosul residents who at first welcomed Isis fighters still are feeling a pang of buyer's remorse, Reuters reports:Two weeks after Sunni insurgents overran northern Iraq's biggest city Mosul, shrines lie smashed, non-Sunnis have fled and armed men have warned women not to walk in the streets unescorted. Residents who welcomed the expulsion of the Shi'ite-led government's soldiers and police from the mostly Sunni city are now asking what life will bring under the al Qaeda offshoot calling the shots, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Ahmed Khalil, an engineering student in Mosul, said the government of Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki had felt like an occupying force, and he was glad to see it go. But the rise of ISIL has put him on guard. "The first impression was like the prison gates were broken, and we started to taste freedom," Khalil said. "But after the spread of too many armed groups, including al Qaeda, I've gotten cautious about what's next." His concerns were repeated in over a dozen interviews with Mosul residents, although most said ISIL had acted with more restraint than in Syria. Men still smoke in the streets, women drive cars, and no one can confirm any beheadings or floggings. Read the full report here. 5.38pm BST Recommended reading: Rania Abouzeid on the Syrian roots of Iraq's newest civil war."The Syrian revolution – and the hesitant, confused international reaction to it – paved the way for the resurrection of a militant Islam that would turn vast regions of Iraq and Syria into borderless jihadi strongholds and inch closer to redrawing the map of the Middle East," Abouzeid writes in Politico magazine:Ironically, al Qaeda, Nusra and Isil all share a transnational ideology with the same ultimate goal: an Islamic state that spreads out from Syria into the Middle East, reestablishing a caliphate that ended in 1924 after the fall of the Ottoman Empire. They merely differ on who should lead the effort and the tactics to achieve it.Syria provided these groups with a safe haven and enabled them to recruit fighters who can now openly move between the Syrian and Iraqi battlefields, effectively erasing the border between the two countries.Ultimately, Abouzeid notes, Isil isn't marching across Iraq alone:Disenfranchised Sunnis from across the political spectrum, including former Saddam loyalists, are also involved, drawn together by the increasingly autocratic and sectarian rule of the Iraqi government. This new Iraqi Sunni coalition, however, is unlikely to last. Isil couldn’t work with others in Syria, so how long before it turns on, or aggravates, its new Iraqi allies?"(Read the full piece in Politico here.) 5.30pm BST Here's video of Iraqi Kurdistan president Massoud Barzani greeting US secretary of state John Kerry in Irbil and of Kerry's remarks in advance of their meeting. Kerry says in part:As everybody knows, this is a very critical time for Iraq as a whole. And the government formation challenge is the central challenge that we face. In recent days the security cooperation between the forces here in the Kurdish area have been really critical to helping to draw a line with respect to Isil and also to provide some support to the Iraqi security forces. So I thank president Barzani and all the leaders... in that regard. ... 5.25pm BST #Iraq crisis has displaced 0.5m. We're doing all we can to reach families with aid http://t.co/iigxIg4ROS @unicefiraq pic.twitter.com/eeTbIZcUEN(#ff @prashantrao, outgoing AFP Baghdad bureau chief) 4.49pm BST As Iraqi Kurdistan president Massoud Barzani diagnoses a "new reality" in meetings with the US secretary of state, Kurdistan has begun selling Iraqi oil for export, according to the Wall Street Journal and Iraq Oil Report.Iraq Oil Report cites an unnamed "senior official from the Kurdistan Regional Government" as saying Kurdistan had sold 1.048 million barrels of oil for $106 million.The Wall Street Journal report, which cites the Turkish energy minister, dovetails with the Iraq Oil Report, saying Kurdistan had made an oil sale for close to $100 million "for the first million barrels of oil it piped to Turkey and shipped to international markets."Updated at 5.06pm BST 4.35pm BST Thomas Erdbrink in the New York Times describes the resurrection of Moqtada al-Sadr's Mahdi Army:Mr. Sadr revived his Mahdi Army, possibly one of the largest and most experienced battle groups in Iraq, and announced that under no circumstances would it be under the control of the government. [...]On Saturday he was back with his forces parading in several cities showing off homemade rockets as divisions of would-be fighters filed by in what looked like suicide belts. In a statement released on Sunday, Mr. Sadr announced that his forces would not in any way be under government control. “Despite the disagreements of some friends and enemies of the parade, you showed strength and power — you terrified them,” he told his volunteer fighters.Read the full piece here. 4.20pm BST  3.54pm BST The Pentagon press secretary tweets that the rumors you may have heard about the US using armed drones on ISIS are unfounded.No truth to rumors in media today that US drones struck ISIL targets in Iraq.The US has said it is operating unmanned surveillance vehicles over Iraq. The Washington Post has quoted unnamed US officials as saying the White House is considering using armed drones in Iraq. 3.25pm BST While the White House has stopped short of calling for prime minister Nouri al-Maliki to make way for new leadership next month, congressional leaders and prominent voices in the US foreign policy community have been making the case. Strobe Talbott is president of the Brookings Institution and a former deputy secretary of state under president Bill Clinton:#Maliki's gotta go, but he's only part of problem. Sunni Arabs resist idea of Shia Arab state, hence many Iraqis see #ISIS as lesser evil. 2.54pm BST Kerry has given more hints that the US wants Maliki to step down and that his holding back on military intervention until he does so. In an interview with the BBC he again insisted it was up to Iraqis to chose their leader. But in a transcript published by the State Department he also said:  Without the formation of a government, without an adequate transformative decision by the leaders of Iraq, anything that the United States or others or allies or friends would do to try to fight back is going to be limited, if not impossible. You need a competent, unified government that is prepared. That’s the first step. The second step is, obviously, you’ve got to reconstitute the military, and that’s going to take this political leadership to help to do that. And then you’ve got to lay out a strategy and understand exactly what you’re doing. But I have no question but that every country in the region will combine in order to ultimately take on and expel ISIS, because it is simply unacceptable to have a terrorist organization grabbing territory and challenging the legitimacy of governments and then challenging neighboring countries externally with acts of terror.Kerry was asked whether US was refusing to conduct air strikes before the formation of a new government.He replied: Barring some exigent emergency or something that predicates that the President makes a decision which he always has available to him with respect to any country or any crisis in the world. But basically, there must be a government here so that there can be a strategy going forward, because just a strike alone is not going to change the outcome. You need to have a full-fledged strategy that is being implemented which is principally a political strategy.And as even President Barzani and his folks today said, there has to be – they concur there’s no military solution. There may be military action, but there has to be a political solution that deals with empowering the people in the communities where ISIL is today to be prepared to take them on. That takes a certain amount of preparation, strategy, implementation. And what President Obama is trying to do is encourage that process to come together as rapidly as possible, because without it everything else would be wasted. 2.31pm BST CNN has released a few more quotes from that interview with John Kerry. After his talks with Kurdish leaders, Kerry also said: I'm hearing things that indicate to me that if they [Kurdish leaders] follow through on the things they're saying, there's a capacity to have a new government that could be a unity government, that could reflect a greater capacity for success.He also insisted that forming a new Iraqi government is a crucial precursor to any further US intervention in Iraq. The key is, if you don't have a viable government, that is a unity government that is not going to repeat the mistakes of the last few years, whatever we might choose to do would be extraordinarily hampered. It would be very difficult to be successful if you were just engaged in some kind of military activity, because there's no ultimately just a military solution there. 2.21pm BST The UN cautioned that its estimate of 1,075 deaths in 17 days in Iraq this month was probably an underestimate.The Iraq Body Count has recorded more than 3,000 deaths this month a level of violence not seen since 2006.  2.02pm BST Here's a summary of the latest developments today: 1.33pm BST John Kerry has insisted that Kurdish leaders are backing his efforts to form a new government in Baghdad.In an interview for CNN after his meetings in Irbil, Kerry played down President Barzani's remark that Iraq is facing a "new reality". Barzani's observation is being seen as a rejection of the US secretary of state's call for unity. But Kerry said: Even President Barzani today, who is opposed to the prime minister [Nouri al-Maliki] made it clear that he wants to participate in the process that he wants to help chose the next government. And other leaders that I met with were all engaged and energised and ready to go to bat for a new governance. So while he says there's a new reality. The new reality is that they are under attack from Isil and they have realised that they cannot continue with this sectarian division.Updated at 1.38pm BST 1.11pm BST It wasn't just the body language that was different in Ibril and Baghdad. There was no need for body armour in the Kurdish region, notes Kurdish campaigner Abdulrahman Hamdi. see the difference between #Erbil and #Baghdad during @JohnKerry's visit. #Kurdistan pic.twitter.com/wk0dvaBlD8 12.34pm BST A boutique has opened in one Istanbul's busies shopping streets selling Isis T-shirts and banners, according to the Turkish news site Yurt. Store selling ISIS apparel opens in Istanbul neighborhood, eyes 7 additional locations http://t.co/tF6kJUJNgH pic.twitter.com/lOvOKagCMf 12.03pm BST John Kerry's flying visit to Irbil is coming to an end.After several hours in Erbil, Iraq, John Kerry is now about to depart for NATO meetings in Brussels.The Times reckons that Kurdish leaders rebuffed Kerry's appeal for unity, which maybe an over interpretation of Barzani's remark about the "new reality" in Iraq. Updated at 12.40pm BST 11.49am BST United Nations human rights monitors say at least 1,075 people have been killed in Iraq during June, most of them civilians, AP reports. The UN human rights team in Iraq says at least 757 civilians were killed and 599 injured in Nineveh, Diyala and Salah al-Din provinces from June 5-22.Spokesman Rupert Colville told reporters in Geneva the figure "should be viewed very much as a minimum" and includes some verified summary executions and extra-judicial killings of civilians, police, and soldiers who had stopped fighting.He says at least another 318 people were killed and 590 injured during the same time in Baghdad and areas in southern Iraq, many of them from at least 6 separate vehicle-borne bombs.Updated at 12.27pm BST 11.04am BST Iraqi air strikes near the oil refinery in Baiji, have killed at least 19 people on Tuesday, officials told AFP. It also reported that the plant is still in government hands. The raids, which began early on Tuesday, also wounded at least 17 people, they said. The officials said the dead and wounded included civilians, and it was unclear if there were any casualties among the militants who were the target of the strikes. Iraqiya state television said 19 "terrorists" were killed in the Baiji raids. Militants also launched a renewed push to seize Iraq's largest oil refinery, which is located near the town, but the overnight attack was repelled by security forces, officials said.  10.54am BST Residents in a string of Shia Turkmen villages south of Kirkuk have given first hand accounts of alleged Isis killings and brutality. Scores of people are missing, more than a dozen residents who told the Washington Post.The survivors’ stories of civilians being gunned down were reminiscent of the most brutal days of the Iraq war.The Turkmens have been caught up in past sectarian violence in Kirkuk and other ethnically mixed cities in northern Iraq, but the power of the Isis rebels adds an explosive new element to such clashes.Askar Hassan of the Shia Turkmen village of Brawawchli said the attack began around midday 17 June, when many of the town’s residents were napping in the heat. First, shells began to crash into the village. Then he heard gunfire. Hassan grabbed his family and bolted into a nearby field of date palms.As they ran, a group of men sprayed the fleeing villagers with bullets.Hassan said he saw his cousin drop from a gunshot before he felt a bullet pierce his own side, sending him to the ground. “Pretend to be dead,” he told his wife and four children as they fell around him. Two of the children had also been shot, he said.Within moments, the militants had reached them. “God is great!” they shouted, but they moved past his family members, who were lying still, Hassan said. 10.20am BST There are yet more competing claims about who is in control of the Baiji oil refinery. CJ Chivers, from the New York Times, was told by an army officer that militants have captured perimeter towers but that the battle for the plant continues. ISIS claim of capturing Baji refinery disputed by Iraqi Army officer inside; says militants captured towers by fence but battle continues. 10.17am BST US officials are worried that the growing strength of the Kurds could cause them to split off from Iraq, according to the Boston Globe's Matt Viser who travelled to Irbil with Kerry.He writes: One of Kerry’s aims is to convince the Kurds to remain active in creating a central government, according to a senior state department official.“If they decide to withdraw from the Baghdad political process, it will accelerate a lot of the negative trends,” said the official, speaking on the condition of anonymity. “Whereas if they are an active participant in that process ... they will have substantial clout and influence in Baghdad.”But the gains that Kurdish forces have made in recent weeks, the official said, could complicate the discussions.“Some facts on the ground can be created that might not be reversed,” the official said. “I mean, they’re in a very different situation and – but they – I think there’s a debate going on in the Kurdish region with some people saying, ‘Hey, this is actually pretty good, look what’s happening here,’ and others saying, ‘So we should just kind of build a moat and kind of do our own thing.’” 10.02am BST There are unconfirmed reports that the judge who sentenced former Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein to death has himself been executed by Isis militants. The Daily Mail reports:Raouf Abdul Rahman, who sentenced the dictator to death by hanging in 2006, was reportedly killed by rebels in retaliation for the execution of the 69-year-old.His death has not been confirmed by the Iraqi government, but officials had not denied reports of his capture last week. He is believed to have been arrested on June 16, and died two days later.Jordanian MP Khalil Attieh wrote on his Facebook page that Judge Rahman, who had headed the Supreme Iraqi Criminal Tribunal during Saddam s trial, had been arrested and sentenced to death. 9.41am BST The body language at today's meeting between Kerry and Barzani looked a lot less awkward than Kerry's meeting 24 hours ago with Nouri al-Maliki. At one point during yesterday's photo call Kerry appeared to be ushering Maliki out amid speculation that he urged the Iraqi president to resign.By contrast today Kerry was photographed joking with Fuad Hussein chief of staff at the presidency of the Kurdistan regional government. Updated at 9.49am BST 9.29am BST A new CBS poll show the majority of Americans are against sending troops back to Iraq, but a slim majority back drone strikes against Isis insurgents. A slim majority of Americans (51 percent) favour sending military advisers into Iraq to train and advise the Iraqi military and collect intelligence, which President Obama has proposed. Forty-two percent oppose it. Nevertheless, four in 10 don't think that will have much of an effect on the violence there. Twenty-eight percent think sending advisers will increase the violence there, while 23 percent expect it to decrease.In addition to sending military advisers into Iraq, there is public support for using unmanned aircraft or drones to target militants in Iraq - something the president has not ruled out. But there is less support for airstrikes using manned aircraft.Large majorities (77 percent), however, oppose sending US ground troops into Iraq -- something President Obama has said the US will not do. 9.16am BST This Guardian map shows the location of the Baiji oil refinery in the context of other recent Isis gains.  9.00am BST A "reliable source" has told the BBC's Richard Galpin that militants have taken full control of the Baiji oil refinery. Speaking to the Today Programme from Baghdad, Galpin said his source claimed 160 soldiers defending the plant agreed to lay down their weapons in return for safe passage after negotiations led by tribal leaders. The Iraqi government still claims it controls the plant, he noted. 8.44am BST Kerry's meeting with Massoud Barzani kicked off with a cryptic warning from the president of the Kurdish region.He is quoted as saying "we are facing a new reality" at the start of talks. "We are facing a new reality," Kurdish leader Barzani tells Kerry to start meeting. Kurds have gained ground in Iraq, cld seek independence.He was blunter with CNN when he said Iraq was falling apart (see earlier).  8.31am BST The reported fall of the Baiji oil refinery comes a day after Iraq's army said it had thwarted a fresh attack on the plant. The Iranian news site al-Alam quoted army spokesman General Qassim Atta as saying that Iraqi special forces protecting the refinery had engaged in fierce battles with Isis militants, killing three militants, including a commander, forcing them to flee. There have been competing claims about who is in control of the plant since fighting began more than a week ago. Last week Iraq's oil ministry threatened legal action against news agencies which reported that Isis insurgents had siezed Beiji. There has been no word from the ministry since the latest reports that the refinery had fallen. But Iraq's foreign minister, Hoshyar Zebari, who told al-Jazeera that Iraqi special forces soldiers were still in control of the plant.  7.58am BST During his visit to Irbil Kerry will urge Massoud Barzani to work to uphold Iraq's crumbling state, after the Kurdistan president warned that Iraq was falling apart. AFP quotes state department spokeswomn Jen Psaki as saying that Kerry will highlight "the important role that the Kurds can play in helping the central government address... challenges for the benefit of all Iraqis," State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said. It adds: The militant offensive has cleared the way for Iraqi Kurds - who were once gassed by former dictator Saddam Hussein - to take control of a swath of disputed territory they want to incorporate into their autonomous region over Baghdad's strong objections. Crucially, their security forces are now responsible for securing the ethnically mixed oil-rich city of Kirkuk, the heart of that disputed territory. "Now we are living a different era," Barzani told CNN, as he called for Prime Minister Nuori al-Maliki, whom he described as "the one responsible for what has happened" in Iraq, to step down. "During the last 10 years we did everything in our ability... to build a new democratic Iraq, but unfortunately the experience has not been successful." Pressed on whether Iraqi Kurds would seek independence, Barzani said: "The time is here for the Kurdistan people to determine their future and the decision of the people is what we are going to uphold.""Iraq is obviously falling apart anyway, and it's obvious that a federal or central government has lost control over everything." US officials acknowledged that the gains made by Kurds in recent weeks in the fighting might not be easily reversed. At the same time, Washington is keen to persuade the Kurds to speed up the formation of a new government following April elections. Under a de facto system in Iraq following recent elections, a Kurd has traditionally held the presidency, a Shia Arab has been the prime minister and a Sunni Arab has been the speaker of parliament. "The Kurds have a better role to play in maintaining the stability of the state here to some extent," a senior State Department official told reporters. "If they decide to withdraw from the Baghdad political process, it will accelerate a lot of the negative trends," he warned. But if the Kurds take an active role "they will have substantial clout and influence in Baghdad". The region has also taken in thousands of people displaced by the militant offensive, and Kerry's visit aimed to recognise their efforts to tackle "a very serious refugee crisis".  7.41am BST Overnight video from Baiji purports to show Isis supporters celebrating the fall of Iraq's main oil refinery to the militant group (hat tip Markit0171). Isis has pledged to hand over the refinery to local tribes to administer, according to the BBC.  7.32am BST Kerry has travelled to Irbil with Brett McGurk, the state department official responsible for policy on Iraq and a former ambassador to the country.In #Erbil with Secretary Kerry for meetings with President Barzani and the leadership of the #Kurdistan Regional Government (#KRG).A number of journalists are also accompanying the secretary of state. They include the Wall Street Journal's Jay Solomon, who has dubbed the trip and yesterday's visit to Baghdad the "save Iraq tour". .@JohnKerry touches down in Irbil, Kurdistan as the Save Iraq tour continues. #IraqCNN's Jim Sciutto has a photograph of Kerry's arrival in Irbil (or Erbil). Sec. @johnkerry arriving in Erbil, greeted by Kurdish leaders as he tries to unify #Iraq against #ISIS pic.twitter.com/AIbP3GJaYG 7.23am BST Welcome to our continuing coverage of the crisis in Iraq. Here's a summary of the latest developments:Updated at 8.44am BST