The list of "positives" from the Iraq war are outweighed by the longer list of "negatives", according to David Miliband, the Labour former foreign secretary, whose vote for the 2003 invasion has subsequently turned into a millstone around his neck."It's very tempting for people in my position, to say that we will add to the positive side of balance sheet, to say that the Arab spring wouldn't have happened without the Iraq war," the MP said on the BBC's Question Time last night."It's temping, but in all honesty, I can't say that."Miliband found himself on the defensive last year during his failed bid to become Labour leader when rival candidates, including his brother, criticised the decicision to invade Iraq."It would make life much easier. I voted for the war in Iraq. I read Hans Blix's 174- page report documenting the WMD that hadn't come. But I have to recognise today that the list of positives - which include Saddam gone, which include the Kurds safe, which include Gaddafi giving up his 3,00 chemicals bombs – those positives are outweighed by the longer list of negatives."Milband, who was an education minister at the time the war started, was responding to the question of whether he was sceptical about the effect of the Iraq war, and if he agreed that the so-called Arab spring would not have happened without it."History is still being made in Iraq. And, as I say, it would make life easy for me if I could say yes. But the truth about the Arab spring is thast its seeds are deep in Arab society," he said"They are deep among Egyptians above all, who have seen their nation run in an autocratic and corrupt way and national pride sunk. What should be the leader of the Arab world has been sunk. That is not a Saddam Hussein issue. It's about people demanding universal rights, and that is what we should be standing up for."Asked if he still believed that he made the right decision on the war, he replied: "On the evidence that was in front of me at the time, I had to make that decision."Richard Perle, a former top adviser to George W Bush, for his part said on Question Time that the Iraq war had ultimately demonstrated that even a figure like Saddam Hussein, "who Iraqis thought was there forever", could be removed."The world, including the Arab world, saw people coming out of the voting booths in Iraq with purple thumbs, and in fact, in the immediate aftermath of that you had an uprising in Lebanon which unfortunately ran out of steam. I think [Iraq] was an inspiration. It was a demonstration that just because you live in an Arab country, just because you are ruled by an Arab dictator, you don't have to accept that as your inevitable future. And we now see the Arab world rising up against its dictators."