How complacent is the Iraq inquiry chairman, Sir John Chilcot? On the second day of the inquiry's public hearings, he told a Foreign Office witness: "We have a very detailed account in the Hutton inquiry report of the construction of the dossier, almost line by line, and I don't think there is any need for this inquiry simply to rehearse that."Except that the Hutton inquiry's very detailed account of the construction of the September 2002 WMD dossier omits two drafts produced by spin doctors. It does not mention the John Williams draft dossier released two years ago or the draft that was produced at the beginning of June 2002 by the Coalition Information Centre (CIC), authors of the really dodgy February 2003 dossier. It says absolutely nothing about the involvement of the CIC – a propaganda unit set up by Alastair Campbell to promote the UK's involvement in the "war on terror".I published the CIC draft today on the Iraq Inquiry Digest website and put it into context in a piece for Index on Censorship. It is dated 3 June 2002 and was circulated three days later. It is the earliest draft dossier ever published.Essentially, the significance of the draft is that it precedes and is virtually identical to the draft given to the Hutton inquiry as the starting point for the document published in September 2002. But the government didn't tell Hutton that someone had cabinet sceptic Clare Short down to sign the dossier's introduction – without asking her.Lord Hutton tells us that during April and May 2002, people at the Foreign Office and Cabinet Office wrote various components of what would become the notorious "45 minutes" dossier. He says – because that is what government witnesses told him – that "during the spring and summer of 2002 the draft paper was regularly updated by the assessment staff". He meant the assessment staff of the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC), in line with the government's claim that the dossier was produced within the intelligence community, rather than by spin doctors, as had been alleged. "By 20 June 2002 a dossier had been prepared entitled BRITISH GOVERNMENT BRIEFING PAPERS ON IRAQ."At least Hutton managed to ignore the claims of JIC chairman John Scarlett that the date on the 20 June version was "a misleading date in real terms" as no one had thought to assemble the different components as a single dossier until the beginning of September. It isn't clear why Scarlett and Alastair Campbell have sought to convince various inquiries that nothing much happened on the dossier that summer. Was it because it was always being said at that time that "no decisions" on Iraq had been taken? Or to conceal the CIC's involvement, given that Campbell was insisting that the WMD dossier was a world away from the dodgy dossier? Perhaps it was a matter of professional pride from the spy and the spin doctor to say things that were not entirely true.In Campbell's published diary, he describes how on 23 April 2002 he met officials including John Scarlett "to go through what we needed to do communications wise to "set the scene for Iraq, eg a WMD paper and other papers about Saddam." He added: "Scarlett a good bloke."What worries me most about the current Iraq inquiry is that Chilcot and co will take the Hutton approach and construct a report largely from what witnesses have told them rather than what actual evidence says. It is not clear whether the inquiry has been given the CIC draft document as they will only say, with the usual complacency, that they are satisfied that they have all the papers they need. But as Carne Ross said in his devastating statement to the inquiry: "Other documents by certain officials contradicted the testimony they have given at this inquiry and yet these witnesses were not questioned about these contradictions."When Sir Lawrence Freedman reminded Campbell at the inquiry that the efforts of various officials in Spring 2002 led "in June to a document that was entitled 'The British Government Briefing Papers on Iraq'", Campbell said he could not recall such a document and had not been involved in it. Had Freedman been in possession of the CIC draft – and been allowed to quote from it – he should surely have put it to Campbell that it is inconceivable that the CIC, which reported directly to Campbell, would have produced a draft Iraq dossier without his approval or knowledge. Had Freedman been in a position to quote from whatever instructions Campbell issued after his meeting with Scarlett, he would surely have made the link, which is in any case pretty obvious.But then, given that "we have a very detailed account in the Hutton inquiry report of the construction of the dossier, almost line by line", it is not clear why Chilcot and co went through the motions of asking Campbell about it at all.Once again it is the media, rather than the inquiry, putting new information into the public domain. Previously, this has happened through leaks. This time, it is through freedom of information (FOI). The point was made on Newsnight on Wednesday that FOI disclosures since previous inquiries were (at least partly) responsible for the setting up of the current Iraq inquiry. Chilcot is in danger not only of looking very foolish for failing to realise that he needs to start with a blank sheet of paper but of being left behind by new FOI disclosures, of which this one will certainly not be the last.