If Barack Obama hopes American troops will leave behind a stable, secure and democratic Iraq when most of them withdraw in August, he's in for a big disappointment. In many respects the country remains on a knife edge and could yet tip back into sectarianism and inter-communal strife. Given all the blood and treasure the US has expended there since 2003, this is not an impressive result.The moment George Bush's "liberation" of Iraq began to look like something much more complicated came exactly seven years ago tomorrow. Until then, the invasion narrative had broadly followed Washington's fairytale script – namely, an irresistible, triumphal march on Baghdad to topple the monstrous dictator and free an oppressed and grateful populace from his cruel yoke.But on 28 April 2003 came news of clashes in Fallujah, a city in the predominantly Sunni Muslim areas west of Baghdad. Soldiers from the 82nd Airborne opened fire on civilian protesters outside a local school where American forces were stationed. Up to 17 people died and many more were injured. Far bloodier fighting ensued as the Sunnis subsequently turned against the invaders, then the Shia, and then each other.Fallujah was a turning point. And one by one, in the days and months that followed, America's illusions – and uncounted tens of thousands of civilians and soldiers – also died in what by 2006 was a raging civil war. Now, with George Bush, Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld and the rest out of office and busy writing their memoirs, and with some order restored, the US just wants out of Iraq. It wants done with it. But Iraq isn't finished with America.Intensifying disputes over March's general election results, renewed weekend bomb attacks on civilian targets and Shia mosques, and persistent interference by Iran and Syria are raising fears that the country could again descend into the sectarian warfare that followed the 2005 polls. Three recent incidents demonstrate the potential for mayhem that could yet force the Americans to delay their withdrawal.Last Friday saw a series of bomb attacks on Shia targets in Baghdad and Anbar, in the Sunni triangle. Some of the carnage was attributed to al-Qaida in Mesopotamia, purportedly to avenge the killing by US forces of its two most senior leaders. But the savagery was reminiscent of the mosque bombings in 2006 that sparked Sunni-Shia sectarian warfare – and was seen as an attempt to rekindle it.Iraqi soldiers who arrived on the scene of one of the bombings were stoned by angry Sunnis who oppose the Shia-led government. Ominously, Moqtada al-Sadr, the Iran-based foe of prime minister Nouri al-Maliki, has since said his Shia Mehdi army, demobilised under a 2008 truce, is ready to step in to protect worshippers. His "offer" resurrected the spectre of the militia battles of old.In a separate incident last week, the family of a Sunni tribal chief who supported the US-initiated programme to build a Sunni alliance against al-Qaida was butchered after gunmen stormed their home in Tarmiya, north of Baghdad. Police said the man's three young sons had their throats cut while his wife and daughter were shot in the head.Meanwhile, the Washington Post's Leila Fadel reported that troops from Iraq's predominantly Shia army beat and tortured dozens of Sunni men in Radwaniyah, west of Baghdad, after the killing of five soldiers. The incident was said to have underscored the gulf of mistrust separating the two communities.Supporters of Iyad Allawi, whose secular Shia-Sunni alliance claimed a narrow election victory over Maliki, say sectarian considerations have influenced post-poll decisions to recount votes and disqualify some candidates. Some are calling for fresh elections supervised by the UN. Analysts warn that if next week's Baghdad recount results in Maliki's coalition retaining power, Sunni alienation and anger could mutate into violent opposition. Others predict Iraq will still be without a government when the US partial withdrawal is supposed to be completed in August.Optimists argue Iraq is much changed from 2006. They say the al-Qaida threat, despite the recent bombings, has diminished; that neither Sunnis nor Shias want a return to the bad old ways; that fewer people voted along sectarian lines; and that a Shia-Sunni-Kurd coalition government will eventually emerge from the haggling. According to the UAE's National newspaper, "it will be almost the same as the last government. Mr al-Maliki appears to be the one preventing this, based solely on his desire to stay in charge". It urged the prime minister to step down "for the good of the country".Speaking earlier this month, General Ray Odierno, the US commander in Iraq, said he was confident the withdrawal would take place on schedule, with the remaining 50,000 troops set to leave in 2011. But he made no attempt to minimise the problems that remain and warned that Shia Iran was trying to further undermine Iraq's shaky democracy."They [Iran] still provide lethal aid. They provide training for those who continue to try to create instability in Iraq. They continue to try to increase their influence. They are involved in attempting to influence the results if the elections. They do not respect Iraq's sovereignty," Odierno said. In similar vein, Maliki has accused Syria of harbouring and helping Sunni Ba'athist militants as part of its own efforts to manipulate events. Damascus denies it.Seven years on, Iraq's unfinished business ranges from continuing internal territorial and external border disputes to severe social deprivation and human rights abuses. But it is sectarianism that could be its undoing."Iraq is not out of danger and the US must not abandon the country to face inevitable turbulence and malicious regional interference … The process of government formation, if mishandled, could re-energise sectarian forces," said Zalmay Khalilzad, the former US ambassador to Baghdad, writing in the Financial Times.The best way forward, he suggested, might be a "grand coalition" of the three main political groupings, with Allawi and Maliki taking turns as prime minister. It sounds odd. But given Iraq's continuing, chronic institutional weakness and its sectarian tensions, anything less than a unified front could prove fatal.