5.27pm: There are a couple of other quotes that are worth putting up in full. They are from the exchange at 3.41pm. At one point Sawers read out a passage listing the objectives the government had set itself for Iraq in early 2003.A stable, united and law-abiding Iraq, within its present borders, cooperating with the internationa community, no longer posing a threat to its neighbours or international security, abiding by all its international obligations and providing effective, representative government, sustainable economic growth and rising living standards for all its peoples. Sawers said Iraq had achieved those goals.But Chilcot disagreed. He told Sawers:The picture that is painted in that statement of objectives is not, I think, what you would find in Iraq today.That's it for today. Thanks for the comments.5.19pm: Here's what Chilcot said at the very end of the hearing.I think we have talked a lot about potential, if not final judgements, at any rate provisional judgements about the whole six years. And I think the committee itself is extremely ... aware of the casualty list, the blood. Treasure you can rebuild. Blood you can't get back. I don't know whether at this stage we shall come to the kind of final judgement that these last questions have raised. This may be the first draft of history. But we are conscious throughout of that cost that has been incurred by humankind. I think I'll close with that. Very curious. What does he mean by that? It didn't sound like a ringing endorsement of the war to me ....5.12pm: Here are the main points from the second half of the session.• Sawers said Britain might not have backed the war if the government had known how much violence there would be afterwards.Frankly, had we known the scale of the violence, it might well have led to second thoughts about the entire project.• Sheinwald and Sawers both refused to say that they thought the war was worth the "very high cost". See 4.47pm and 4.50pm.• Chilcot said the government had not achieved the targets it set itself in Iraq. See 3.41pm.• Chilcot suggested the government had "bit off more than [it] could chew with Iraq". See 3.41pm.4.55pm: That's it. Chilcot ends with a peculiar, wistful note. He says that he and his team are conscious of the cost paid in "human blood". I'll put up the full quote in a moment, because it's fascinating to anyone trying to speculate about the conclusions the inquiry will reach.First, though, in a moment, I'll summarise the main findings from the last 90 minutes (which were a lot more newsy than the first 90 minutes).4.53pm: Chilcot asks Sawers about the impact of the war on Britain's standing at the United Nations. (Sawers was Britain's ambassador to the UN from 2007 to 2009.)Sawers says people admired the UK for trying to uphold the authority of the UN.4.50pm: Sawers says everyone involved in Iraq has asked this question many times. There is no "clear-cut" answer. But what is clear cut is that Iraq is now a better place.Sawers says he has been concerned that the success in Iraq has been overshadowed by the damage to Britain's reputation in the Middle East. But even in Egypt the mood has changed and moved on. "Our leaders have moved on but our values persist." He says he does not think there has been "sustained damage" to the UK's reputation in the region.There is a risk of people in the UK "exaggerating the scale of that reputational cost", he says.4.47pm: Lyne asks Sheinwald if Iraq was worth "the very high cost".Sheinwald replies: "That a very difficult decision and a very difficult debate. I can't answer that even now." It did require a high degree of resilience from everyone concerned. But it was an important issue for the government.Lyne asks: "So what has it done for our reputation in the world? Has it been a plus or a minus?"Sheinwald says that depends who you talk to, and whether they are talking publicly or privately. Some people admired Britain's professionalism. But it was very controversial in the Arab world.Lyne asks about opinion in Europe.Sheinwald says the divisions in Europe healed "reasonable rapidly".4.45pm: Sir Roderic Lyne suggests that Britain was trying to achieve "mimimum requirements" before it left Basra.4.40pm: Sir Roderic Lyne asks how much influence Britain had over Nuri Maliki's government in Baghdad.Sheinwald says Maliki was interested in what was happening in Basra. But sometimes it wanted to do things itself.When the British were preparing Operation Sinbad in Basra, the Iraqis were unwilling to authorise strikes against the militias, Sheinwald says.Lyne says in the latter period the UK was "hanging on in Basra and unable to get out".Sheinwald says the British had various training and intervention roles. That justified the force of 5,500 that was there towards the end of 2007.Lyne asks how much influence Britain had with the US. "Were we left with much traction with the Americans?"Sheinwald says by 2007 other issues had risen up the agenda.4.38pm: Sheinwald says the government chose to accept that the result in Basra would not be perfect.Freedman says: "So we started off with exemplary, and we finished off with sufficiency."Sheinwald says that's correct.Sawers says it was clear from early on that the key to a successful transition depended on what was happening in Baghdad.4.33pm: Sir Lawrence Freedman asks about the American "surge". Sheinwald says the "surge" showed Bush taking charge of US policy. In the UK there was "some scepticism" about whether it would work. It did not affect British policy in Basra.Sawers says the Baker Hamilton reflected lower expectations. Bush "to his credit was not prepared to lower his expectations", Sawers says. At no stage was there a request from the Americans for the UK to increase its force levels.Sheinwald says the "surge" enabled the Bush adminstration to give a timetable for withdrawal in 2008 on the basis of recent success.4.30pm: Sir Martin Gilbert asks what impact the Iraq experience had on Afghanistan policy.Sheinwald says that almost everyone involved in Afghanstan had been involved in Iraq.4.24pm: Freedman says that Lieutenant General Sir Robert Fry, who gave evidence to the inquiry this morning, said there was a growing realisation in 2005 that the MoD would have to send more troops to Afghanistan.Freedman says Fry also suggested that Afghanistan was another example of a country where Britain send soldiers without fully realising what it was getting into.Sawers says as the Iraq deployment came to an end, it became clear that there was some "headroom" to get more involved in Afghanistan. But the government could not do that until it was confident about the drawdown of resources from Iraq.Sheinwald says the drawdown took longer than expected. The government had to consult the Iraqis.4.20pm: That's better. Everything is working again now. Freedman is asking about 2006, when the British deployment in Afghanistan started to increase. Sheinwald says the 2006 deployment was a "relatively small one" and that it was "manageable" alongside the Iraq deployment.In 2006-07 there was explicit discussion about balancing the two deployments. The MoD gave advice that there was a finite number of battlegroups and that they had to be shared between the two theatres.4.18pm: My connection went down for a bit, so I've lost some copy. Sir Lawrence Freedman was asking about WMD. Sheinwald said Blair did not want to admit that WMD would not be found until the Iraq Survey Group reported. Sawers said that, for Iraqis themselves, WMD was never their main concern.4.07pm: Sir Roderic Lyne asks why no one anticipated the onslaught of violence. If the preparations had been better, could the impact of the violence have been mitigated.Sawers says the government would have been "better prepared" if it had thought through these issues more thoroughly. But the level of violence was "unprecedented". "The mindset of our American colleagues was Germany 1945," he says. Even in 1945 it took some years to help Germany recover. And planning for that had started some years before 1945.President Mubarak of Egypt was about the only person who predicted the violence, Sawers says. He warned of 100 bin Ladens being created."Frankly, had we known the level of violence, that might well have led to second thoughts about the whole project," he says.That's significant. I translate that to mean: "If we had known it would be that bad, we would not have got involved."4.05pm: Desmond Bowen says Douglas Alexander, the international development secretary, made an announcement today about a database of volunteers who will be available to travel abroad to help with the reconstruction effort in conflict zones.4.01pm: Lady Prashar asks about the training of the Iraqi police.Sawers says Britain's biggest police training effort took place in Jordan. That was because it was safer to take recruits from Iraq and train them there.It was difficult to persuade police officers, either serving or retired, to take these jobs. Doug Brand, who was the police adviser in 2004, did a good job at getting people to volunteer to join the training effort. But it was hard to get people to sign up for this.Officers training the police had to be at the police academy. That meant they had to travel outside the secure zone, Sawers says.3.58pm: Sawers says that when the violence was at its height, there was a "weariness" about dealing with it. Foreign Office officials became reluctant to accept postings there.3.55pm: Chilcot says the committee will see for themselves if they go to Iraq. Interestingly, he suggests its a question of "if" they go to Iraq, not when. When he held a press conference to launch the inquiry, he made it clear that at that stage they did expect to go to the country.3.41pm: They're back. Chilcot refers to Sir Hilary Synnott, the British regional commander in the south. Synnott has already given evidence to the inquiry and he's written a book, Bad Days in Basra. Is it unfair to him to say that his complaints about British policy were based on the fact he was there too soon?Sheinwald says it was not easy to get people to go to Basra. (One of Synnott's main complaints was that he did not have enough support.)Chilcot says Synnott argued that Britain was too small to handle what it was trying to do in the south of Iraq. Was Britain up to it?Sawers says: "I think we delivered very substantial efforts to the reconstruction effort ... in the south." There was eventually a full complement of staff in Basra. The problem was not the scale of the British effort; it was "the huge onslaught of violence". Every time the British put up an electricity line, it would be taken down, by criminals or insurgents.Sawers says it is true to say that the government failed to forsee the problems.Chilcot asks: "Did we not bite off more than we could chew with Iraq?"Sheinwald says rebuilding southern Iraq was never part of the original plan.Chilcot says the government had to "scale back" its overall goals.Sheinwald says this happened. Chilcot says there is an alternative view. Transforming Iraq could never have been achieved in one or two years. It was always going to take six years or so.Sawers says that, over the last six years, there has been a transformation in Iraq. It's stable. It has not changed its borders. It does not pose a threat to its neighbours. Economic growth has been achieved. There is still progress to be made. It is not as stable "as we would like". But the government has achieved the goals set in the summer of 2003.(Sawers read out a list of the objectives set in 2003. The key one was stability.)Chilcot says those targets have not been achieved.Sawers disputes that. He says there are fewer deaths from violence in Iraq now then there are in Pakistan.Chilcot asks if this is true proportionately. Sawers accepts that might not be true proportionately.3.26pm: Chilcot calls a break.It hasn't been a particularly exciting session so far. Here's the best of it:• Sheinwald said Blair did not "for a moment" think the British would be able to train an Iraqi police force in three months. He defended the former prime minister from one of the criticisms made by Sir Jeremy Greenstock when he gave evidence yesterday and described an apparently unrealistic demand made by Blair in September 2003. See 2.34pm.• Sheinwald said it took the Americans a while to realise how serious the Iraq insurgency was. He also appeared to criticise some of the tactics employed by the American military in the 2003-4 period. See 2.25pm and 2.53pm.• Sawers said it was possible that having British forces based in the south of Iraq limited Britain's influence over the US. See 3.08pm.3.17pm: Lady Prashar goes back to the September 2003 meeting with Blair. Was an assessment made of what extra resources were required?Sheinwald says this was a question that was asked. There was a follow-up meeting in October.Sawers says the military had access to the reserve. Other government departments did not. But that does not mean that resources were not reorganised. There was a "substantial" redirection of money within Whitehall. At one stage Sawers was in charge of Foreign Office resources covering "the arc of instablity". Half of the money went to Iraq. A quarter of the money from the government's fund set aside to deal with instability abroad also went to Iraq.Prashar asks about the balance between short-term funding and long-term funding.Sawers says DfID was rightly concerned to ensure that improvements were sustainable.From 2003 to 2009 the government achieved a great deal. But there were arguments and complaints every month.3.13pm: Freedman asks about Abu Ghraib, the prison where the Americans were abusing Iraqi prisoners.Sawers says the British knew that there were "difficulties" at the prison. The US army reviewed the detainee arrangements in January 2004. The revelations, when they became public, were a "shock" to the British. "They were way beyond anything that we envisaged might be going wrong". The British thought there was a problem with conditions, and possibly violence.Sawers says he went to Iraq three times in 2004. His visit in early May was the most gloomy of all the ones he made to the country. The insurgency and violence was clearly "going to get worse". Abu Ghraib added "another nasty twist to the difficulties we faced".3.08pm: Freedman asks if having the British based in Basra limited Britain's influence over the US.Sheinwald says 10% of the Coalition Provisional Authority staff in Baghdad were British. The British also had people attached to the Iraqi prime minister's office. Sawers says he spent 90% of his time on what was happening nationally in Iraq.Freedman asks if Britain would have had more "clout" if it had not taken responsibility for a "box" in the south.Sawers says: "You can argue it both ways." The military liked having their patch, and not being part of a US force.Bowen says that's correct. For logistical reasons, it was helpful to have the force concentrated in one area.Freedman says Greenstock told the inquiry yesterday that the CPA was very much an American operation.Sheinwald says the sums of money contributed by the British were "tiny" compared with what the Americans were putting in.Sheinwald says the British wanted the American approach to mirror the British one. But they knew it was going to take time. That was not going to change overnight.3.04pm: Sir Lawrence Freedman says the Americans appointed someone to deal specifically with Iraq, Robert Blackwell. How did that impact on the British?Sheinwald says Blackwell was a member of the US national security council. The British tried to ensure that they had people matching the various officials dealing with Iraq on the NSC.3.00pm: Sheinwald says each successive Iraqi government has wanted to control its own security. Increasingly, in 2005, 2006, 2007, the issue of balancing forces between Iraq and Afghanistan was an important issue for Britain. But this was not a problem earlier.2.57pm: Lyne asks about the American re-think taking place in 2005.Sawers says the major review of US policy was conducted by the Baker Hamilton review in 2006. That eventually prompted a change of strategy.2.53pm: Lyne asks if there was an alternative strategy.Sawers says he remembers weekly meetings where this question was asked. But they always concluded that, to retain the confidence of the Iraqi people, they need to maintain their commitment to the political process. "It was really important to stick to the political timetable", particularly to retain the support of the Shia community, Sawers says.Sheinwald says that in 2003-04 there was a concern about the impact of American military tactics on the Shia community.Lyne asks if the coalition was good at public relations, at getting its message across to the Iraqi people.Sheinwald replies: "I'm afraid not." There was not a broad-based media in Iraq.2.45pm: Lyne asks how the situation deteriorated through 2004 and 2005. How did London respond?Sheinwald says the "political story" was one of sticking to the political timetable. In June 2004 the UN passed security council resolution 1546 paving the way for the handover of power to the Iraqis. That laid a "new foundation for Iraq after the handover". After that, there was a need to stick to the "very complicated timetable" involving elections etc. Sawers says the security situation deterioriated for a number of reasons. Elements of Saddam Hussein's regime started to organise. Al-Qaida emerged in Iraq. In 2005 these elements became more prominent. Sometimes it was hard to tell which element was responsible for which attack. There was more violence from within the Shia community. These three elements combined to "aggravate and worsen the security situation". From the summer of 2004 General David Petraeus started to build up the Iraqi forces.2.42pm: Lyne says at that end of August 2003 the British had 9,500 troops in Iraq. He says there was not a big change in the force level after that.2.34pm: Lyne asked about the Blair meeting in September 2003. How had British strategy evolved at this point? What decisions were taken at that meeting?Sheinwald says they were "pointing the machine" at the need for a "comprehensive approach". The PM's meeting was partly a "sit-rep" - a good example of Iraq inquiry jargon, meaning a situation report, I think - but it also covered the way ahead.Lyne asks about the targets set in relation to security.Sheinwald says they were talking about training packages lasting six to eight weeks. He says Blair did not believe "for a moment" that police could be properly training in that time. This is interesting. Yesterday Greenstock implied that Blair did think a police force could be trained in that timescale. Sheinwald is defending Blair against the charge that he had unrealistic ambitions.Lyne asks if there was a "disjunction" between the view from London and the view on the ground.Sheinwald says he does not think there was at that stage.At that stage people did not realise how corrupt the Iraqi police force was.Desmond Bowen says in September 2003 the British did not think they were facing an insurgency. They thought they just had to deal with security problems.Bowen says the British were not planning to build up the Iraqi army at that stage. They thought an army would be needed to deal with external threats. They did not think the Iraqis would need an army for internal security.2.31pm: Lyne asks where the key decisions were being taken - on the ground, or in Washington and London.Sheinwald says it varied. There was a shifting pattern. Increasingly, as the situation in Iraq got worse, Bush took personal control, Sheinwald says. Earlier the Pentagon was very much in charge.Sawers says Paul Bremer (the US administrator in Baghdad) was given considerable freedom early one. Later Washington exercised more control.2.25pm: Sir Roderic Lyne has one more "process" question. How closely did Sheinwald interact with the US administration? Was the UK in alignment with the Americans? Or were there differences?Sheinwald says the contacts continued at a frequent level. Bush and Blair had a video conference roughly every fortnight, talking for between half an hour and an hour. Sheinwald spoke to the US national security adviser, first Condoleezza Rice and then Stephen Hadley, sometimes every day.Originally there was some in the US adminstration who did not think the insurgency was as serious as the the British thought it was. That changed. The American machine initially was "slow and cumbersome".The British were successful in influencing the way the Americans handled the political process in Iraq, he says.Sheinwald talks about a meeting Blair had in early September about Iraq with Greenstock and others. Greenstock spoke about this yesterday. After the meeting, Blair raised the issues he had been told about with Bush, Sheinwald says.2.21pm: Sir John Sawers says there was "strong central drive" in Whitehall. The fact that Sheinwald was Blair's foreign policy adviser and head of the Cabinet Office foreign affairs directorate strengthened the ability of the Whitehall machine to drive these issues, he says.Sawers says Sheinwald was able to exercise power at "four-star level". When Sawers was Blair's foreign affairs adviser, he was just a private secretary. He was not in charge of the Cabinet Office secretariat, in the way Sheinwald was. That means he only operated at a "two-star level".There's an interesting aside here. Sawers says that Sir Roderic Lyne worked as the prime minister's foreign affairs adviser - ie, he did the same job as Sawers - when John Major was prime minister.2.19pm: Chilcot asks if DOP met at key points.Sheinwald says it was used on Iraq more towards 2006-07, when it had to discuss transition issues. Chilcot says a number of witness have said that they did not feel that the nation was being put on a war footing, in relation to the invasion and particularly the aftermath.Sheinwald says he hesitates to use the phrase "war footing". But the country was certainly on a "crisis footing".2.12pm: Chilcot asks about Whitehall process. He says this is an issue that the Butler inquiry (that he sat on) looked at. How did Sheinwald find the structures when he arrived?Sheinwald says he tried to ensure that Blair got consistent advice from different parts of Whitehall.Chilcot says the Butler inquiry found that there were "fewer minds" at the top because of the way the Whitehall machinery operated. Does Sheinwald accept that?No, he replies.From the summer of 2003 it was necessary to get the whole of Whitehall involved in Iraq, especially the Foreign Office, the Cabinet Office and the MoD. Iraq was discussed at cabinet. It was also discussed by DOP, the defence and overseas policy committee. Underneath DOP, the day to day work on Iraq was handled by an ad hoc ministerial group.Chilcot says an ad hoc group was a form of cabinet committee.Sheinwald agrees. He says it was a proper cabinet committee, meeting from 2003 to 2005, usually chaired by the foreign secretary.In 2005 a new committee, DOP (Iraq) was set up, chaired by the prime minister.So there were a great many meetings within the classic Cabinet Office structure, Sheinwald says. There were other meetings too which were minuted.2.10pm: Sheinwald went to work for Blair in August 2003. What did the situation in Iraq look like then, Lyne asks.It was pretty worrying, says Sheinwald. It was moving "very rapidly". The reports from John Sawers in Baghdad and Sir Hilary Synnott in the south showed that services were not being delivered on the ground.It was a "huge job" and a "very sombre analysis" was put to ministers, and accepted by ministers.2.05pm: Sir Roderic Lyne starts with a question to Sir Nigel Sheinwald. Did he have previous experience of Iraq before he started working for Blair?Not specifically, says Sheinwald. But he knew he was moving to Downing Street from January 2003 and he spent some time preparing. He first went to Iraq in November 2003.Lyne asks if it would have been useful to have more grounding in the subject before he took over.Sheinwald says it would have been useful. But he applied himself to his job "pretty diligently".Lyne asks what other subjects Sheinwald was dealing with when he was working for Blair. How much time did Iraq take up?Sheinwald says Iraq was the biggest issue on his agenda. But there were lots of other things going on, like Afghanistan, the Middle East, Iran, Libya, the G8 presidency (including climate change and Africa), India and Pakistan, and Russia.Something approaching two fifths or half his time was spent on Iraq, Sheinwald says.Lyne asks if it would have been better to have someone focusing just on Iraq.Sheinwald says it was helpful to be dealing with "the whole waterfront".2.02pm: Sir John Sawers starts with a clarification of something he said in last week. The Department for Interntional Development was not substantially involved in policy making in the run up to the war. It was not involved on the ground. But they were involved in some meetings.Sawers is tidying up something he said last week. Chris Ames at the Iraq Inquiry Digest has got more on this here. 2.01pm: They're here. Sir John Chilcot says he will be asking the witnesses about the period from 2003 to 2007-08. He says that his team will check the evidence given against the papers "which are still coming in".1.14pm: The Iraq inquiry continues to hear evidence about what happened in the country after the war and this afternoon a trio of heavyweights are appearing to talk about "the view from Whitehall". They are:• Sir Nigel Sheinwald, Tony Blair's foreign policy adviser from 2003 to 2007 and now Britain's ambassador to the US.• Sir John Sawers, Blair's foreign policy adviser from 1999 to 2001, UK envoy to Iraq in 2003, political director at the Foreign Office from 2003 to 2007 and now head of MI6.• Desmond Bowen, policy director at the Ministry of Defence from 2004 to 2008.Sawers and Bowen have already given evidence before, but Sheinwald is appearing for the first time. The hearing starts at 2pm and I'll be live blogging from then.