Hans Blix, former UN chief weapons inspector:"The British decision to go in was a tragic mistake. Britain slowly slipped into it. Once the prime minister had committed to support for President Bush, it was hard to change course. We have a saying in Swedish that, if you get on the wrong tram, it's better to get off at the first stop than to stay on till the end. But it was hard to change course and it became more difficult."I often felt that the UK was among the forces wanting UN inspections. There were strong forces in Washington around Cheney who did not want UN inspections at all."The British remained loyal allies to the Americans, but they also extricated themselves as soon as it became politically feasible. Their policy has not impacted particularly on their relations with the rest of the European Union, but in the wider world it has cemented the view that the UK will stick to the US closely when it can. We see that even now in the financial crisis."But there's not much resentment against the UK, and Tony Blair is now doing some good work in the Middle East and on climate change. The situation is different because we have Barack Obama healing many of the wounds."Michael O'Hanlon, one of America's leading military thinkers, based at Washington's Brookings Institution:"In retrospect, all of us who supported the war - and I include not just the UK but American Democrats and think-tankers and the like - probably should have asked harder questions first about whether the war was properly prepared militarily and diplomatically."It's hard to say [how well Britain performed]. Good in some ways. But clearly the diplomacy of the war wasn't successful on balance, in the eyes of most of the world. And Britain was part of the initial successes, then part of the ensuing failures, and less part of the 2007-2008 recovery than it might have been. "It was a frustrating and tragic war for the US - and perhaps even somewhat more so for the UK."Marina Ottaway, director of the Middle East programme, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace:"The issue is really whether or not the United States and its allies achieved much by going into Iraq, and did the right thing at that time. The British earned a very good reputation at the beginning."There was a tendency to compare favourably what the British were doing in Basra, as compared to the more stumbling attempts of other countries elsewhere. Towards the end, when it became clear that Basra was overrun with militias, then greater doubts started arising about whether the British had done the right thing or not."In the same way that there has been an upsurge of anti-Americanism in the Arab world, there has also been a resentment against the British. We all know that in Europe the popular opinion was not in favour of the intervention, so again, in those circles that were opposed to the war, it has not improved the reputation of the Brits. "It has once again strengthened the image of the British in government circles in the United States as the US's best allies."