Give this to Dick Cheney: he still has the ability to exceed our worst expectations. Speaking to CNN's John King last Sunday, the (blessedly) former vice-president blithely asserted that the Bush administration had "accomplished nearly everything we set out to do" in Iraq.Even for a propagandist as practised as Cheney, this was an astonishing claim. But we know what really happened. Six years ago, the Bush-Cheney administration took America to war in Iraq using what we now know were false arguments based upon faulty intelligence about Saddam's alleged possession of weapons of mass destruction. Ignoring the advice of their own generals and diplomats, Bush and Cheney directed the undermanned US military to pacify and occupy Iraq, giving rise to an insurgency and attracting extremist fighters from around the region.After years of denying that a crisis existed and repeatedly assuring Americans that we had "turned a corner" in Iraq, Democratic victories in the 2006 elections forced the administration to recognise that a change in strategy was needed. Interacting with a number of other factors, the surge strategy adopted by the Bush administration eventually managed to bring the violence down.Though violence in Iraq has thankfully declined from the catastrophic levels seen in 2006-7, the country is still plagued by terrorism. According to the Associated Press, since 1 January 2009, major attacks have included:• 23 killed by a suicide bomber at the home of a tribal leader in Youssifiyah on 2 January• 38 killed by a suicide bomber in Baghdad on 4 January• 16 killed by two car bombs at a bus terminal in Baghdad on 11 February• Eight killed by a suicide bomber in Karbala on 12 February• 40 killed by a suicide bomber in Musayyib on 13 February• 13 killed by a car bomb in Hillah on 5 March• 30 killed by a suicide bomber at a Baghdad police academy on 8 March• 33 killed by a suicide bomber in an Abu Ghraib market on 10 MarchMore than four million Iraqis remain displaced, both within and outside the country, with many afraid to return and others simply unable, having lost their homes in the waves of sectarian cleansing that have transformed many of Iraq's formerly mixed areas.Though Iraq's provincial elections were judged a legitimate and welcome success, many of the country's most divisive political questions – the status of Kirkuk, constitutional reform, the distribution of oil revenues – remain unresolved. And even the most optimistic analysts predict that Iraq will be struggling against a low-level insurgency for years to come.In short, Iraq is still very much in crisis. Though by far the worst costs of the war have been borne by Iraqis – as many as 600,000 Iraqis have been killed in the war – the costs to the United States have been high. More than 4,200 American soldiers have been killed, with more than 30,000 wounded, many of them seriously and requiring long-term care. The American taxpayers' tab is more than $600bn and counting.The strategic costs to the US are likewise considerable: an empowered Iran, with significant influence in the new Iraqi government and greatly increased strategic depth. The outflow of terrorist tactics and technology from Iraq into the surrounding region, with Iraq-trained jihadists participating in attacks in Lebanon and Yemen; and high levels of distrust and dislike of US intentions that have only been partially ameliorated by the end of George Bush's presidency.There is another significant cost that must be factored into the Iraq debacle: Afghanistan. New York Times reporter Dexter Filkins recently quoted a western aid official lamenting "the tragedy ... the $70bn that would have given you enough police and army to stabilise this place all went to Iraq". By diverting troops and resources to Iraq in 2003, the Bush administration allowed the Taliban to re-establish themselves in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border areas, and the country had steadily collapsed back into insurgent warfare. Having failed to complete the mission in Afghanistan, the Bush administration handed the new president a war that promises to be as difficult and costly as Iraq has been – if not more.So all of this is what the Bush administration "accomplished" with the Iraq war, today entering its seventh year. Cheney's aim – in which he's being aided by a number of other former administration officials and conservative pundits – of erecting this rhetorical Potemkin Iraq in the minds of Americans is obvious: to hold the Obama administration responsible if and when violence again erupts. Cheney is as smart as he is dishonest – talking points aside, he knows that there's a fair chance of that occurring in the Iraq he and Bush have left for President Obama.