George W Bush talked this week about the decisions he made in Iraq as if they were history, the insurgency had been defeated and the conflict, bar a few loose ends, over. Wrong on all counts. If American troops are not being attacked on a daily basis, Iraqis certainly are. Iraq Body Count says that an average of seven people die a day from suicide and bomb attacks, and that there are three deaths from gunfire or executions. Two months after Barack Obama hailed the end of US combat operations in Iraq, the conflict itself is far from over.What the international community apparently treats as an acceptable level of Iraqi violence is neither random nor sporadic. On Wednesday at least four were killed and dozens injured in a co-ordinated wave of bomb and mortar attacks. Last week insurgents unleashed one of the fiercest assaults on Baghdad since the invasion in 2003, in a barrage of car bombs and roadside explosions that killed at least 63 and wounded nearly 300. Two days before that, 53 worshippers were massacred in one of the capital's main cathedrals.The group in the eye of the current storm are Iraq's Christians, a community so old as to claim to be the country's original inhabitants. So many have now fled abroad or been killed that there are just 400,000 left out of a pre-war population of one million. Al-Qaida in Iraq, written off as "strategically defeated", is back, smaller in number than before but more committed and lethal. Rockets and mortars began landing again in Baghdad's Green Zone. So concerned was the US that the current security situation could degenerate after eight months of political deadlock, that Mr Obama personally intervened yesterday to persuade Ayad Allawi to enter a power-sharing government with his rival as prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki. Mr Allawi's mainly Sunni Iraqiya group yesterday got the speaker's post in the national assembly, as the Kurds retained the presidency. But such has been Mr Allawi's reticence to accept the cooked-up position of head of a new council of strategic policy, that the deal is capable of unravelling .Behind Mr Maliki and Mr Allawi stand Iran and Saudi Arabia, regional rivals engaged in a byzantine power struggle. Mr Allawi is unconvinced that Mr Maliki, the man who won two seats fewer than he did in the last election, is prepared to share real power. The restive Sunni streets of Anbar and Diyala will be watching if Mr Allawi walks away from the deal. Their faith as voters has been strained beyond breaking point. The US described the announcement of the coalition as a big step forward, but this must be more of an earnest hope than an expression of reality. Iraq is the unfinished business of two American presidents.