Remember the Iraq inquiry, launched in July? It hasn't gone away, and later this month the committee should be making an announcement about its much-anticipated public hearings. Meanwhile, it is looking at a mountain of information and consulting interested parties – particularly those with direct experience of the war – trying to work out what the main questions are. If it gets bogged down under the weight of evidence and expectation, Iraq Inquiry Digest has been set up to help.Iraq Inquiry Digest is a website to monitor and comment on the investigation (which will inevitably become known as the Chilcot inquiry). The digest is, as I hope the name suggests, a distillation of facts about the process: what we know already and what we hope to find out.Behind the project is a group of people with an interest in making sure that this inquiry finally gets to the bottom of Britain's involvement in the war. I am the site's editor and main contributor. Another key contributor is Dr Brian Jones, formerly of the Defence Intelligence Staff, who gave evidence to the Hutton and Butler inquiries. Other supporters and future contributors are Dr Chris Lamb, who made a freedom of information request for the minutes of two pre-war cabinet meetings; Rose Gentle, whose son Gordon was killed in Iraq; Dr Glen Rangwala who exposed the "dodgy dossier" on Iraq's alleged concealment attempts; and MPs from each of the main parties. Journalists Peter Oborne and Michael Smith, who published the Downing Street documents, are also supporters, as is Index on Censorship. The very limited costs of the project are coming out of my own pocket. As the inquiry gets going, we will be blogging on what it has – or hasn't – found out. And we will be adding new evidence to the mix. During hearings, we will identify what we think needs to be asked of individual witnesses. As those witnesses are seen – in open sessions, we hope – we will be commenting on the effectiveness of the questioning and the openness and honesty of the witnesses. Our bloggers will be asked to rate both on a numerical scale.Despite Gordon Brown's best efforts, the inquiry will not take place in secret and its format will not be 25 years out of date. But it is still Brown's handpicked committee, and it remains to be seen whether it matches Lord Hutton's inquiry for accessibility and openness. The expectations and possibilities of the modern age mean that an official inquiry cannot expect to operate in its own bubble, without its approach and performance being scrutinised and criticised. The inquiry is being carried out on behalf of all of us, and it has to answer the questions we want answered. Chilcot must not make the same mistakes as have been made before.As far as possible, we have tried to avoid questions obviously loaded in one direction. "Did they lie?" – which is perhaps on many people's minds – is not one of our top-line questions, although it is the subtext of a lot of them. "Did Tony Blair say one thing and do another?" is a consistent theme.If there is a bias, it is that the majority of our questions relate to what happened before the invasion, rather than what went wrong afterwards. Although the occupation of Iraq – which was undeniably disastrous – takes up the majority of the inquiry's timeframe, there are suspicions that Brown chose the longest possible period so that its deliberations would be similarly extended and diluted.We have also tried to identify why there is a case to answer, in terms of what has already been alleged and what evidence exists to support those allegations. Separating evidence from questions and trying to analyse what questions the evidence raises without going too far in answering those questions has been a challenge.That evidence is at the heart of what a new inquiry might achieve. Much of it has been published or leaked since the four official inquiries on whose verdicts the government previously relied, causing a massive gap between public perceptions of the war and the official version of events. That gap is poisonous for democracy and pre-dates the expenses scandal as a major source of mistrust in the political process.The first thing the inquiry should do is to confirm the authenticity of those documents that have previously been leaked and publish official versions of them. The authenticity of the Downing Street documents leaked to journalist Michael Smith in 2004 and 2005 is not in serious doubt, but the fact that they have not been officially acknowledged causes unnecessary problems.The digest will also be a vehicle for new evidence and new revelations. We plan to publish new documents and break stories about the war over coming weeks (and Comment is free will keep you posted with regular commentary from us).As this is a citizens' resource, we are also extending an open invitation to anyone who has information, including people who are providing information to the inquiry, to pass it to us. We are particularly keen to hear from anyone who knows of any attempt to mislead the inquiry or to withhold information. There is no doubt that this has happened before, and information given to previous establishment inquiries never saw the light of day.If it's going to be true to its intentions, the digest has to be both transparent and participative. It would be ridiculous to insist that we know all the questions, let alone the answers. We'd like anyone who thinks they've got better ideas to let us know. Add a comment below or on the site. If anyone wants to contribute or otherwise collaborate, please get in touch.We all know that this is the last chance. There will not be another Iraq inquiry.