A day after the Department of Defense announced the first US death in the campaign against Islamic State (Isis) militants in Iraq, Central Command said 22 air strikes had been carried out in the country on Friday and Saturday.Marine lance corporal Sean P Neal, one of 1,600 troops supporting Iraqi forces against Isis, died in Baghdad of a “non-combat” injury, the US said late on Friday. The Marines said Neal’s death was under investigation.Another US military death has been associated with the campaign against Isis in Iraq and Syria. On 2 October, the navy said a marine who ejected from an MV-22 Osprey aircraft over the Persian Gulf was presumed lost at sea.Strikes on Isis targets in Iraq began on 8 August; strikes in Syria followed on 23 September.The 22 strikes in Iraq on Friday and Saturday included attacks in frequently targeted areas near the vital Mosul dam, the city of Fallujah and the northern city of Bayji, home of an oil refinery. US warplanes also destroyed an Isis artillery piece near the besieged town of Kobani in Syria, officials said. Activists and a Kurdish official said Isis was shelling the town on Saturday. Idriss Nassan, a senior official in Kobani, told the Associated Press fighting was concentrated on the southern and eastern edges of the town, also known as Ayn Arab.The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the fighting concentrated on the eastern side of the town, which is surrounded on three sides by Isis fighters.On Friday, reports from Kobani suggested Isis fighters may have used an unidentified chemical weapon. On Thursday, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said US-led strikes in Syria had killed more than 500 militant fighters and 32 civilians. Close to 150 strikes have been carried out around Kobani.The Iraq strikes on Friday and Saturday hit large and small Isis units, buildings, vehicles and fighting positions, and the bomber, fighter and remotely piloted aircraft used in the air strikes all returned safely, Central Command said. Iraqi security forces later said they had retaken most of the town of Jurf al-Sakhar near Baghdad, the biggest gain in months of fighting. “We have managed to push out Islamic State terrorists from the town of Jurf al-Sakhar today and now we are raising the Iraqi flag over the government offices,” said provincial governor Sadiq Madloul. 