 3.56pm BST Here's a summary of the latest developments: 3.06pm BST The BBC has corrected its transcript of the Maliki interview. It now translates him saying that Syrian jets struck in the al-Qaim area, but crucially on the Syrian side of the border.That clarification makes his remarks less alarming to the west, but he is still quoted as welcoming air strikes by Assad jets, and saying that Iraq and Syria are facing the same fight against Isis.Updated at 3.07pm BST 2.55pm BST Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah has vowed to "take all necessary measures" to protect his Kingdom's security.The state was issued at the start of a national security meeting about Iraq, according to the Saudi broadcaster al-Arabiya.#BREAKING: #Saudi king chairs National Security Council meeting to discuss Iraq crisis http://t.co/whRZo48Bms 2.43pm BST Hague's meeting with Maliki may have looked friendly enough, but it came at a peculiarly awkward time. The Iraqi prime minister is resisting calls to set up a salvation government and, more alarming still for the West, he appears to be shifting allegiance towards Syria. Updated at 2.47pm BST 2.33pm BST Maliki has underlined his allegiance to Syria by adopting the Assad tactic of signalling a reliance on Russian support. In his BBC interview he is also reported to have announced that he is in talks with Moscow over the delivery of jet fighters. maliki tells bbc he is in talks with russia over jet fighters delivery because america dragging its feet 2.27pm BST Salman Shaikh director of the Brookings Doha Centre says Syrian air strikes inside Iraq make the prospect of a sectarian regional war more likely. Syrian airforce Iraq bombing is v dangerous devt.We're even closer to all out Sunni-Shia regional war.#Maliki #Assad #Suleimani #KSA #QatarSyria airforce Iraq# attack shows how serious situ is for #Maliki &#Suleimani. No holding back it seems.Things just got lot more complicatedVali Nasr, dean at the School of Advanced International Studies, at Johns Hopkins says the now apparently open alliance between Maliki and Assad will make US involvement in the crisis even more tricky. Commentator Meir Javedanfar notes the shifting alliances in the Middle East. Welcome to the new Middle East where within the same week #Israel bombs #Syria & Syria bombs targets in #Iraq http://t.co/Z2Em5zQacB 2.15pm BST The UN's children's charity, Unicef, has expressed alarm about the "mass displacement" of people in northern Iraq after it said 1,500 people have fled fighting in Hamdaniya.Those fleeing to Irbil include hundreds of children it said. Unicef's Iraq Representative Marzio Babille said: Many of these displaced people have travelled long distances on foot and some bear injuries sustained in the recent violence.Unicef assessment teams were at the various locations where families were sheltering Wednesday evening and have today begun providing immediate life-saving aid – including water and sanitation kits - to the children, women and their families.Unicef reiterates its call on all parties to the conflict to ensure the protection of children and all civilians.Updated at 2.21pm BST 1.22pm BST The BBC has broadcast footage of Maliki welcoming Syrian cross border air strikes against insurgents in the al-Qaim area. It quotes him saying: There was no coordination involved, but we welcome this action. We welcome any Syrian strike against Isis, because this group targets both Iraq and Syria ... But we didn't make any request from Syria. They carry out their strikes and we carry out ours. The final winners are our two countries. 1.14pm BST  An insurgent artillery offensive against Christian villages in the north of Iraq has sent thousands of people fleeing from their homes, seeking sanctuary in the Kurdish enclave, according to AP. The shelling of the cluster of villages happened in an area known as Hamdaniya, 45 miles (75 kilometers) from the frontier of the self-ruled Kurdish region. While many villagers appeared to have been granted access by daybreak, hundreds of Shia refugees were still hoping to be let in but were facing delays because they lacked sponsors on the other side. One of the refugees, who gave only her nickname of Umm Alaa, fearing retribution, said she and hundreds of others with her had left their village of Quba and another nearby hamlet during the militants' initial assault on June 10 to seek shelter in nearby communities that were then attacked Wednesday. Another, who agreed to be identified only named Huda, tried to calm her 10-year-old son Mohammed, who was crying of thirst. "They will kill every Shia man, and they will burn every Shia house. Nobody has stayed in Quba. Every single Shia has left," he said, echoing the fears of many interviewed. Updated at 1.48pm BST 1.07pm BST Iraqi state TV has broadcast footage claiming to show that government forces in control of the Baiji Oil refinery. According to a translation by Mona Mahmood (@monamood) , it quotes a military official as saying: "It is under our control, all the refinery is under our control, Isis could not get anything. The battle has continued for seven days. More than 90 Isis militants have been killed. The local Baiji tribes are working with us."The broadcaster showed footage of a helicopter landing inside Baiji refinery. It dismissed claims that the insurgents controlled the plant as "lies". It said morale among the troops guarding the plant was "high" and that they had enough food and weapons to defend it.Updated at 1.46pm BST 12.15pm BST Three Iraqi helicopters have landed at Isis-controlled Tikrit University and clashed with with militants, according to a brief update by Reuters. It cited security sources but did not elaborate.  11.44am BST Up the Euphrates river in Syria, Isis control of dams combined with historically low water levels threatens a humanitarian crisis, according to a new Chatham House paper by analyst Nouar Sahmout.She writes:Isis now has control of the Euphrates’ major water structures within Syria. This includes Al-Raqqa Dam, one of the biggest dams in the Middle East, which controls the river flow for most of the irrigated lands downstream of Al-Raqqa and supplies 19 per cent of the country’s electrical power.The Euphrates River, which provides 65 per cent of the country's water needs, is also experiencing a dangerous decrease in its flow rates. This is likely to be due to a combination of factors: decades of poor water management, current neglect of water infrastructure on the Euphrates, and the absence of any coordination between Syria and upstream Turkey regarding the river flow. As a result, in late May, the river dried up downstream of Al-Raqqa city, depriving many downstream towns of water. The water level of Al-Assad Lake – Syria’s largest reservoir, which provides irrigation for some 500 square miles of agricultural land and all of Aleppo’s drinking water − has dropped by six meters since ISIS took control in January. If the lake loses one more metre the water system will stop working. This will leave more than four million inhabitants without access to safe water. This could result in a humanitarian catastrophe that would overwhelm agencies on the ground. 11.31am BST Employees at Iraq's Haditha dam have been told to be on standby to open its flood gates as insurgents advance, according to the New York Times. The warning raises the possibility of catastrophic damage and flooding, it said. Alarmed army officers told employees to stay inside and to be prepared to open the dam’s floodgates if ordered to do so, one employee said.“This will lead to the flooding of the town and villages and will harm you also,” the employee said he told the officers. 11.20am BST Britain has repeatedly ruled out military intervention in Iraq, and there's no sign that Hague's visit to Baghdad will change that.On a visit to Qatar on Wednesday, Defence Secretary Philip Hammond, said a “political solution” to Iraq’s divisions among Sunni, Shia and Kurdish factions was a “necessary precursor” to any military help for the Maliki government. McClatchy quoted Hammond saying: “Any military intervention which was not preceded by a political initiative to create an inclusive government, a government which is credible with the Sunni community in Iraq, would be bound to fail."  11.10am BST Syria's air force is filling a vacuum left by US reluctance to to launch air strikes on behalf of the Maliki government, according to the BBC's correspondent in Baghdad, Richard Galpin. 10.48am BST Hague says he has travelled to Baghdad to lobby for an inclusive government as a solution to the "existential threat" posed by Isis gains. In a statement explaining his trip, Hague said:The Iraqi state is facing an existential threat, with huge ramifications for the future stability and freedom of this country. The single most important factor that will determine whether or not Iraq overcomes this challenge is political unity.As a friend of Iraq, the UK believes the urgent priority must be to form an inclusive government that can command the support of all Iraqi people and work to stop ISIL in its tracks. The discussion of this key point is the purpose of my visit to Iraq and will form the basis of my conversations with Prime Minister Maliki and President of the Kurdish Regional Government Masoud Barzani as well as other key political figures.The UK can provide diplomatic, counter-terrorism and humanitarian support to Iraq. We were the first donor nation to get a team on the ground to assess humanitarian needs in Irbil. We have provided £5 million in emergency relief already, and there is more that we will be able to do in support of a unified Iraqi government.ISIL is a brutal terrorist group that is alien to this country, to the Middle East, and to the Islamic faith. It is a mortal threat to the stability and territorial integrity of Iraq, but the danger does not stop here: ISIL poses a direct threat to other countries in this region.Moreover, anyone glorifying, supporting or joining ISIL should understand that they are assisting a group responsible for kidnapping, torture, executions, rape, and numerous other crimes documented by international human rights organisations. This is not heroic behaviour, it is heinous behaviour, and no one should be under any illusions about that.But the immediate priority, and the focus of my discussions today, is to help and encourage Iraqi leaders to put sectarian conflict behind them and unite across all political parties.”Yesterday Hague was in Brussels for a meeting of Nato foreign ministers. Updated at 10.52am BST 10.37am BST Out of the blue William Hague has popped up in Baghdad.Have arrived in Baghdad for talks with Iraqi leadersHow's he going to help? Updated at 10.42am BST 10.29am BST Sunni militants have taken control of a town an hour from Baghdad, according to Reuters citing security sources. It said the latest gains for the insurgents is at Mansouriyat al-Jabal, which is home to four natural gas fields. 10.13am BST Disturbing video from activists opposed to the Maliki government claims to show victims of the Syrian air raids on al-Qaim. The clip [warning graphic content] shows a dead man on the blood-splattered floor of a grocery store, and bodies being loaded on to a truck. It cannot be independently verified.  10.03am BST A new round of negotiations between Sunni insurgents, the Iraqi military, and tribal leaders is under way over control Iraq's main oil refinery at Baiji, according to a worker at the plant.Ahmed Abdul Hameed, a 36-year-old employee at the refinery told the Guardian's Mona Mahmood (@monamood) that staff are increasingly angry at the Maliki government over air strikes against the Baiji area. A prominent tribal leader in Baiji city, sheikh Ghalib al-Nufous launched a new round of negotiations between the rebels and the military forces gathering inside the refinery yesterday. Leaked information from the talks suggested the military forces guarding the plant, were offered safe passage out, in return for handing over control of the refinery to tribal leaders.We hope that that a deal can be reached to end the crisis at the plant, so that staff can finally be paid. There are more than 11,000 staff who have not been paid for a month now . The government in Baghdad views all the families living in Baiji as terrorists or in support of terror. It keeps firing air strikes at civilians not the rebels. Maliki's order to cut off our salaries is compounding our misery. Maliki can't understand that there are innocent people who have nothing to do of what is happening in Baiji. We need to be paid to be able to survive and feed our families.  The refinery staff are happy to return to work but the army won't allow it. They are worried that we might be suicide bombers or collecting information for the rebels.The shortage of fuels in the city is adding to our hardship. The power is off and the generators are running out of gas, there is no drop of fuels anywhere in Baiji.  There are more than five trucks loaded with petrol inside the refinery, we thought the rebels would distribute them among people, but my friend, who is a truck driver at the refinery, said that the trucks have been hit by repeated air strikes.Civilians in Baiji claim the air strikes flattened houses killing all civilian occupants.  9.30am BST Maliki has confirmed that Syrian planes carried out those cross border air strikes, according to the BBC.Iraqi PM Maliki tells BBC that Syrian planes bombed jihadists on border crossing, welcomes any attack on Isis group http://t.co/zJlsD3FlSEA BBC World Service bulletin reported Maliki saying that he did not request the air raids but welcomed any attack on Isis. Updated at 9.32am BST 9.16am BST The BBC has secured an interview with Iraq's beleaguered prime minister Nouri al-Maliki. There's no word yet on what he said, but we'll keep you posted.#Iraq's Prime Minister Nouri Maliki gives exclusive interview to @BBCArabic in Baghdad pic.twitter.com/PR0QN6hrfn via @rcolebourn 8.52am BST  Iraq has started the process of forming a new government by next week's deadline. Reuters reports: Iraq's presidency issued a decree on Thursday for a parliament session on 1 July.Vice President Khodair al-Khozaei, who is acting president and a close ally of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, announced the session would be held. Three months after elections, a chorus of Iraqi and international voices have called for the government formation process to be started.  8.45am BST The White House has warned Syria to stay out of Iraq, after giving credence to reports that Syrian war planes carried out the attacks on al-Qaim. Spokesman Joshua Earnest said the administration has “no reason to dispute” the reports of Syrian airstrikes in Iraq, McClatchy reports. It quotes Obaman's spokesman as saying: Earnest saying: The solution to the threat confronting Iraq is not the intervention of the Assad regime. In fact, it’s the Assad regime and the terrible violence they perpetrated against their own people that allowed (Isis) to thrive in the first place.McClatchy also notes that Syrian opposition activists claimed the al-Qaim strikes missed the extremists’ main bases and killed 30 civilians. It quotes Abu al Walid, an opposition activist in insurgent controlled eastern Syrian town of Raqqa as Assad “is giving a hand to his ally, Maliki".  8.13am BST Syria's state news agency has dismissed claims that Syrian war planes carried out cross border raids in the Iraqi town of al-Qaim.It said: A Syrian media source refuted allegations made by malicious media outlets who claimed that the Syrian air force shelled area within the borders of Iraq, asserting that these reports are completely baseless.Several news reports by media outlets who continue to cover up for terrorist groups in Syria had reported that the Syrian air force targeted sites in the town of al-Qai’m near the Iraq-Syrian borders. 7.50am BST The details about cross border air raids by Syrian forces are sketchy. Iraq's military initially said it carried out the strikes against militants in the town of al-Qaim on Tuesday. Locals in the area and security officials in western Anbar province accused Syria of carrying out the air raid. But western security officials told Reuters it was still unclear which government was responsible. Later US officials and a senior Iraqi military official confirmed to AP that Syrian war planes carried out the raid. The BBC says Damascus has denied involvement. Video footage from al-Qaim claims to show the aftermath of the raid. Updated at 8.04am BST 7.31am BST Welcome to live coverage of the continuing crisis in Iraq. Here's a roundup of the latest developments: