Five years ago to the day, on March 13 2003, just a week before the invasion of Iraq, Lord Goldsmith the attorney general, had a meeting with Lord Falconer and Baroness Morgan, two of Tony Blair's closest political allies, about the legality of a military attack. The day before, Admiral Sir Michael Boyce, the chief of the defence staff, had expressed concern about the equivocal advice Goldsmith had earlier provided.The attorney had warned that the government and its military commanders could be hauled before a domestic or international criminal court and might lose. Most British international lawyers appeared to agree.However, by March 17, in the wake of Boyce's concern, Blair insisted that it was indeed, his "unequivocal" view that Iraq was in breach of its UN obligations. Goldsmith passed on the prime minister's message to Boyce and then assured the cabinet that an invasion was quite legal, after all.Robin Cook resigned from the cabinet. Elizabeth Wilmshurst, deputy chief legal adviser at the Foreign Office, resigned, too. Without a new UN resolution, the planned invasion amounted to "the crime of aggression", she said.Five years later, whether the invasion was lawful or not may seem academic. Neither Blair nor Bush nor Rumsfeld is likely to be indicted for war crimes. However, their unilateral decision to invade undermined the authority of the UN. It has yet to recover. Perhaps it never will.Yet the UN and the rule of law are not the only casualties of the war - apart, that is, from the death and destruction which followed in Iraq. There is a strong case to be made that those who put the soldiers there, in Washington and London, are in breach of the legal obligations imposed on occupying powers by international agreements, notably the Geneva Conventions.The decision has also undermined other international institutions, including Nato, making it far more difficult to reach a consensus on how to cope with crises elsewhere. The chronic crisis of Afghanistan is symptomatic.The author will blog every day for the next week, running up to the fifth anniversary of the war on March 20, on the legacy of Iraq from the British perspective. For more Cif blogs about Iraq's reckoning, click here.