While the west has at times been divided in its evaluation of the threat posed by Iran's nuclear programme, in Israel the feeling is unambiguous.Israelis believe the threat is best exemplified by Iran's hardline president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who has repeatedly expressed his contempt for their country since taking office in 2005.Ahmadinejad has described the Holocaust as a myth and most famously, in 2006, was reported as saying he wanted to see Israel "wiped off the map". There were claims that the quote was inaccurate but either way he has shown little love towards Israel and has used threats towards the country to try to boost his popularity among Muslims angry at perceived injustices inflicted on the Palestinians.Only yesterday, in New York for the UN general assembly, Ahmadinejad claimed that "a small but deceitful minority of Zionists are playing with the American public", comments aimed at the forthcoming US election. Israel's geographical proximity to Iran and the fact that it is so resented by the Muslim world – who Ahmadinejad still looks to for support despite most leaders' dislike of him - coupled with the military might of the US make Israel a much more likely target than America. And for the Israelis, the idea of Ahmadinejad with his finger on a nuclear button is unthinkable.After a US intelligence report published at the end of 2007 said Tehran's nuclear weapons programme had been on hold since 2003, Israel's prime minister, Ehud Olmert, was quick to indicate that he did not agree, saying that "all options are on the table". Israel is said to believe that Iran could possess a nuclear bomb as soon as 2010. Israeli officials were reportedly unhappy when the US announced plans to station diplomats in Iran for the first time since 1979, fearing a softening of Washington's stance towards Tehran. And when Olmert announced a series of initiatives designed at ending long-running conflicts with Lebanon, Syria and Hamas earlier this year, Iran was conspicuous by its absence. What is more, the talks with Syria were seen as a deliberate attempt to isolate Iran from the one Middle East country it could truly call an ally. The world may have shuddered when Israel's deputy prime minister, Shaul Mofaz, said in June that a strike on Iran's nuclear sites would be "unavoidable" if Tehran refused to halt its alleged weapons programmes, but within Israel the reaction was more muted. Mofaz himself was unrepentant, even going so far as to repeat the threat.While Olmert publicly disassociated himself from the comments – Israel's relationship with the US dictated that nothing less would be acceptable - he later assured the Israeli public: "Iran will not be nuclear."Olmert's successor, Tzipi Livni, has also talked tough on Iran but the scale of her rhetoric has not touched that of Mofaz. The Israeli public's concerns were perhaps reflected by the fact that Mofaz – who had been viewed as an outsider – in the end only lost the election to be Kadima's new leader to Livni by a whisker.