Jerusalem is permanently festooned with thousands of Israeli flags; they hang from lampposts, apartment windows, shop-fronts and any other setting where their nationalistic message can best be delivered to those passing by. It's a case of thinking those that flaunt them do protest too much, as though they are so uncertain in their identity that they drown any doubt under a sea of blue and white cloth.Drive out into the countryside, and the locals are far more restrained in their patriotism. Not for them the urge to drape their national colours from every available surface; rather they are either self-assured enough to not require such flamboyant gestures or – as with the girl I met on the weekend – their nationality comes a long way down the list of what makes them who they are.Carmel, who spent many of her formative years ensconced in Kibbutz Merhavia, a Shomer Hatzair – bastion of socialist ideology, has now reached a point where she "couldn't care less" about the make-up of the state of Israel. "I'm not Zionist", she explained, "but at the same time I'm not anti-Zionist either. It is acceptable to be neither", she continued. "It's the death of idealism; and it's the same with a huge number of my generation across the country." Despite being encouraged to play an active role in leftwing campaigning during her youth, Carmel freely admits that she was inspired more by her peers than by any burning desire to effect change in her homeland, hence her reluctance to continue her activism upon leaving the kibbutz. "It's not 'cool' to be leftwing anymore", she said. "It used to be about being macho, being in the best army units, and working the land." Now, however, "people want out of the army, and if you are a farmer on a kibbutz, everyone calls you a sucker and says 'go and work in the stockmarket'". Despite being born and raised in the kibbutz movement, her parents left Merhavia "at the first opportunity, and never looked back". The kibbutz movement, which has died a slow death over recent years, "failed because it ate itself", according to Carmel.It's an inhuman ideology; human nature is to want more, and to never be satisfied with what you have. Which is why we have phrases like 'the sky's the limit' and 'the grass is always greener on the other side'. If you live on a kibbutz near to a city and you see someone your age driving a new Audi, you get frustrated and think 'why shouldn't I have that too?'.After serving as a commander in the Israel Defence Forces, Carmel entered the business world. "Capitalism is much easier to identify with [than socialism and leftwing politics]", she said. Her pulling away from her childhood encoding has left her cynical about the Israeli left's future prospects. "The left wing here is finished, especially after the kibbutz movement collapsed; whereas the right wing continues to thrive on hatred and religious indoctrination".Religion is to blame for much of the region's woes, according to Carmel, who feels no spiritual connection whatsoever to the land of Israel. "The religious right wing dwells on the past, [to the point that] they're willing to sacrifice their future to preserve a 2000-year-old tradition", she said. "I understand why we don't give up the Golan Heights, as it's strategically important and necessary for our security, but the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem? If it gives us trouble, then fighting for it is a stupid idea." She can't see things changing for the better in the near future either. "It'll be exactly the same in 20 years: the occupation will continue, there'll still be terror attacks, and people will still be scared of each other. I don't talk about politics anymore with my friends; we've become cynical and numb like no other country has." Instead of a passionate political movement emerging from within Israeli society, Carmel expects the political climate to continue being dictated by American policy. "We just do what the US says", she said. "They're our mum and dad, and we're not stupid – we don't want our inheritance cut off. If their government goes to the right, so will we; if they go left, we'll follow also. It's got nothing to do with what Israelis think." On the face of it, her assessment of the state of play seems pretty pessimistic, at least in terms of rallying support for change from within. However, Israelis' apathy and their desire to embrace capitalism like their peers in the west could well prove fertile ground for a rejection of ultra-nationalism and continued conflict with the Palestinians.After all, as Carmel put it, "the idea of a Jewish state [exclusively] for Jewish people is the exact opposite of capitalism. In the rest of the world, people care about the price of goods, not who made them. Here, some people are happy to pay extra, just because the products were made in the settlements and they want to support their ideology." As more and more young Israelis reject the continued expense of propping up the settlement enterprise – with all of the embedded security expense, the state subsidies provided to the settlers, and so on, the more difficult it will be to justify their continued existence. The only way out of the impasse is to sideline those for whom religious and nationalist fervour has replaced all other emotions and principles, and quick. If socialism's death allows capitalism to flourish in its stead, then – whilst it may appear unpalatable to the old guard of Israeli politics – at least it might bear unexpected fruit in terms of bringing peace with the Palestinians.