 8.36am BST Welcome to Middle East Live.We have changed the format of this blog. It is now primarily a forum for readers to share links and offer commentary on developments. Please post your comments below on any of the day's stories from the Middle East.Here's a roundup of the main developments:• Israeli troops shot at a target across the Syrian frontier on Tuesday in response to gunfire that struck its forces in the Golan Heights, the Israeli military said. A statement said a military vehicle was damaged by shots fired from Syria but that there were no injuries. It said that soldiers "returned precise fire".Update: Shots were fired from #Syria at an #IDF patrol overnight. IDF forces returned fire, reporting a direct hit on source of the attack.• Britain is seeking to amend the EU arms embargo on Syria to press Bashar al-Assad into holding peace talks with the rebels because the escalating conflict is threatening a regional "catastrophe", William Hague warned on Monday. The foreign secretary said the case for amending the embargo was "compelling". Weapons would be supplied only "under carefully controlled circumstances" and with clear commitments from the opposition, he told MPs.• Syrian and Hezbollah troops have pushed deep into the strategic border town of Qusair after a ferocious artillery and mortar blitz that is thought to have killed more than 50 residents and laid bare the Lebanese militia's direct support for the Assad regime. The battle for the town, which lies at a crucial junction between Damascus and Homs, is believed to be edging in favour of loyalist forces who had hammered rebel-held areas with overwhelming firepower before launching a much-anticipated advance late on Saturday.• Barack Obama has expressed his concern about Hezbollah's involvement in the siege of Qusair, in a call to Lebanon's president Michel Suleiman. In a statement the White House said: "President Obama stressed his concern about Hezbollah's active and growing role in Syria, fighting on behalf of the Assad regime, which is counter to the Lebanese government’s policies."• Next month's peace conference in Geneva represents Syria first "sliver of hope" for months, so it is "crucial that all sides treat it properly as a genuine chance for change", argues Jonathan Steele. Fairly early in the process there needs to be a coalition government of national unity that includes ministers from the opposition as well as from the current regime, as last year's guidelines spelt out. This will take political courage on all sides, since al-Qaida and the other fundamentalists who have joined the fight are likely to denounce rebels who take part as collaborationists, or even assassinate them. The hardliners are in Syria for the long haul and even if the main opposition groups were to make a peace agreement, Syria is probably doomed to face a long-term armed insurgency in parts of the country, as well as regular suicide bombings in its main cities, for years to come. The precedent of today's Iraq is all too likely to affect Syria too.• The UK has granted arms export licences to Saudi Arabia worth almost £4bn over the past four years despite growing fears about the human rights record in the kingdom during the Arab spring, new figures show. Last year the government approved licences worth £112m for 209 items, including crowd control ammunition grenades, components for military aircraft and combat vehicles, and components for electronic warfare.• A feminist activist who scandalised the country by posting topless photos of herself online has been arrested and may be charged for conducting "provocative acts" at a religious centre where police prevented hardline Islamists from holding their annual conference, the interior ministry has said. Amina Tyler, 19, describes herself as a member of the Ukrainian feminist group Femen, which uses nudity in protests. On Sunday she went to the central Tunisian city of Kairouan, where police prevented the hardline Ansar al-Shariah group from holding a conference after it was deemed a threat to public order.• A wave of attacks killed at least 86 people in Shia and Sunni areas of Iraq on Monday, pushing the death toll over the past week to more than 230 and extending one of the most sustained bouts of sectarian violence the country has seen in years. The worst of the violence took place in Baghdad, where 10 car bombs ripped through open-air markets and other areas of Shia neighbourhoods, killing at least 48 people and wounding more than 150, police officials said.• US secretary of state John Kerry arrives in the Holy Land this week on his fourth visit in two months amid deepening scepticism on all sides about his chances of breathing life back into the moribund peace process. The British foreign secretary William Hague will join the Middle East diplomatic merry-go-round this week, with a visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories beginning on Thursday.Updated at 11.43am BST