In the wake of the devastating earthquake of 1927, the early Zionist pioneers were quick to come to the aid of the local Arab community, regardless of the political schism between the two camps. Millionaire Nathan Straus sent an unsolicited $5,000 to the residents of Nablus, where scores of homes had been levelled, while the impoverished Jews of Tel Aviv immediately despatched three truckloads of food aid to the battered city. "This is the way we are," noted Chaim Shalom Halevi in a letter to his family in the Diaspora, referring to the millennia-old Jewish adherence to the commandment "love thy neighbour as thyself".As has been proved throughout the build-up to the state of Israel and in the decades since its inception, the dominant strand of Zionism does not make a comfortable bedfellow with core Jewish values, thanks to the callous way in which all those frozen between the headlights of the Zionist juggernaut are treated. Nationalism has trumped religious values to the point (seemingly) of no return, and as every year passes, the malaise seeps deeper into the collective Israeli psyche. In order to challenge the attitudes prevalent in the camp of mainstream Zionism, the best way forward is to search for the chink in the armour – the soft underbelly where can be found those whose politics and ideologies are not fully formed, and who are open to considering a new way of thinking in relation to Israel and Zionism.To that end, the work undertaken by a growing number of Jewish youth movements could play a pivotal role in reinventing the Zionist wheel among the next generation of Israeli and diaspora young adults. Organisations such as Sedaka Reut spawn the Hadash voters of tomorrow; NGOs like Israel Activists foment changing attitudes among the youth leaders of today. The cracks are already starting to appear among dyed-in-the-wool Zionist movements, which for years have followed a well-trodden, conservative path of indoctrinating future immigrants to Israel. Instead of simply educating their charges in a vacuum devoid of non-Jews, and turning a blind eye to the harsh realities of the Israel/Palestine conflict, the groups of gap-year students are steered towards tackling the situation head-on, and hands-on. Participants from Noam have just spent three months volunteering in Tel Aviv's poorest neighbourhoods, spending time working with hard-up Jewish, Arab and migrant worker communities in dire need of assistance. During that time, several ventured into the West Bank to assist Rabbis for Human Rights in their work with Palestinian farmers, or visited Israeli-Arab cities to see for themselves the corrosive effects of decades of the Zionist project. The impact of such experiences will have lifelong ramifications for many of the students, and could well be the beginning of a sea change in diaspora Jewish thinking towards the I/P imbroglio. "[This new scheme] is the start of a move away from traditional gap-year programmes," says Nat Kochan, who spent 12 weeks working with the thousands-strong community of African refugees in south Tel Aviv. "There needs to be this move, in order to open people's eyes to more than the standard Israel experience," he continues. "I've changed my views since I've started reading about the situation and talking to people a lot more. There was suddenly a click in my head, and the 'Jewish-majority state' didn't make sense any more; the idea that a Jew was seen as more valuable than anyone else, and the fact that people believed in – and acted for – that cause".He, along with another Noamnik, Shoshana Eilon, produced a haunting 20-minute video documentary about life for those refugees who managed to make the perilous flight from persecution in Africa to Israel. While Israel has proved far more hospitable than many other nations to those fleeing the oppression of their home countries, there is still a great deal of antipathy and animosity meted out to the refugees, both at official and street level – which the two filmmakers make crystal clear in their work. The footage is interspersed with Biblical quotes which caustically highlight the way in which the Jewish state falls short of living up to the Jewish values on which it was ostensibly founded: "The stranger that dwells among you shall be as one born among you ... for you were strangers in the land of Egypt." As one interviewee from the Ivory Coast notes in the film, "Most Israelis were refugees once: it's crazy to see how they treat other refugees." His comment can, of course, be extrapolated far beyond the plight of those who have made it into Israel proper; the limbo in which millions of Palestinian refugees are forced to exist is a problem which will not simply disappear, no matter how hard the more ardent Zionist factions try to sweep the issue under the carpet. Through the kind of work that Nat and Shoshana have undertaken, the gauntlet is thrown down to the previously-set-in-stone way of viewing Israeli politics, and a fierce challenge issued to the way of thinking that demands Israel be first and foremost a Jewish protectorate set up simply to serve the demands of one ethnic group. If honestly addressed, the questions raised can only lead to a more tolerant and inclusive way of thinking, and – ultimately – a realisation that the best way forward for all peoples dwelling here is an egalitarian and intertwined approach to coexistence. Sixty years of acquiescence to the old guard has done nothing to safeguard the Jewish residents of Israel, let alone the Muslims, Christians and others forced to make way for the incoming waves of olim. However, with an open-minded and fresh approach to the grim realities of life in the Holy Land, as well as a return to core Jewish values rather than a reliance on nationalism-infused sectarian ideology, there is a glimmer of light shining through the gloom. It is up to the youth leaders of today to capitalise upon that fact, if ever the true teachings of our religion are to prevail over the current cross-eyed way of approaching the land of Israel and all its inhabitants.A book of Seth Freedman's columns is now available. Can I bring my Own Gun? is available to Guardian readers for £6.99 (RRP £8.99)