Israel and Germany agreed today on a new and closer strategic relationship with agreements on joint investments and defence cooperation during a visit to Jerusalem by Chancellor Angela Merkel.Under the new agreement, the two governments will meet annually, a relationship that cements Germany's role as one of Israel's strongest allies in Europe and its second-largest trading partner, after the US.Merkel, on her third visit to Israel as chancellor, brought with her seven members of her cabinet who met jointly with the Israeli cabinet.She laid a wreath at Yad Vashem, the official Holocaust memorial in Jerusalem, and both sides made careful references to the Nazi legacy. The text of their bilateral agreement spoke of "Germany's awareness of its historic responsibility towards Israel" and said Merkel reiterated"Germany's responsibility for past history and for the Shoah," using the Hebrew word generally reserved for the Holocaust."What is important is that we are not forgetting anything," said Israeli prime minister Ehud Olmert, "but we are also not giving up the opportunity and the obligation to act together to ensure a better future for our peoples, the region and the whole world."Yet Merkel's visit has still brought some controversy in a country where some still carry a bitter opposition to Germany. Merkel will tomorrow address the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, in German and some rightwing MPs have insisted they will walk out in protest.The Israeli government made a particular concession to allow Merkel to become the first head of government to speak to the parliament, an honour usually reserved only for heads of state or monarchs.The visit was to mark the 60th anniversary later this year of Israel's creation. Merkel will not meet Palestinian leaders on this trip, although her government has agreed to host a joint Israeli-Palestinian conference later in the year to encourage the so-far lacklustre peace process.At a joint press conference with the German chancellor, Olmert spoke defiantly about expanding settlements in east Jerusalem. "We have announced that there will be places where there will be additional building. These are places that will remain with Israel in any constellation, and this includes first and foremost Jerusalem, and everyone knows it." He specifically mentioned Har Homa, a settlement where new housing tenders have been announced even since the renewal of the peace process at Annapolis last autumn.Under the current process, which relies on the US road map, Israel has to freeze all settlement activity and dismantle outposts built since March 2001. Israel says it does not believe the requirements apply to east Jerusalem, even though the Palestinians claim east Jerusalem as the capital of their future state. However, Olmert also said peace talks with the Palestinians would continue.A Palestinian polling organisation said today that support for Hamas had increased in the past three months while that for Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president engaged in the peace talks, had dropped. The Palestinian Centre for Policy and Survey Research put support for Hamas at 35% against 31% in December. Fatah, led by Abbas, was at 42%. If a presidential election were to be held now, Abbas would tie with Ismail Haniyeh, the ousted Hamas prime minister, it said.