Dani Dayan of the Yesha Council attempts to recruit President Jimmy Carter to the cause of a restored "Judea and Samaria" (We're on solid moral ground, 8 June) on the strength of his being, in 2009, favourably "shocked … by the reality on the ground" of the West Bank Jewish settlement bloc of Gush Etzion, and of his personally rejecting the idea of its ever becoming part of "a Palestinian territory".In his Trip Report of 17 June, Carter in fact writes: "At Kerev Foundation, Yossi Beilin explained the status of the Geneva Initiative annexes (basic proposals unchanged), and then we drove to the Gush Etzion settlement south of Jerusalem. This is one of the settlements that, under the Geneva Initiative, would be within the 2% of Palestine to be swapped to Israel". Carter, in short, merely cites a proposal incorporated in the 2003 accord (with Dr Beilin as a signatory) and its supplementary annexes of 2009 – Gush Etzion being a special case, its Jewish character dating back to the last years of the British Mandate.Failing to offer that necessary context, Dayan also omits to mention how, watching a Netanyahu speech later in the same day, Carter finds himself "appalled by his introduction of numerous obstacles to peace, some of them insurmountable" – no sharing of Jerusalem, no settlement freeze, Palestine demilitarisation and open airspace, and the removal of Hamas.But if the ex-president really has become, in Dayan's words, a "notable exception" to the allegedly ignorant denizens of "the international diplomatic high echelons" and their opposition to the continuing occupation of the West Bank, presumably we can await a radically revised version of his 2006 book, Palestine: Peace Not Apartheid?William MathewNorwich• Dani Dayan's article turns logic on its head and is an example of the old technique of hoping that if you say something often enough, in this case "solid moral ground" (five times) it will be believed. The settlements are a blatant – and under international law illegal – occupation of land belonging to someone else. Apparently, according to Dayan, the fact that over half a million live there makes them legal. Apparently looking into the eyes and faces of settlers would make the settlements legal.Apparently the right of Jews to live in certain places is inalienable because they are cradles of Jewish civilisation. On this argument there would have to be hundreds of population exchanges throughout the world – many of claimants who occupied lands far more recently than Jews occupied Palestine.Joseph CockerLeominster• I expect that Jews and non-Jews alike will take issue with the morality of Dani Dayan's statement that "the right of Jews to live in Shiloh, Hebron or Beth El is inalienable". However, I am more interested in the last paragraph. What does Mr Dayan have in mind when he says "the time has come to invest in new innovative paths to peace that unite people through acts of mutual respect"?If he rejects a two-state solution, is he thinking of a new Israeli/Palestinian superstate or some sort of equal federation? By "acts of mutual respect" does he mean that the two peoples would live together in complete equality with all the peoples in the region having unfettered rights to live, work and pray wherever they choose? Perhaps you could give him more space in your paper or in your correspondence columns to elaborate on this. Who knows, we may be on the verge of a breakthrough that Blair and others have "flown over". Jeremy SolnickWalberswick, Suffolk• Dani Dayan is typical of Israelis who tell Palestinians why the Jews are justified in occupying the West Bank with far less justification for their claims than the millions of Palestinians whose families, like mine, lived continuously in Palestine for hundreds if not thousands of years before being expelled by Jewish armies in 1948.Dayan himself was born in Argentina and is proudly secular and has no religious beliefs. But this doesn't stop him rolling out mytho-religious arguments for occupying the West Bank. Most modern Israelis are, in historical terms, recent immigrants from the west, colonisers who plotted to take over a land whose inhabitants had all the rights of any indigenous population. Karl SabbaghNewbold on Stour, Warwickshire