Israel today freed a convicted Hizbullah spy and sent him back to Lebanon, while Hizbullah turned over the remains of what it said were dead Israeli soldiersThe move could be the preliminary stage of a larger prisoner exchange between the bitter enemies. Israeli authorities released Nasim Nisr early today after he completed a six-year sentence for espionage, driving him from a prison in central Israel to the northern Rosh Hanikra crossing.Cameramen surrounded the white van Nisr was sitting in as a blue gate swung open to allow him through the frontier. A Hizbullah official said the militant group handed over a brown box containing what it said were the remains of Israeli soldiers killed in the month-long Lebanon war in 2006. An Israeli security official confirmed that the remains were being transferred back to Israel. He said Hizbullah had agreed to turn over the remains as a "gesture" and the move was not coordinated with Israel.  Helge Kvam, a Red Cross spokesman in Jerusalem, called Hizbullah's move a "complete surprise." Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah predicted last month that Israel will release prisoners it is holding "very soon," setting off speculation that a major swap was in the works. Israel is believed to be holding seven Hizbullah members in its prisons, while Hizbullah has been holding two Israeli soldiers it captured in a 2006 cross-border raid that sparked that year's month-long war. The soldiers are believed to have been badly wounded, and Hizbullah has offered no proof that they are still alive. Nisr, 39, was born in Lebanon to a Jewish Lebanese mother and a Shia Muslim father. Because of his Jewish ancestry, he later moved to Israel and became a citizen, and married twice. He has a 10-year-old son from his first wife and two daughters, aged 10 and 7, from his current wife. Nisr was "nervous but happy," said his lawyer, Smadar Ben-Natan. "I certainly hope that this heralds a prisoner swap deal in the near future," said Ben-Natan, who represents two of the Lebanese prisoners still held by Israel.