Next week's annual National Policy Conference of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (Aipac) is shaping up to be another truly dramatic moment of US political theater.US Secretary of State John Kerry, who has impressed Israelis and Palestinians alike with his tireless and determined efforts to broker a Mideast peace agreement, will come face-to-face with Aipac, whose leaders and supporters have passionately opposed Barack Obama's Iran policy but have so far shown little visible enthusiasm for Kerry's Israel-Palestine initiative.Kerry will no doubt try to persuade a skeptical (and possibly heated) audience why the Obama administration's attempt to resolve the Iranian nuclear crisis diplomatically will also strengthen Israel's security. But the meat of Kerry's address will likely be an appeal to the 14,000 delegates to get behind his Israel-Palestine peace initiative by joining what he has called a "great constituency for peace". Today, in an interview with MSNBC's Andrea Mitchell, he offered a bit of a preview:It's a very complicated, very difficult issue for a lot of people. It's so emotional - so deep, historically and culturally - that I do not get agitated. I just don't let those things get in the way. I believe, and President Obama believes, that Israel and the region and the Palestinians will all be served by having peace. ... And we will meet our obligations and our commitments to Israel with respect to security, even as we try to nudge this process forward to end what has been too many years of conflict.It's more than a nudge, though: this moment could hardly be more decisive. In the next few weeks, Kerry is likely to formally present a "framework" for Israeli-Palestinian peace treaty that will lay out, in unprecedented detail, the principles along which the United States expects the parties to end their conflict. These principles, some of which have been leaked in advance, include the establishment of a Palestinian state on the vast majority of the West Bank. Its eastern border will be the Jordan River. Its western border will be based on the pre-1967 line between Israel and Jordan.According to US officials, the line would be drawn so that 75 to 80% of Israeli settlers could remain in their homes. The Palestinians would get an equal amount of land in exchange. The United States has also laid out detailed security arrangements to deal with any new threats to Israel that could arise as a result of withdrawing from the West Bank.It seems like an ideal agreement for Israel, but already there have been howls of outrage on the Israeli political right, including some in Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's own Likud Party who oppose any Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank. But it should be noted that they represent a relatively small minority in the Israeli public while a clear majority in the Knesset, the Israeli parliament, is on record as backing a two-state solution. And Kerry, in the NBC interview, made it clear: We're going to continue to press forward, notwithstanding these occasional comments from one quarter or another, which I don't just let get in the way of the process.No doubt, there are opponents of a two-state solution within the ranks of Aipac as well, although the organization is formally on record as supporting a two-state solution. While Kerry is likely to be heard politely by most in his audience, it will be interesting to see how enthusiastically he is applauded, especially after the recent disagreement between Aipac and the administration over Iran.Aipac lobbied the Senate to pass legislation that would have imposed new sanctions on Iran if the current negotiations failed to produce an agreement that completely dismantled Iran's nuclear program, including its ability to continue low-level uranium enrichment for civilian uses. But sponsors of the resolution, in the face of opposition from the administration and a wide coalition of mostly progressive organizations, failed to muster sufficient momentum to get it to the floor of the Senate and the legislation is now, to all intents and purposes, on ice.In an opinion piece published over the weekend in the New York Times, Aipac president Michael Kassen and board chairman Lee Rosenberg signaled they intended to fight on. Arguing for a strong congressional role in US foreign policy, they urged Congress to "outline for Iran the acceptable terms of a final accord. This must include, at a minimum, the dismantling of its nuclear program, so that Iran has neither a uranium nor a plutonium pathway to a nuclear weapon".The authors, who seemed to advocate that Congress override the president's Iran policy, made no mention of the Israel-Palestine issue or Kerry's efforts.Aipac has a unique role in American Jewish life. It remains the largest, richest and most powerful institution within the community. Aipac has done much to strengthen the US-Israel relationship over decades of its existence. Now, it can provide another great service – by giving Kerry the wholehearted support he is asking for.If Aipac were to get enthusiastically behind Kerry's peace initiative, it could send a powerful message. And if 14,000 pro-Israel activists were to deliver that message in person to their elected representatives, Democrats and Republicans would take serious note. That could be a game-changer.Polls show that more than 80% of American Jews back US leadership toward a two-state solution. Our community passionately wants to see the Israeli-Palestinian conflict finally settled. Many of us are looking to our communal leaders, especially our best-known organization, to give voice to that desire.