From 1948 to 1973, Major General Israel "Talik" Tal, who has died aged 85, created and commanded the fledgling tank corps of the Israeli army – the Israel Defense Forces – establishing it as the principal arm of the IDF and primary safeguard of Israeli military security. Best known for his design of the Merkava (Chariot) tank, Tal fought in and won many critical battles in the first 25 years of Israel's creation, and is widely acknowledged as the main architect of the highly successful armoured campaign of the six-day war of 1967.Tal was raised in Moshav Be'er Tuvia, then in the British Mandate for Palestine. His military career started when, at the age of 17, he joined the Jewish Brigade, a British army unit formed from Jews living in Palestine, and fought as a machine gunner in North Africa and Italy. After the Jewish Brigade was disbanded in 1946, Tal returned to Palestine and served in the Haganah, the militia formed as a precursor to the IDF. During the 1948 war Tal rose to the rank of platoon commander and fought against Jordanian and Egyptian forces.Following the success of Israeli tanks in the 1956 war against Egypt, in which Tal commanded the 10th Infantry Brigade, the IDF sought to move the use of armour from a secondary role in support of the infantry to the role of the main fighting component of the IDF. Tal, already an exponent of tank warfare, was transferred to the Tank Corps, assuming command in 1964. It was here that his military theories and strategies were to reach their pinnacle. His emphasis on "pure tank" doctrine placed the use of tanks at the heart of an offensive, aggressive and mobile IDF, strategies that were to lead directly to the dramatic victory of 1967.The standardisation of training and emphasis on accurate long-range gunnery meant that Israeli tanks were capable of defeating the enemy when outnumbered and ostensibly outgunned by more modern tanks which, despite better firepower and protection, had less well trained crews. His tank doctrine, initially vindicated during skirmishes with Syrian armour during the 1964 "war over water", emphasised the importance of quality over quantity, and reinforced the importance of crew survivability. Trained tank crews were hard to replace, and long-range gunnery allowed them to destroy their opposition before the enemy could make superior numbers count. Despite his reputation as a disciplinarian, Tal developed a force structure that emphasised the primacy of small units and sufficient informality in command to allow the officer on the ground to use local initiative to exploit situations in the quickest way possible.It was during the six-day war that Tal's operational doctrine and leadership was most successful. Tal's division fought in Gaza and northern Sinai, advancing along the Mediterranean coast from Rafah into Gaza to the east and westwards through El Arish to the eastern bank of the Suez canal in just three days. Greatly assisted by air superiority, Israeli land forces rapidly gained and held tactical surprise, preventing the Egyptian forces from being able to reorganise and counter penetrations of their front lines, which led to a collapse of morale in the Egyptian army. It lost some 80% of its equipment, including an estimated 800 tanks, abandoned in the face of the Israeli advance.Such was the extent of the victory that Israeli tank forces saw a net gain of some 100 tanks. But Tal's "pure tank" doctrine was to sow the seeds of future problems.In the runup to the 1973 war, Tal was one of a few officers who believed that an attack was imminent, and his failure to pursue his conviction and insist that a third regular armoured division be transferred to the Sinai caused him considerable remorse afterwards. When fighting broke out, Tal was deputy chief of staff, in which role he clashed with many of his colleagues, some of whom claim he was overly pessimistic in the early hours of the war. Others insist, however, that Tal's call for a 40km retreat along the Suez front was a move calculated to allow time for Israel's reserve forces to arrive at the battle, and fitted well with his opinion that a victorious war required the manoeuvre of large armoured forces.Tal clashed with his superiors in the aftermath of the war, refusing the then defence minister Moshe Dayan's and chief of staff David Elazar's order to continue the attack on the Egyptian 3rd Army, which was cut off on the eastern bank of the Suez Canal, despite the signature of a ceasefire. Dayan's insistence stemmed from his desire, shared in the IDF command, to eradicate the last offensive formation in the Egyptian army, and Tal's refusal, which he cited for moral reasons, marked the end of his chances of becoming chief of staff, effectively ending his career.After retiring from the army in 1974, Tal joined the defence ministry and continued with his work on the design of a new tank, which eventually became the Merkava. It entered service with the IDF in the 1980s and remains, in an upgraded version, its main tank. Conceived with close attention to detail according to Tal's principles, it was developed with the survivability of the crew foremost in mind. Unusually the engine is front-mounted, so that when the vehicle is hit, it may lose its engine, but the driver, who sits behind, is shielded. Advanced composite materials are used on its heavily sloped armour. The Merkava even features a small mortar in the middle of the turret to fire smoke rounds, and a small cabin in the rear of the tank for either an infantry dismount section, extra ammunition or stretchers for wounded troops. Widely regarded as one of the most effective tanks of its generation, it has a combat record second to none.The major general rejoined the army to oversee the implementation of a field forces command, but his pure tank doctrine had outlived its effectiveness, since the advent of anti-tank missiles made the use of supporting infantry and artillery increasingly important, and his influence on strategy, while still considerable, declined.Weakened by a stroke in 1999, Tal remained frail until his death. He is survived by his wife, Hagit, a son and a daughter.• Israel "Talik" Tal, soldier, military strategist and tank designer, born 13 September 1924; died 8 September 2010