Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, is tired, disappointed and angry. For years it has been his chosen task to present the acceptable face of Palestinian nationalism to the world. He was among the first members of Fatah to call, in 1977, for talks with Israelis. "Because we took up arms," he said in 2012, "we were in a position to put them down with credibility." He was the representative the PLO put forward to sign the first Oslo accord in September 1993.He has been the leading moderate among Palestinian leaders over the years, both serving Yasser Arafat and clashing with him. He succeeded Arafat as president, and since then has seen the chances for a two-state solution with Israel and his own authority among Palestinians both gradually crumble away, the two processes being closely related.His virtues have been patience and a refusal to give up hope, but they have been sorely strained in recent days. The failure of the talks between Israelis and Palestinians which John Kerry, the US secretary of state, pursued with such determination over nine difficult months can hardly have taken Mr Abbas by surprise. It had been widely anticipated. But the barely concealed relish with which the government of Binyamin Netanyahu two weeks ago bade goodbye to negotiations which they had effectively torpedoed by authorising new settlement-building seems to have pushed President Abbas into an uncharacteristically extreme burst of activity, and perhaps into a strategic change of course.He had already revealed his plans for the Palestinian Authority to join a number of international conventions. Then he warned that the dissolution of the authority would have to be considered. Finally he announced a process of reconciliation with Hamas. All are anathema to the Israelis. The conventions gambit is seen by Israel as an attempt to reach a halfway house on international recognition of a Palestinian state. The dissolution of the authority would thrust the whole responsibility for the occupied territories on to the Israeli government. The Palestinian security forces which have protected Israelis would no longer do so, the quasi-legal arrangements which keep the relations between the two peoples within a framework of limited normality would fall away, the foreign aid which essentially pays for the occupation would disappear. There would not only be no partner for peace: there would be no partner for anything. The move to create a unity government with Hamas would bring into the Palestinian leadership figures who do not recognise Israel's right to exist, a possibility the Israeli government regards, or professes to regard, with horror.These decisions reflect a desire to punish the Israelis for, as Mr Abbas sees it with some justification, negotiating in bad faith. He may also think they will shore up his own legitimacy, after years without elections. He might hope that, even at this late stage, with the Kerry-led negotiations all but dead in the water, they could galvanise the Americans and the Israelis into some new effort to rescue them. Or he may be signalling that he sees the future as one in which trying to outflank Israel internationally at the United Nations, campaigning for international boycotts, and demonstrations and calculated obstinacy on the ground in the West Bank, will be more important than restarting talks at which the Israelis never deliver.The decision on Hamas has been a gift to Mr Netanyahu, enabling him to shift the blame for the failure of the talks from Israel to the Palestinians. This gives him a tactical advantage for the moment in his domestic politics and perhaps internationally as well. The Israelis may also think they can live with a boycott or two, and they will not be taking the threat to dissolve the authority very seriously, because it would mean the end of the Palestinian salaries, jobs and interests that the system sustains, not to mention the livelihood and security of ordinary Palestinians. But they may nevertheless come in time to regret the lost opportunity which Mr Abbas represented.