Barack Obama and Benjamin Netanyahu gave speeches earlier this month in Egypt and Israel which used the same vocabulary of peace and hope, but were otherwise about as opposed as two accounts of reality can be. The American president's Middle East is a place where difficulties can be solved and traumas overcome. The Israeli prime minister's Middle East is a region where security depends on giving little, and giving even that only if harsh conditions are met. In particular, while Netanyahu found he could pronounce the phrase "Palestinian state" without gagging, he hedged this miniature verbal concession with a demand that the Palestinians and other Arabs recognise Israel as a Jewish state, and he insisted that Israel had the right to add to settlements in the West Bank to accommodate "natural growth". In other statements he has seemed to suggest that the removal or containment of the Iranian nuclear threat is yet another condition for the creation of a Palestinian state.Iranian disarmament is not Obama's to give, while asking the Arabs for recognition of Israel as a Jewish state moves the bar up from simple recognition of Israel in the full knowledge that this would be a rhetorical step too far for Palestinians and represent a demotion of the status of Israeli Arabs. This is a Netanyahu we know of old, adept at presentation yet obdurate in practice, as he was in power between 1996 and 1999, during which period he comprehensively undermined the Oslo process, blocked peace talks with Syria and alienated King Hussein of Jordan. Above all he expanded settlements, poisoning the relatively warm relations his predecessors Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres had enjoyed with the Palestinians and paving the way for the second intifada. President Obama understands how central the settlements are, which is why he has made it clear that all settlement activity should cease."Natural growth" sounds reasonable but it has been consistently and cynically used in the past to justify a rolling programme of expansion. Odd that we hear of natural growth but never of natural shrinkage, even though some settlers do return to Israel, and more would do so if the subsidies that give them houses half the price of those at home, and help sustain a high birth rate, were to be removed.Israeli defence ministry proposals for many more houses at a settlement north of Ramallah may not have been intended to throw the gauntlet down before Obama, but that could be the effect. The Israeli government says no approval has been given for new houses. It could well be true that the plan was just wending its way through the administrative pipeline like so many settlement programmes before it. But now the scheme is out in the open, the question is whether Israel backs off, in which case Obama will have shown he can bend Netanyahu to his will, or whether it goes ahead.If it were to do so, with this or some later scheme, it is hard to see how Obama could avoid taking action. Merely deploring new settlement activity would be widely, and rightly, seen as a defeat. A model for effective policy is at hand. In 1992 George Bush and his secretary of state James Baker threatened to deny loan guarantees unless settlement activity was halted. The United States gives $2.8bn a year to Israel, and its leverage, if it chooses to use it, is enormous. Whether or not this settlement proposal provokes such a crisis, however, the issue of settlement expansion should not be allowed to obscure the far larger issue of the settlements themselves. It would indeed be a victory for Netanyahu if, in return for freezing a few extra flats, Obama let himself be manoeuvred into accepting that the existing settlements are "facts on the ground" that can never be changed. Settlements can be abandoned, or assigned to the sovereignty of another state, and many of them will have to be if a fair peace is ever to be obtained.