The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, arrived in Israel on Monday with an entourage of about 400 ministers, advisers, security personnel and journalists on a state visit for talks focusing on sanctions against Iran.A fleet of planes from Moscow was met by Israel's Soviet-born foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman. Putin went straight to the coastal city of Netanya to dedicate a memorial to Red Army soldiers in a ceremony attended by his Israeli counterpart, Shimon Peres.Peres spoke of "the bravery of the Red Army that defeated the Nazi forces. Without that victory, it is doubtful whether we would be standing here today".He added: "I am confident that Russia, which defeated fascism, will not allow similar threats today. Not the Iranian threat. Not the bloodshed in Syria."International efforts to halt Iran's nuclear programme will be the main item of discussion during the visit. "We think, in order for sanctions to be effective, they must be implemented by the international community as a whole," an Israeli official said."Russia has a key role to play. We need to get Russia on board in supporting the efforts of the international group negotiating with Iran. Iran must not think it has an escape door with Russia."Russia and China have favoured a less stringent sanction regime against Tehran than one backed by the US and Europe.The crisis in Syria and the results of the Egyptian presidential election are also expected to be discussed."We would like to hear from Russia on how they see things," said the official, adding that Israel was not involved in events in Syria.Following the Netanya commemoration, Putin's schedule included a Jerusalem lunch with the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, and a formal state dinner, hosted by Peres. On Tuesday, Putin and his entourage will meet the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, in Bethlehem.It is Putin's first visit to the Middle East for seven years. Israel's 7.8 million population includes more than a million immigrants from the former Soviet Union and Russian is widely spoken in the towns where they are concentrated.