Italy is tired of playing the ugly duckling in Europe. The time for daredevil tactics and unreliable leadership has gone. Today, Silvio Berlusconi and his coalition appear both less maverick and much more aware of international and European rules. There was a time when the financial markets were very suspicious about the anti-EU approach taken by previous centre-right governments, but no one can deny that the treasury minister Giulio Tremonti is being very careful to avoid increasing Italy's enormous public debt. Moreover, his opinions on how to deal with the financial crisis by working with the rest of the EU are being taken seriously.Berlusconi, after having tried to create a European fund to save struggling banks, successfully persuaded the EU to coordinate its response to the crisis. He also pointed out how important it was to take action on Euribor inter-bank lending rates in order to build banks' confidence. Tremonti 's financial plan promises big results for a small outlay. In fact, not a single euro has yet been allocated to it from the Italian budget. Though he says the government could intervene to bail out struggling banks, Tremonti has merely promised to guarantee bond issues made by banks during 2009 and for the next five years. The Bank of Italy will also exchange portfolio bonds with lower-quality bonds owned by other banks. Italy wants to send a reassuring message to Italian savers: the government is guaranteeing all deposit accounts during 2009, thereby bolstering the interbank fund guarantee. With these steps, Berlusconi and Tremonti have shown their ability to respond quickly to the crisis without leaving the market and the Bank of Italy in limbo.However, Berlusconi is conscious that the most important game is played outside national borders. Right now, at the European Council, he is committed in renegotiating European commission environmental policy. The cuts in CO2 emissions that Europe is demanding risk crippling Italian industrial output.Italy wants Europe to support its own economies as well as ensuring its exports remain competitive. Tremonti has been trying to convince the European Parliament of the need to issue public debt bonds (Eurobonds) to finance big European infrastructure projects. The rest of the Union tends to favour domestic solutions. Italy's willingness to work with other European countries is a new and welcome development.The G8 will meet in Italy next year. The aim of the Italian presidency will be to draw in five emerging economies – South Africa, India, China, Mexico and Brazil – with the aim of rewriting international monetary exchange rules. A new agreement in the Bretton Woods tradition would take into account the rapid globalisation of the last decade. Italy is thinking big inside a new and less bureaucratic Europe. Berlusconi can already count on the support of the majority of Italians. Now he needs to win the trust of the rest of the EU.