Silvio Berlusconi's personal doctor put off a decision on when Italy's prime minister should be released from hospital, saying the 73-year-old's injuries were worse than initially announced.Dr Alberto Zangrillo said the media tycoon had lost half a litre of blood after being hit in the face with a plaster souvenir during an attack on him at a rally in Milan on Sunday night. Zangrillo said although his patient would not need an operation, it would take the prime minister at least 25 days to recover fully from his injuries."The consequences are more serious than we could say [on Sunday] evening," he said after seeing Berlusconi. "I found him shaken, annoyed – as if woken, really out-of-sorts, from a bad dream."Italy's billionaire leader suffered a fractured nose and two broken teeth after being hit by a replica of Milan's famously jagged cathedral, the Duomo, which took place as he mingled with the crowd in the city. He was cut under one eye and his top lip was split in two places.An earlier medical bulletin issued by the San Raffaele hospital in Milan to which Berlusconi was admitted said he was in "persistent" pain and was being given antibiotic and anti-inflammatory drugs. A doctor said he was eating only with difficulty.As Berlusconi began his recovery, there was speculation the attack would complicate Italy's already intensely polarised and febrile politics.A 42 year-old man, Massimo Tartaglia, was arrested and jailed, accused of premeditated assault after the incident. Police said he was found to be carrying a pepper spray.Tartaglia, an electronics technician whose inventions once earned him an interview in Il Giornale, the Berlusconi family's newspaper, was reported to have a 10-year history of mental instability. But his assault came against a background of passionate anti-Berlusconi protest. Tartaglia was tonight reported to have written to the prime minister in hospital to apologise. He said his actions had been "cowardly" and "superficial".Zangrillo said that while still bloodied, Berlusconi had told him: "There is a climate of hatred. I expected this to happen."Claiming to be victimised by leftwing prosecutors and judges, Berlusconi has vowed to overhaul Italy's constitution to curb their independence, leading some Italians to believe he threatens the very foundations of their democracy. On5 December, an estimated 250,000 flocked to a "No Berlusconi Day" in Rome.In the hours after Sunday's attack, several tens of thousands of people signed up to Facebook pages that celebrated Tartaglia as a hero.In a front-page editorial beneath a huge picture of the injured prime minister, Il Giornale said the attack was a first triumph for "an anti-[Berlusconi] hate front".But Antonio Di Pietro, a former magistrate who once prosecuted the prime minister for alleged corruption and now leads a small, stridently anti-Berlusconi party, said Berlusconi had "instigated" the violence by his actions. Di Pietro's words were swiftly disowned by most centre-left politicians, and Pierluigi Bersani, the leader of the biggest opposition group, the Democratic party, visited Berlusconi in hospital.Professor James Walston, of the American University of Rome, said: "The difficulty for the opposition now will be to separate personal sympathy for someone who has had his faced smashed in from institutional antipathy towards what it is Berlusconi stands for." He added: "The attack has had an immediate sympathy-generating effect and it could help his people to bounce legislation through parliament to change the relationship between the judiciary and the executive."Among other questions still to be answered is whether the legendarily image-conscious Berlusconi, who has had a hair transplant and a facelift, would seek to disguise his injuries or flaunt the scars as evidence of the alleged savagery of his opponents.Some commentators speculated that Italy was at risk of slipping back into political violence. Walston said: "Unless the social situation, and particularly the job situation, gets worse I don't think we'll be close. But we are getting closer."