Bond investors on Thursday sent a warning to Italy that it was not yet out of the financial woods.The first auction of longer-term bonds since Italy began feeling the heat from the financial wildfire on the eurozone periphery succeeded in attracting enough buyers. But they demanded far higher returns than had been expected, including an all-time record of 5.9% for holding 15-year paper.As the outcome became known, the stock market briskly reversed course. Having risen 0.3% before the auction, the FTSE MIB index of blue chip shares fell 1.7% before recovering some of the lost ground. Banks and insurance companies – big holders of government debt – took the brunt of the losses.In the bond markets, the premium that investors demanded for holding Italian, rather than safe-haven German, benchmark paper shot back through the 3 percentage point barrier.The warning shot from investors came as members of the upper house of parliament prepared to vote on a four-year austerity budget which the government is hoping to rush through by the weekend. In a further effort to reassure the markets, more deficit-cutting measures have been included in the past 48 hours, including pension cuts and additional health charges. The package also now contains pledges of privatisation and deregulation.Silvio Berlusconi's conservative government has a majority in both houses. But in the lower house, the chamber of deputies, where it has only a slim edge, the prime minister has turned Friday's division into a confidence vote. That means any of his followers considering a rebellion will know it could bring down the government.The opposition is due to vote against the package. But in the national interest it has agreed not to present amendments.The bond auction pushed the gross yield on Italy's five-year treasury bonds to 4.93%, the highest level since June 2008 and a full percentage point above the level at the last offering. But demand exceeded supply by 100% for the five-year bonds, and by 50% for the 15-year bonds.