Sunday morning and I'm driving my son to Bologna airport for his flight to Valencia. I drop him at departures and head for a car park. A car draws along side, the driver waves at me. I put my window down and he greets me by name. I look at him blankly. He laughs and suggests we pull in. I nod and have no sooner turned off the engine than he's there leaning with both hands on my door grinning through the open window: "Don't you remember me?" Not really.He says my name again and cocks his head in various poses to help jog my memory. I apologise. He can't believe I don't remember him. "Where were you in 2007-8?" he proffers. I tell him, he nods. "And what were you doing?" He congratulates me on my answer. And I don't remember him?He says a woman's name. I stare back. He yells that it's his daughter. I don't remember her either. I sink down in the seat mortified. To save me further embarrassment he changes the subject, saying he's flying out to Paris where he now works. He leans in and rubs the lapel of his jacket between two fingers: he's in the rag trade. I feign delight – but who is he?He straightens up and asks what size I take. Medium. "Open your boot, I've something for you." Now he's carefully placing a dark suit draped in plastic in the boot of my car. He says it retails at €2,600 ($3,100). He closes the boot and winks. Who is this guy?He stands closer and mumbles something that I don't catch. He repeats. Now I don't understand. He's getting annoyed and slowly repeats the suggestion that maybe I would like to make him some little contribution.I tell him I've no money; he senses an assertiveness in my tone. The suit's out of the boot in a flash and he's gone.Later, my son tells me that when he got out of the car, the driver behind called him over and asked him my name. My son obliged, thinking he was an acquaintance of mine.This is the don't-you-remember-me con, one of the top cons in Italy, and the most skilful. It's a beauty and it leaves me in awe of my artful amico. And to think I didn't even get his name.Guardian Weekly regularly publishes a Letter from one of its readers around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letters@theguardian.com