The village of Piazzaga has a permanent population of two – a taciturn couple who, while I am there, only come out for the witch-burning. Perched on a precipitous hillside 700m above Lake Como and accessible only by jeep or on foot, the village becomes virtually uninhabitable in winter. But in summer its stone cottages fill with retirees from Como and Milan, tourists embark on the trek up the hill from the lakeside resort of Torno, and Crotto Piazzaga opens its doors.As the only business in town, Crotto Piazzaga serves both as gourmet restaurant and a hub of the community. In its gourmet capacity, it rewards trekkers for their exertion with butter-drenched local dishes and spectacular views over the lake. As community hub, it provides a constant flow of espressos and gossip.The volunteering deal is simple: essential help entails two hours of washing up during the busy lunch service in exchange for accommodation, excellent food and limitless red wine. Additional help depends on your own enthusiasm. Despite my initial scepticism at the prospect of volunteering in a restaurant, the deal strikes me as pretty good.During services, chef Alessandro prances around stirring pots and keeping up an indefatigable chatter, broken only by sporadic snatches of song. Co-managers Veronica and Katya administer front of house. My washing-up burden is shared by fellow volunteer Lee – a debonair Australian mining geologist on an epicurean tour of Italy with an eye out for properties and Italian cougars.Crotto’s menu changes weekly and is a celebration of rustic mountain food. Pizzoccheri (fresh buckwheat pasta) with Swiss chard, three cheeses and garlic-sage butter, oven-baked ribs with polenta, veal in mushroom sauce. All three members of staff tend to me patiently through my wrestles with pasta rollers, Italian grammar and the cappuccino machine.After a few days, I assume I know everything there is to know about Piazzaga, and the witch-burning takes me by surprise. An inscrutable annual tradition, it starts with the entire village crowding into the restaurant to eat tripe, and culminates with the igniting of a pyre behind the church, from which protrudes the effigy of a woman atop a wooden pole, dressed in a mismatched selection of old clothes. The direction the flaming “witch” falls dictates the village’s luck for the next year – towards the lake being a good omen, towards the hillside bad.As to the origins of this custom, everyone I ask claims ignorance. This year, amid gasps and accusations of poor pyre-stacking, the “witch” topples sideways, trainers smoking but otherwise unharmed. After she is thrown resolutely on to the pyre, the village retires to Crotto to debate what the unprecedented omen could mean. Heads are shaken ominously.Yet nobody can maintain their solemnity for long, and as the evening wears on peals of laughter break out. Calls for wine progress to calls for grappa. Alessandro is drawn into an impassioned duet of Nessun Dorma with a silver-haired gentleman sporting a magnificent moustache. Somehow, I think they’ll be OK.• Cat organised her trip through workaway.info, which features thousands of volunteering opportunities 