Bergamo is decked with flags. All the way from the lower to the upper town there are Italian flags in all the windows to celebrate the 150th anniversary of Italy's unification.The city showed off its patriotic fervour on 2 February when it welcomed the president, Giorgio Napolitano. Along his route the crowd waved flags and shouted "Viva l'Italia". This is hardly surprising from the town that in 1860 contributed 180 patriots to Giuseppe Garibaldi's famous Thousand. A year later, on 17 March 1861, his campaign led to a reunified, sovereign kingdom of Italy. But that is a kind of paradox in this bastion of the Northern League, which advocates independence for northern Italy.Ettore Pirovano, the Northern League leader of the provincial council, with more than a third of the vote in 2010, is a perfect example of this contradiction. Two of his ancestors joined Garibaldi's march and he proudly showed us their photographs on his computer. "They were adventurers," he said. "They thought Garibaldi was a sort of Buffalo Bill." It does not occur to him that this might seem odd. "From Garibaldi to the Northern League, it's all part of the same story," he explained. "Yes, we too are trying to help the south by setting up a truly federal tax system, without which unification is incomplete. If we succeed, we shall reconcile Italians with the state and carry on Garibaldi's adventure."The anniversary was a holiday in the province, despite Northern League opposition. Many people in Bergamo seem to be trying to sustain dual loyalty, to the ideal of unity and the cause of independence."It's our paradox," said Ettore Oncis, editor of the local daily, L'Eco di Bergamo. "We contributed to unifying Italy, but we find it increasingly difficult to live with. The League is the only party to express this feeling. It is not against unity, just the use to which it is put, which is detrimental to diversity and encourages scrounging, bureaucracy and excessive centralisation of power."Lombardy is a prosperous region, and the state has come to be seen as an enemy. "Work accounts for about three-quarters of a person's identity here," Oncis added. "What do they want from the state? Fewer problems and greater efficiency. But that doesn't mean they lack a sense of a common destiny."Lawyer Carlo Salviano, who helped set up a history museum about local unification heroes, is not amused by the idea of putting Garibaldi into a green shirt, the League's colour. "Garibaldi is such a powerful figure everyone wants to take him on board to support their ideology," he said. Between a bust and a painting, we caught sight of Garibaldi's shirt, still red.This article originally appeared in Le Monde