This chapel's renovated Giotto frescoes are breathtaking – every surface bursts with colour. Giotto was the first artist to portray Christ as a real person and the story of his life covers the walls. The entire wall above the entrance is covered by his terrifying depiction of the last judgement. Book ahead.Piazza Eremitani, cappelladegliscrovegni.it, adults €13, children €6 KatharineSianMusic in CerianaThis medieval hilltop village has many attractions – fabulous food, mountain walks, but perhaps most unusual are the six choirs, famous for preserving their ancient regional singing tradition, involving polyphony – interweaving melodies. Go to the Easter festival, or even better the festival of Madonna della Villa in September, which starts with a torchlit procession to the chapel, and includes the choirs singing in the piazza. These are village events, not tourist spectacles, but the welcome to strangers is open and sincere.comune.ceriana.im.it/en-GBSquariallFesta della Madonna del Rosario, Cinque TerreWhen we arrived in Biassa last autumn, the small square in front of the church was packed with people of all ages and there were stalls selling local wine and chestnuts. Then a group of priests in green and gold robes emerged from the church, followed by the statue of Mary carried on the shoulders of half a dozen villagers and the rest of the congregation. The procession was accompanied by a group of musicians and we could hear it winding its way through the narrow streets of the village long after we left to continue our walk. It was a wonderful way to experience a tradition that dates back centuries.lecinqueterre.org/engRuby11Isola Bella, Lake Maggiore, Borromean islandsAll of the Borromean islands are magical, but Isola Bella, setting for the Palazzo Borromeo, is the crowning glory. The Borromean family employed the most accomplished architects and gardeners to transform a rocky crag into the setting for its magnificent baroque palace and Italianate gardens. A visit will provide a taste of how an aristocratic Italian family lived in the 17th century. The palace contains a wealth of treasure including paintings, sculptures and Flemish tapestries. borromeoturismo.it, adults €13, children €5.50GdeanoukEtruscan Necropolis at TarquiniaOn a hilltop just outside the town are these painted Etruscan burial chambers which inspired DH Lawrence to write what was to be his final, most heartfelt travelogue, Sketches of Etruscan Places. Although there are more than 6,000 tombs, only about 15 are open to visitors each day. The wall paintings are surprisingly celebratory, depicting scenes of dancing, music, feasting and sex! The town's Tarquinia National Museum is devoted to Etruscan exhibits and sarcophagi excavated from the necropolis. Be sure not to miss the pair of winged horses from the pediment of a Tarquinian temple, one of the greatest Etruscan masterpieces ever discovered.necropoliditarquinia.it, adults €8, children €4KSRobOstia Antica, RomeWhen the usual sites in Rome are heaving with people, Ostia Antica is a place of superb Roman sites which are blessedly peaceful. The site was once the sea port of ancient Rome but was silted up after the decline of the Roman Empire. Many buildings have been excavated and it is possible to spend a whole day here enjoying the sites and rural peace. We were there on a Saturday and it was not mobbed like the centre of Rome.archeoroma.beniculturali.it/en, €6.50pp, free to under-17s (closed Mondays)NataiesgranCa'Pesaro, VeniceThis splendid gallery on the Grand Canal – inexplicably absent from many online Venice guides – houses a delightful collection of 19th and 20th century art (as well as a smaller Oriental Art Museum on the top floor). While the great majority of the works are by Italian artists possibly less well-known to a general audience, some big international names are also represented, with fine pieces by Klimt, Chagall, Kandinsky, Klee and Moore.Sestiere Santa Croce, capesaro.visitmuve.it/en/home, adults €8, children €5.50StanleyAccringtonAmbrosiana library and art gallery, MilanIf you only have time to see one gallery in Milan, make it this one. Set up in 1618, it is home to more than 1,500 paintings by artists such as Raphael, Luini, Titian, Caravaggio, Botticelli and Bruegel. It also has a large collection of work by da Vinci including his Codex Atlanticus. The building is a fine example of Lombard architecture, with mullioned windows, frescoed walls and vaulted ceilings. The visit ends in the library, rich in manuscripts, notably Homer and Virgil. Piazza Pio XI, ambrosiana.eu, from €10 KSRobMugelloItaly is all about culture – the place simply oozes art and history – but if you are seeking a more modern cultural experience I recommend a visit to the Moto GP – Italian style: Mugello in July. The passion of the crowds is contagious and you will certainly learn a lot about Italians. motogp.comSallyyoung