Silvio Berlusconi has been challenged before by former political allies, like Gianfranco Fini, and survived. Maybe it's wish fulfilment, but this time it feels different. His party is in chaos after the handbrake turn he performed hours before he was due to face a humiliating split on a no-confidence vote. Having pulled five ministers out of government on Saturday and instructed his party to vote "in unanimity" against the government, 25 MPs from the centre-right Freedom People party (PdL) were reportedly ready to defy their leader by voting against and a similar number could have stayed away. His climbdown was curt and, maybe this time, conclusive. Whatever else happens, Mr Berlusconi is no longer in full control of his party.This political crisis was entirely of his own making. It was about him. That was the whole problem in the eyes of his former supporters in the industrial north. The country is wedged firmly in the longest recession since the second world war, and they see their party leader playing games with the coalition, ready to tip up the board if he loses. A significant portion of his party could not see the justification for bringing the coalition down now, simply because the ruling centre-left party refused to delay a vote, due on Friday, to expel Mr Berlusconi from the senate. Everyone, from the financial markets to industrialists, told the ageing leader that an election now would be unpopular and change little. Italy needed a government that could carry out reforms.For Enrico Letta, the scenes in the upper house of parliament were something of a pyrrhic victory. Mr Letta saw the revolt down but he did not achieve a real win. That would only have happened if Mr Berlusconi had gone ahead with his original project and lost. Mr Letta was certainly bolstered by the prospect of a split in the PdL's ranks, but until that definitively happens and a new centre-right faction is formed, the current coalition will limp on from one crisis to the next. Mr Letta's primary goal is to push through political reforms – such as changes to Italy's voting system, which would deliver decisive results and strong governments. With Beppo Grillo's Five Star Movement on 25% of the vote, Mr Letta can do little to reform Italy's electoral law without the centre right. So Mr Letta needs Mr Berlusconi to quit the political scene sooner rather than later. Meanwhile, he will not have endeared himself to those in his party who thought his coalition was about shoring up a corrupt, anti-communist, media tycoon.So although one can see the beginning of the end of an era in which Mr Berlusconi has dominated the centre-right, until a modern pro-reform party emerges to displace Forza Italia that dream is still some way from fruition. Extracting Mr Berlusconi could still be painful.