It was the day the culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt, announced that he fully intended to let Rupert Murdoch buy the rest of BSkyB. But first we heard from the Speaker. When the Duke of Edinburgh turned 90 the house sent its best wishes, and bizarrely the Speaker, the prime minister, the leader of the house and Ed Miliband had to turn up and find out what he thought.It's as if you sent a friend a birthday card, and were summoned to their house to be thanked. Or, as Mr Bercow put it, they had "waited upon" the duke. "We were graciously received by His Royal Highness, who responded in these terms 'What the bloody hell are you doing here?' "No, no, that was someone else's voice (mine, actually). All the duke actually said was that it had been a privilege to help the Queen.Then we came to Mr Hunt, who also had good tidings for someone important. None of this was a surprise and Labour MPs were deeply sceptical, since they suspect this is the payback for Murdoch's support for the Tories at the last election.Heavens, what a sceptical bunch they are. Mr Hunt explained at great length how he had followed all the rules, and proceeded by the letter of the law.He had acted quite independently and had taken independent advice from independent people. He had not consulted the prime minister, and had not spoken to either Rupert or James Murdoch."Aye, but he has," said a growly Labour voice, referring to Cameron's jolly social sessions with the News Corp bosses.Mr Hunt was therefore in the stance familiar for politicians of all parties: using one hand to give the rich and powerful what they want, and the other hand to pat himself on the back. It is both difficult and ungainly.Tom Watson, the Labour MP who has led the fight against Murdoch, poured a bucket full of cynical scorn over Mr Hunt's head. He spoke softly but angrily.News International had famously broken promises to the government. Murdoch's chief executive, Rebekah Brooks, admitted that her staff had made illegal payments to police officers. Reporters, already mired in the phone-hacking scandal, had been collaborating with convicted prisoners. They had even hacked the parents of the two little girls murdered in Soham. On top of that, the new company would be registered in Delaware.He made one slip, saying he expected Mr Hunt would get his reward. As Tories booed, we wondered what he meant. A knighthood? Envelopes stuffed with money? A free Sky box?Mr Hunt reminded us of his own integrity. Chris Bryant said that no other country in the world would allow so much media power in the hands of one company – which had tried to cover up its employees' crimes. "Apart from Italy!" yelled Kevin Brennan, and Mr Bryant agreed – yes, we were in the same boat as Italy.Barry Gardiner summed up Labour's fury: Mr Hunt was wrong, morally and politically. "He is propping up a crumbling empire. Murdoch is the Gaddafi of News Corporation ..." They really were cross.