Manchester City's troubled striker Mario Balotelli has been told he must mature before being reconsidered for the Italian national team. The warning comes as Roberto Mancini, the City manager, considers whether to discipline the 20-year-old for allegedly throwing darts at youth team players.Balotelli was omitted from Italy's European Championship qualifier against Slovenia last Friday and Tuesday's friendly against Ukraine following his red card in City's Europa League defeat by Dynamo Kyiv. Mancini criticised his compatriot for the "stupid" challenge on Goran Popov before demoting him to the bench for the defeat at Chelsea three days later.Now the president of the Italian Football Federation, Giancarlo Abete, has warned the former Internazionale player that his career will continue to suffer for club and country unless his behaviour improves."Balotelli still has some problems and lacks continuity," said Abete. "He needs to mature and that has to be a personal choice. We hope he grows and that the focus is placed on his technical ability. He is a great champion of Italian football and will return to be a part of the national team."Abete's hopes have not been encouraged by the latest controversy to blight Balotelli's career, with the striker alleged to have thrown darts at members of City's youth team from a first floor window at the club's training complex last week. Balotelli was only present at Carrington due to his exclusion from international duty and, though no one was hurt in the incident, Mancini will demand an explanation from his £24m signing when the manager returns to the club today before deciding whether disciplinary action is warranted.No measures have been taken against the forward by the club so far but the allegation is another untimely problem for Mancini as he strives to deliver Champions League football to Eastlands, and for City's ambitious owners, next season.Cesare Prandelli, the Italy manager, has echoed Abete's stance that Balotelli does have a future at international level providing he addresses his disruptive behaviour. "Everyone is responsible for their own behaviour," said Prandelli. "Balotelli has to understand that with this type of behaviour, he is only hurting himself. We have sent him positives messages. I think he is struggling, he is in need of affection, being considered and perhaps this is his way of expressing this need."Italy's win in Slovenia on Friday prompted Prandelli to revise plans to recall the City striker for the friendly against Ukraine. "I considered calling him after the game against Slovenia but then I thought it was best not to because this group has responded well," he said. And the former Fiorentina coach admits Balotelli must use the remainder of City's season to regain trust at international level."I want responsible players in my national team. The external episodes that surround Balotelli are annoying but this has happened in the past with other players so this is nothing new," added Prandelli."In certain cases the behaviour off the pitch conditions the judgement of what you do on the pitch. It will be his performances on the pitch in the next two months that will make us understand if he is ready to begin an adventure with us. He will have to do well with City and make sure people talk about him for what he does on the pitch. Only then will he become an important player for the national team because his talent cannot be questioned."City have suffered an injury setback after the German football federation said the defender Jérôme Boateng needs surgery on his right knee. Boateng hurt the knee while warming up for Saturday's European Championship qualifier against Kazakhstan and has returned to Manchester. City are also without another key defender in Micah Richards.