1 It seems impossibly dreamy, too good to be true: a beautiful farm up in the hills above Verona with something to catch the eye at every turn: wooden horses on the terrace, carvings on the walls, flowers on the roof. Children set off to see their friends on horseback; Dad creates beautiful objects in his workshop; Mum climbs the hill to collect honey for breakfast. Yet it is all very real, and there is a streak of steeliness, too, running through Ilaria and Maurizio Corazza. This is evident in their determination to be forces for environmental good. "Every day we have to make choices that affect us, our guests and the land," says Ilaria. "We heat the water with solar panels; we reduce our waste, save water and travel only little and responsibly. But we are involved in tourism - albeit in a small way - and that has a huge impact on the environment. Most of our foreign guests arrive by plane and then hire a car - they need one in these hills - and that has a negative impact that cancels out some of our work. We try to do our best and hope to show guests that it's possible to make a difference." Guests are encouraged to explore the hives, the eight organic hectares and the woodwork studio. The Corazzas are keen supporters of local agriculture and organise tasting sessions of local produce and of their own honeys, oils and jams. You can buy all these, plus hand-crafted presents and other local produce, in the tasting room. Maurizio restored part of the structure - which dates from 1800 - himself, and the result looks authentic and attractive: big and airy rooms have simple cotton rugs over stripped floors, rough and whitewashed plastered walls, solid country furniture and excellent beds and bathrooms. There's also a shared kitchen. Breakfast is delicious, with seasonal cakes and home-grown fruits. There is a WWF-managed forest nearby and there are nature trails galore on the farm and beyond. It's an easy place to be, even though there is a keen sense of purpose. Join in with it all or simply settle into the quiet that is everywhere. • Ca' del Rocolo, near Verona (00 39 045 870 0879; cadelrocolo.com). Two doubles, one family room (€60-€75; €410-€450 a week). Nearest train stations: Verona Porta Nuova or Verona Porta Vescovo2 The small holding is in a hamlet on the edge of a plain; behind, densely wooded hills extend to the Slovenian border, sometimes crossed just for the gathering of wild berries. From the bedroom balconies there are wonderful views over the treetops; in autumn, the smell of wood smoke wafts around the chalet and creates a wonderful, almost alpine, feel. Guests have spoken of the artistic atmosphere and of the absolute commitment of Toni and Paola Costalunga to doing the right thing environmentally, socially and communally. "The reconstruction has been done largely by ecological methods," says Toni. "We used all the original building materials that we could find around the property. We repaired hand-made roof tiles, chestnut beams, floor tiles and hand-carved flagstones." Simplicity, rusticity and a green approach are the keynotes here; so you'll sleep on traditional, and immensely comfortable, wool and vegetable fibre-filled mattresses, some with blankets, some with handsome quilts. Children will adore the open spaces, the ready-made playmates, the animals and the little pool that's been created by diverting a stream. The main crop here is grapes, and 2009 marks their 20th year of organic farming. Wine from this region is considered by many to be the finest of all Italian wines and Toni and Paola make three varieties. Maps are laid out at breakfast, and there are heaps of books on the region; the walking is wonderful, there's a castle to visit, and a river to picnic by. It is an area as rich in art, architecture, monuments and history as any in Italy. Days draw gently to a close at Casa del Grivò: fires are lit, tables laid, glasses polished and fine dinners are cooked by Paola using old recipes and their own and local produce. There is candlelight and wine, too, and maybe even music and singing. • Casa del Grivò, Faedis, near Udine (00 39 0432 728638; casadelgrivo.com). One double, four family rooms, from €60; half-board €50 per person; dinner with wine from €25. Nearest train station: Udine3 A Slow way of life can't be forced. If people are not utterly committed, it shows," says Guido Manfredi Rasponi, who manages the rugged 500-hectare organic Fattoria Barbialla Nuova. "We are Slow through and through: we wait for just the right moment to collect truffles; we raise our cattle in a leisurely way, giving them all the time they need to grow naturally. We run our agriturismo in a way that we feel helps our guests to leave behind the stresses of modern life.""A Slow way of life can't be forced. If people are not utterly committed, it shows," says Guido Manfredi Rasponi, who manages the rugged 500-hectare organic Fattoria Barbialla Nuova. "We are Slow through and through: we wait for just the right moment to collect truffles; we raise our cattle in a leisurely way, giving them all the time they need to grow naturally. We run our agriturismo in a way that we feel helps our guests to leave behind the stresses of modern life."The farm, in a nature reserve, is carved out from a larger estate that was left to Guido; the land has been organic since the early 90s and is perfect for grazing their prized, almost biblical, white Chianina cattle. A little shop on the estate sells the fruits of their labours - bottles of golden oils, precious preserved white truffles, beef - so that guests can take a flavour of the place home with them. There are three self-catering farmhouses, all with sweeping views, all on the top of a hill; Le Trosce, with its four fireplaces, has several levels but is all open-plan. The three flats in Doderi, a casa colonica (traditional farmhouse) embraced by an olive grove, are minimalist: Gianluca's joyous bedcovers and 60s-style furniture in Tuscan colours add style, originality and colour. The apartments in Brentina, another farmhouse deeper in the woods, are a touch more primitive, though many will love the simplicity of the whitewashed walls and handmade staircases. Outside are pergolas, patios and pools, cheerful with deckchairs and decking; there are also hens and an orchard. It is a place for the independent, but the owners are always around to help if you need anything. There will be space soon for cooking courses but meanwhile you can invite the resident chef, Lucia, to your apartment for personal tuition, or just sit back with an aperitif while she works her special magic with an abundance of local produce. Come in autumn and you will follow in the footsteps of the staff from London's River Café restaurant. They come here annually to hunt for truffles and to keep their restaurant in truffle oil and shavings for the year. Stay in spring and you can join in wildlife walks or take off on your own with special route maps. • Fattoria Barbialla Nuova, near Montaione (00 39 0571 677259; barbiallanuova.it). Seven apartments: two for two people; three for four people; two for six people (from €420 for a week self-catering). Nearest train station: S. Miniato-Fucecchio4 Most guests arrive in a state of shock, admit Guido and Martina. The postal address suggests this place is on the Tuscan tourist trail; the reality is glorious isolation. But the Bevilacquas' skills as hosts soothe the most ruffled feathers, and the astonishing panorama of Chianti and the medieval village of Volpaia does the rest. "We give guests an 'unplugged' experience without letting them feel abandoned," says Martina. "We look after them, make them drinks, cook for them, help them make plans. We know when to leave people alone and when to join in." Guido and Martina found the old farm 12 years ago after it had been abandoned for 40 years. "It was a classic story: farmhouse left to rot, trees growing inside, land overgrown," says Martina. The couple are supporters of the Slow Food Movement. Says Guido: "We are surrounded by 300 hectares of some of the best organic vineyards, olive groves and honey. We take a lot of care choosing our suppliers and, thank God, here it is still possible to find small artisan producers." Martina, who does most of the cooking, prepares what is seasonal and good. "I prepare only one thing each night, just as you would at home. Sometimes we eat beautifully but simply; sometimes dinner is elaborate. I imagined when we moved here that we would find a local lady from the village to cook for us. She never materialised and now I do it all and I love it." They are a dynamic pair, full of vigour and life, and they have created a memorable place to stay. The beautiful pool vies for attention with the heart- stopping view, there are a library/bar, fine antiques, lovely art, whitewashed rafters soaring over pretty beds and terraces upon which Guido alights with glasses of wine, maybe a grappa, or a restorative coffee. They are vigilant guardians of the landscape and of local traditions. They richly deserve all the good company that is lured to La Locanda.• La Locanda, near Radda in Chianti (00 39 0577 738832; lalocanda.it). Three doubles, three twins, one suite, from €200. Dinner €35 (Monday, Wednesday & Friday only). Restaurants 4km. Nearest train station: Florence5 Locanda Casanuova is a place of contemplation - and always has been, for it began life as a monastery. Bedrooms are almost monastically simple, but have splashes of colour and style to introduce a perfect measure of modernity.The 23 hectares of vineyards and olives produce 7,000 litres of wine and a lot of olive oil; there is an organic vegetable garden too. Holland and Germany come together in Ursula and Thierry Besançon, she behind the smooth efficiency of the place, and in the kitchen with four helpers, and he in his supervision of the estate and the wine-making. They are fine hosts, smiley, humorous and generous. "That the land should be run on organic principles was the most important thing for us," says Ursula, "and we were lucky that no chemicals had been used for a good number of years before we came. The land has now been managed organically for 50 years." The atmosphere is wonderful for people who want to do their own thing unencumbered by hotelly expectations. They are right to call it a "locanda" and not a hotel, for it has none of the mannerisms to be found in most hotels. It is an intensely personal place. It was 20 years ago that they came here and resolved to rescue it. They have done so much more: Ursula practises yoga in the early mornings - you are welcome to join her - and is a superb cook; meals are wonderfully convivial affairs in the refectory, off which is a library where you can pore over trekking maps at a big round table. Spontaneity is another feature: musicians might strike up at any moment on the terrace. Ursula and Thierry rejoice in seeing their guests unfurl: "Those from towns and cities, particularly, arrive stressed. Often they will have planned an itinerary of sightseeing but they relax into a different rhythm. In autumn, people love to get involved in the harvest. Spending time on the land and sharing a big spaghetti on the terrace at lunchtime can be really rewarding." Just 500m from the house is a self-cleaning pond, set up as a swimming pool but rich in lily-pads and other vegetation. The lovely garden has terraced steps, tables and delightful corners and nooks. The views are far-reaching. You are close to Florence too, so you could, if you insist, burn yourselves up culturally with the greatest of ease. There are two apartments, separate from the main house and down a bumpy track beside an ancient mulberry tree. They are charming: attractive crocks, a collection of coffee pots and milk pans, candles and woodburner. The mood of serene simplicity is at its most evident in the yoga room, a beautiful space with richly red silky curtains. The Casanuova is a natural candidate for Slow status, with its devotion to organics, its own vegetables, wine and olives, its lack of pretension and a commitment to doing things authentically. It also has that essential ingredient: great character. • Locanda Casanuova, near Figline Valdarno (00 39 055 950 0027; casanuova.info). Twelve doubles, two suites, four singles - from €70 per person half board. Two apartments, from €75 a night for two. Nearest train station: Figline Valdarno6 Wanda is the overseer of this 45-hectare estate. With her three daughters, Maria, Alessandra and Sara, and their daughters, you have the privilege of seeing Italian family life in action. I Mandorli is a higgledy-piggledy house with little steps here and there leading to rooms and apartments, outhouses, lofts and old olive mills. Flowers tumble from pots, capers scale stone walls and fruit and cypress trees give shade in the garden. Bedrooms are simple affairs with wrought-iron beds and pale homemade patchwork quilts; the small bathrooms are spotless. The vineyard is managed organically; vegetables and sunflowers are grown and there is a little outlet for the estate's produce; you can buy wine, lentils, oils and jams to take home. Guests can wander the land, pick herbs, help with the olive harvest, take cookery lessons, cycle, walk and go rafting. Children will love the wooden slide and seesaw, the old pathways and steps on this shallow hillside, the new pool - wonderful to return to after outings to Assisi and Spoleto. I Mandorli is aptly named: there's at least one almond tree outside each apartment. The blossom in February is stunning and, in summer, masses of greenery shades the old casa padronale. Each daughter speaks a different foreign language, so nobody is excluded from the conviviality of the house. Guests are helped with their itineraries and the sisters promote walking and biking - even if just through the olive groves, for there are over 5,000 trees. • I Mandorli Agriturismo, near Trevi (00 39 0742 78669; agriturismoimandorli.com). One twin/double, two triples, from €40. Three apartments: one for two; two for four, from €65 a night. Nearest train station: Trevi7 The Savinis' commitment to organic farming and to the environment is almost unequalled. In 1980, while living in Milan and running a tiny farm in Piedmont, Augusto and Adriana decided they should search for a bigger farm further into the countryside in Le Marche. Northern Le Marche then was some way behind much of the rest of Italy and that attracted the Savinis. That the farm was within sight of Urbino delighted them, for being close to the city would add a cultural dimension. "In the early 80s certified organic farming was in its infancy," says Giulia, their daughter. "Our beginning was not easy. We arrived with a deep respect for the soil - we didn't want to break the surface more than we had to - and we were regarded as townies who were nuts!" Undeterred they pressed on and are now respected for the dynamic farm they have created. The Locanda stands among ancient protected oak trees. Its 1920s frame has grown into an unusual, unexpectedly modern, small hotel. The bigger rooms with the views are worth asking for. During the renovation they double-insulated the walls and roof, installed solar panels for heating water and have a wood-fired boiler that is fuelled with their own coppiced wood from their 185 acres of land. Loos have dual flushes, all light bulbs are low energy and bed linen is 100% natural fibre to reduce allergens. "We produce over 70% of the fresh food that we serve in the restaurant and the rest we buy from nearby farms, most of them organic," says Giulia. There are DOP cheeses, lamb, their own beef, prize-winning extra virgin olive oil, excellent salamis and a "heavenly" pancetta. All are paired perfectly with local wines: sangiovese from their own grapes, or maybe a bianchello, a rosso piceno or the visner dessert wine made with morello cherries. They make bread, pasta, cakes, pastries, salamis, jams and jellies and grow many herbs for the kitchen and for home-made liqueurs. They mill their own grain and forage for nuts and white truffles. They are a dynamic threesome: Augusto with his knowledge of architecture, local history and culture, Adriana with her love of gardening, cooking and herbalism and Giulia with her gift for communication. • Locanda della Valle Nuova, near Sagrata di Fermignano (00 39 0722 330303; vallenuova.it). Five doubles, one twin; half-board €84 per person. Two apartments for two, €680 a week. Nearest train station: Fano8 Slow has been the story of our lives." So says Maureen Scheda, speaking for herself and for her architect husband Roberto. Maureen had, like many of us a passion for Italy, its history, language and art. Unlike many of us, she moved to Italy to embrace all that she held dear. In the 60s she left Wales for Rome, met Roberto and married him. But after having two children Maureen found Rome was not Slow enough. Her thoughts were turning to the idea of living in a medieval hill-top village. They gave up lucrative careers and plumped for a move to Casperia - a higgledy-piggledy joyful, vibrant village perched in the Sabine hills north of Rome, where they found their dream home in La Torretta. The dilapidated 15th-century palazzo was waiting to be rescued. Roberto poured his heart, soul and architectural talent into its restoration. It is a stunning, lofty house with dreamy views and beautiful interiors including a huge ground-floor sitting room with frescoes around the cornice, giant fireplace, modern sofas and chairs, books, paintings and piano. The terrace views are spectacular. Maureen had another ambition. "Our goal was that our work would help revitalise the village. So many people were seeking work in the cities, abandoning their beautiful birthplaces for a humdrum life of commuting. We wanted to show them what treasures they had right here in Casperia - that it could be possible to live and work in the village. I wanted to do what I could to attract visitors. We have battled with local authorities to preserve the environment and the identity of the village. We have made progress and Casperia now knows a little tourism." Other bed and breakfasts run by local people have opened; there are three restaurants, a yoga retreat and an ever-growing interest in Slow food. Maureen and Roberto organise walking and climbing holidays, too - one of their daughters is a qualified climbing instructor and the other runs cookery courses. A local Slow food expert organises wine and olive oil tastings. • La Torretta, Casperia, Sabina (00 39 0765 63202; latorrettabandb.com). Five doubles, one single, two connecting rooms for a family; doubles €90; dinner with wine €30 by arrangement. Nearest train station: Poggio Mirteto9 Forty-four families once lived in this substantial dwelling in Murgia, and the place still has the feel of a centre for the wider community. The extended families lived around the courtyard, with the bread oven in the centre - an efficient way of sharing resources and bringing people together over a common activity. When Pietro bought the place in 1990 he had no idea that his great-grandmother's sister had sold it in 1890, and that he had, through pure chance, done the proper thing by bringing it back into the family. Forty-four families once lived in this substantial dwelling in Murgia, and the place still has the feel of a centre for the wider community. The extended families lived around the courtyard, with the bread oven in the centre - an efficient way of sharing resources and bringing people together over a common activity. When Pietro bought the place in 1990 he had no idea that his great-grandmother's sister had sold it in 1890, and that he had, through pure chance, done the proper thing by bringing it back into the family. It is a most handsome and traditional farm dating from the 17th century and, after years of neglect, is going strong again with Pietro's respect for tradition and craftsmanship reaching into every crevice. Shapes are rounded; there is nothing chemical in the rooms - no dyes, no bleaches; tiles, and even basins, are made by hand and to traditional methods; mattresses are of natural latex and tablecloths and curtains are of hessian. The walls have been lime-washed, the furniture polished with linseed oil; reclaimed wood has been used for doors; and the food is devotedly organic. Guests have a library to retreat to and a veranda for sunset- and star-gazing. This is a land of sunshine, with Foggia rated the hottest city in Italy. So it is right that 48 solar panels bring the sun's heat to the floor's underside, and that the boiler is fuelled by olive nuts - in plentiful supply and otherwise wasted. Rainwater is "harvested" from the roof and taken to a vast underground tank. There are 190 hectares of organic farm, largely flat, surrounding the house - a serious guarantor of high-quality food. There are olives, cherries, almonds and grapes, all certified to the highest standards.Puglia is no slouch in the food department, producing a wonderful, creamy-buttery cheese called burrata - served at breakfast with homemade cakes and jams, orchard fruits and other local cheeses - it also produces vast quantities of almonds and olive oil from trees on the plains of the Murgia. Puglia has been so little known to tourists that its towns and villages come as a delightful surprise. Lecce was built between 1660 and 1720, in high baroque style and of local golden stone. Martina Franca is another town of timeless beauty, with a piazza, Piazza Roma, some consider to be Italy's finest. Trani was a prosperous port in the Middle Ages and impressive churches, castles and palazzos are testimony to this. • Lama di Luna Biomasseria, near Montegrosso (00 39 0883 569505; lamadiluna.com). Ten twins/doubles from €140; dinner with wine €25. Nearest train station: Barletta10 Turn up during dinner at Il Frantoio and you may feel you have stumbled onto a film set: the courtyard twinkles with candles and sparkling glasses, music drifts from the house, Armando glides elegantly between the tables explaining the provenance and flavours of each little dish and of the wines he has chosen for you. The masseria runs on well-oiled wheels, with each family member assigned a role that draws on their strengths. Daughter Serenella works alongside her husband Silvio and helper Giuseppe to look after the 72 hectares of olive groves and orchards; Armando looks after the staff, sources the wine and is very much 'front of house'; Rosalba has worked magic within the house and the kitchens. The farmhouse is centred on a 16th-century olive press; parts of it were built in 1544 and the bedrooms are in the 19th-century part of the house. The visitors' quarter is a series of beautiful rooms, ranging from fairytale with lace and toile to formal with antique armoires and gilt-framed art. It is a gloriously eclectic mix. Despite the professional edge to this dynamic masseria, the homely touches are ever-present: there is a kitchen for guests to use, sitting rooms and a library. The 16th-century citrus garden, with lemon, orange and mandarin trees and the odd peacock, is alive with colours and fragrances.From the kitchen garden come vegetables, herbs and edible flowers. Rosalba oversees the menus and she and her six chefs create elaborate flavours with simple ingredients; a different olive oil is used in each of the eight courses. "We reproduce centuries-old local recipes; food in the south comes from a long history of peasant dishes," explains Armando. They also make liqueurs, jams, pickles, preserves and patés to ensure that none of their crops go to waste; you can buy jars to take home. The lush Itrian valley is rich in archaeological sites. Seven kilometres away are the Adriatic beaches, some lively with cafes and others protected nature reserves."We conduct ourselves in a way that is at one with nature," says Armando. "Guests say that what we are doing is special but we say that we are simply behaving in a way that should be normal for everybody." • Masseria Il Frantoio, Ostuni (00 39 0831 330276; masseriailfrantoio.it). Three doubles, two triples, three family rooms, from €176; apartment for four from €319; dinner with wine €55 by arrangement. Nearest train station: OstuniFor the complete 'Slow Travel' experience, ditch the plane and travel to Italy by train. Book railway tickets to Italy with Rail Europe (0844 848 5848; raileurope.co.uk). You can explore routes and timetables for Italy's extensive rail system at trenitalia.com, where you can also book tickets within the country. Seat61.com is another useful resource.