Economic recovery in the eurozone accelerated in the first quarter, boosted by a return to growth in France and Italy.Outpacing both the UK and US economies, the single-currency bloc grew by 0.4% between January and March, improving on the fourth quarter of 2014, when gross domestic product increased by 0.3%. It was the fastest rate of growth in almost two years.The French economy smashed expectations, expanding by 0.6% in the first quarter following zero growth in the previous quarter. Italy also returned to growth, with GDP expanding by 0.3%, and Spain was a star performer, growing by 0.9%.Peter Vanden Houte, an economist at ING, said a country breakdown of the figures suggested the eurozone’s recovery was becoming more widespread. He warned, however, that the region’s crisis-hit economy was not out of the woods yet, partly because Greece’s debt problems remain unresolved.“Growth is clearly broadening across the eurozone. That said, the jury is still out whether eurozone growth has reached enough escape velocity to see a self-sustained recovery.“A resolution for the Greek problems will also be needed to lift the uncertainty that still prevents businesses to increase investment.”The Greek economy shrank by 0.2% in the first three months of the year, plunging the troubled country back into recession following a 0.4% fall in GDP in the previous quarter.German growth more than halved to 0.3% from 0.7% in the fourth quarter of 2014. Net trade was a drag on Europe’s largest economy, with imports growing at a faster rate than exports.There was little detail in the first estimate of GDP from the statistics agency, Eurostat, but individual country reports suggested expansion was broadly driven by demand at home rather than abroad.“It seems that growth has come principally from domestic demand, with consumption benefitting from the drop in energy prices and buoyant financial markets boosting confidence,” said Vanden Houte.“Although the euro exchange rate weakened over the first quarter the boost to exports remained probably small, as relative price changes take time to filter through into trade flows. On top of that, growth in the emerging world disappointed, implying less demand for European exports.”The eurozone economy outperformed the UK and US economies in the first quarter. Growth in the UK halved unexpectedly to 0.3% in the first three months of the year, while the US economy came to a virtual standstill, scraping growth of just 0.1%.The eurozone’s annual growth rate edged up to 1% between January and March, from 0.9% in the previous quarter. A pickup in the eurozone will soothe fears that the region is stuck in a rut of consistently sluggish growth. Deflationary fears have also started to fade, helped by a partial rebound in oil prices.Zero inflation in April brought to an end a four-month spell of eurozone deflation. Growth in France was the strongest in two years in the first quarter, fuelled by a surge in consumer spending according to the national statistics office, Insee. Economists had predicted a smaller rebound of 0.4%.Christian Schulz, senior economist at the German bank Berenberg, said: “Cheap oil was a major driver of growth, with consumption making big contributions in the first quarter in France and Germany.”Destatis, the German data agency, said: “Foreign trade had a downward effect on economic growth. Although, according to provisional calculations, exports of goods and services were slightly up at the beginning of 2015 compared with the fourth quarter of 2014, imports recorded a much stronger increase.” The annual growth rate in Germany slowed to 1.1% from 1.6%.