Italy's economy is suffering badly from the credit crunch, with economic output predicted to fall 5.2% this year, even faster than in Britain. But, unlike the UK, property prices have remained relatively stable, because the country never gorged on mortgage debt in the style of the British, or over-developed in the manner of the Spanish.Traditionally, Italians have fewer and smaller mortgages than in the UK, and the interbancario system means it is unusual for more than one lender to give a mortgage or loan to an individual. This cautious approach led to much smaller property booms in the 1990s and 2000s – and fewer problems in the past two years.This year's annual survey of international property markets by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors found Italy was one of the few countries where prices had not fallen over the previous 12 months. "House prices have not risen by anything like those in many other EU countries, growing by about 40% in real terms between 1998 and 2007," it said."There was a surge between 2000 and 2004, but that petered out well before the turnaround in other countries. Weak growth, poor consumer confidence, limited demographic pressures and a responsive supply side have all contributed to the limited performance of the market."It adds Italians tend not to buy and sell property in the frenetic style of the British, moving, on average, just once every 20 years. But it says the official figures for housebuilding are unreliable, as there is so much illegal building.Estate agents agree there has been little of the boom and bust seen elsewhere in Europe. "The Italian property market has not behaved as a mirror image of the UK or Spain. There hasn't been a wholesale collapse and no one was predicting one in 2008, nor are they doing so now," according to Paul Hudson of The Property Finders, a search company working for clients who want to buy in Italy."The second, or holiday-home market has, at least in some areas, performed even better than the first house or 'prima casa' market. This year it is more in the buyer's favour, with longer selling times and greater leverage on discounts. But don't expect to go bargain-hunting and find vendors throwing property at your feet."In the mainstream market for Italian owner-occupiers, prices are typically down 10%. "As a general rule, the cities have suffered most, with properties that sold at the top of the market in the last few years not maintaining their values," says Gemma Knowles of GK Italian Property, a London-based specialist estate agent. In terms of holiday home regions, "Tuscany prices have not come down much, if at all [although] there tends to be more room for negotiation than a year ago".Most Britons buy around the Lakes as well as Umbria and the Aosta Valley, with a few purchases in Rome or Milan. Venice has some of the world's most expensive real estate: expect to pay at least £500,000 for a one-bed apartment. But Tuscany is the most sought-after, and its international appeal has triggered a backlash from locals.Legambiente, an eco-pressure group that has existed for two decades, has started campaigning against "rivers of cement" appearing in the countryside and some historic Tuscan communities, as increasing numbers of holiday homes are built.Jenny Gale, from the West Midlands, has lived in Lucca, a Tuscan hill town, for 19 years, and works for an estate agency. She says people only used to visit Lucca en route to rented Tuscan villas in rural areas, but now, like many towns, it has its share of second homes. "It's a destination in its own right now, since it has the classic features of a cultural centre with year-round appeal. As a result, there is a healthy lettings market," she says.One factor worth considering if you are buying property as an investment is Italy's shrinking population. The number of Italians will fall 15% by 2050, particularly in the north, and the Rics survey says that without immigration, "significant housing surpluses" may arise. That suggests house prices will have little long-term support.Remember that if you take the plunge and buy, it is customary to back up an accepted offer with a deposit – between 10% and 20% – paid through the seller's estate agent, subject to the deal going through after the usual checks. As with some other mainland European countries, be sure to check that outstanding debts connected with the property are fully paid, otherwise they will transfer to you.Kamran Mirshahi, who runs Apulia Properties, says buyers should factor in 12% of the purchase price to cover taxes and fees, rising to 15% where new properties are concerned.This tends to be the most popular area for British buyers, thanks to a mix of culture, food, wine and budget flights to easy-access airports such as Malpensa and Pisa, which have daily services via a number of carriers.Farmhouses with swimming pools and views are the staple purchase for well-heeled Brits in this area, while estate agents say that renovation projects have become less popular (and wrecks are now relatively hard to find anyway).Discounts of 10% can be negotiated, but deals are difficult to conclude because buyers are either tightening their belts or finding mortgages very hard to secure."Until a year ago the real bread and butter in Tuscany and Umbria were apartments in renovated farm complexes, the 'borghi'. It appears these have lost popularity," says Gemma Knowles of GK Italian Property.This two-bed house is at Borgo Il Poderone in southern Tuscany, looking to the Maremma coast some 40 minutes away. It is surrounded by a private garden and there is a shared swimming pool. Originally €250,000, it is now on at €230,000 (£196,000) with GK Italian Property or call 020 7993 2967.Traditionally, Britons have concentrated their interest around Lake Maggiore and Lake Como. Thanks to improved road transport, Maggiore is now under an hour from Milan, so resorts that a decade ago were mid-priced – such as Stresa, Baveno and Ghiffa – are now higher priced.Thanks to relatively strong demand from a lot of Italians, the local market has remained relatively buoyant, and prices are only 5% down in the past two years. Celebrity-strewn Lake Como is more varied. There are beautiful villages and resorts, including Menaggio and Bellagio where prices seem to have remained static for the older period houses, but go a little more towards the Alps and prices are down maybe 10%, according to estate agents. But if you are willing to settle for a modern or new-build home, closer to the lake, there are reductions of up to 15%.This flat is in a 16-apartment complex at Sala Comacina overlooking Lake Como. It is being sold fully furnished and with shared access to a communal swimming pool. Down from €310,000 to €270,000 (£230,000) from Casa Travella, or call 01322 660988.The heel of Italy enjoyed low prices relative to the rest of the country until it was discovered by Ryanair, which started flights from Stansted to Bari and Brindisi in 2004.In the months running up to the launch, prices paid for the cone-shaped "trulli" houses unique to the region doubled or even tripled. Since then, they have largely stagnated.Kamran Mirshahi of Apulia Properties says: "They caught the imagination of buyers – and magazine editors. But that wore off as the disadvantages became apparent – they can be complicated to restore and have very small windows. Now people are more open-minded and looking at some very good value villas.This three-bed restored trullo is in a panoramic location, a short distance from Fasano and the sea, but will probably require extensive redecoration to suit a British buyer.On the market for €265,000 (£225,000) at Apulia Properties, 020 8858 9258. There is additional accommodation in a converted stalla, currently a one-bed apartment with kitchen, bathroom and cellar. The land extends to around 8,000 sq m.This is Italy's central region, bordered by Tuscany to the west but, in property terms, it is significantly less expensive because it is less easily accessible.It used to be where "cheap" wrecks could be found for £30,000 or less and renovated with cheap local labour but, especially since the credit crunch, farmers have wised up and even ruins are expensive.For ready-to-live-in farmhouses and villas, prices have dropped about 10% to 15% in the past two years, especially around Perugia, Terni, Narni and Orvieto. If you are buying with a view to letting out, this could be your region – it is more popular with renters because it is lower cost.This three-bed apartment, close to the hilltop village of Panicale, is on two levels in a renovated farmhouse, and packed with features such as terracotta flooring, wooden beams and original fireplaces. There is a shared swimming pool and large gardens. The price has dropped from €450,000 to €420,000 (£358,000) from GK Italian Property, GK Italian Property, or call 020 7993 2967.Next week: Spain