

5.52pm GMT
17:52

Slightly better than expected economic growth figures from France and Germany, and indeed the overall eurozone number as well, have helped support markets ahead of this weekend’s G20 meeting. Greece exited recession, which added to the positive mood, but on the other hand, Italy fell back again. Overall though, it was a fairly upbeat end to the week. The final scores showed:On Wall Street, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently down 15 points or 0.09%.On that note, it’s time to close up for the evening. Thanks for all your comments, have a good weekend and we’ll be back on Monday.

4.17pm GMT
16:17

More on the protests in Greece from Helena Smith:Greek students have left a trail of banners and graffiti behind them as they marched through Athens this afternoon. In a display of their dermination against a government they now accuse of employing heavy -handed tactics, in addition to selling out to international creditors, this banner in front of Athens University reads: “Police get out from the university. Hands off asylum and down with the government” and demands that the rector of the school immediately resigns. Ahead of commemorations marking the 1973 Polytechnic Uprising, the rector has refused to grant students access to university campuses - the asylum long seen as a hallowed right of students after the collapse of military rule in 1974. The main boulevards are peppered with freshly painted slogans some of which have not been seen since the height of the euro crisis. Students marching on parliament this afternoon pledged to step up protests over the weekend with many saying “the end of the government has arrived.”“The government has miscalculated gravely on this. All Greece needs is a spark (to erupt) and this may be it,” said a law school student who gave his name as Petros Pappas. Such fears are shared by older Greeks who expressed shock this afternoon at the level of violence used against Athens university on Thursday. “The violence last night against students protesting peacefully was disproportionate and shows that the government is very fearful of young people becoming the spark of a fire that it won’t be able to comtrol,” said Leonidas Aposkitis, aged 50, who marched through Athens after taking part in Thursday’s demonstration.

2.59pm GMT
14:59

And yet more positive news from the US economy.Consumer confidence rose to a seven year high in November (so far), helped by falling unemployment - as the Fed’s James Bullard has been saying - and lower petrol prices.The Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan first reading on its consumer sentiment index came in at 89.4, above the 87.5 reading expected by economists and up from the revised 86.9 seen in October.Outlook brightens for holiday shopping as retail sales outperform and consumer sentiment rises...gas prices are helping, to be sure.Updated
at 3.08pm GMT


2.48pm GMT
14:48

The better than average performance of the US jobs market is inconsistent with interest rates at near zero, a member of the US Federal Reserve has said.Speaking to an audience in St Louis, Jame Bullard said he did not see low inflation readings as a reason to delay a move away from low rates. He said (courtesy Reuters):[Jobs growth] suggests that over the next year, it will become more and more difficult to point to labour market performance as a rationale for a near-zero policy rate.Bullard is a notable hawk but is currently a non-voting member of the Fed’s rate setting committee, until 2016. Even so, the idea of rising US rates is gaining ground, hence the strength in the dollar.Fed’s Bullard: Job Market Gains No Longer Justify Current Fed Policy: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis… http://t.co/QjjtQOIrjB WSJ

2.37pm GMT
14:37

The positive US figures is giving the dollar a lift, with sterling falling to a 14 month low against the US currency. Nicholas Ebisch, currency analyst at Caxton FX said:Retail sales data in the US beat expectations this afternoon, coming in at 0.3% when 0.2% was expected. This comes in along with a string of positive data for the US dollar. The dollar index is currently at 88.24, which is its highest point since mid-2010. The US economy continues to be the brighter spot in a global economy that is struggling with growth, thereby boosting the dollar continuously higher.

1.45pm GMT
13:45

Still with the US, and import prices fell in September by 1.3%, the most in more than two years.The fall was due for the most part to lower costs for imported fuels following the recent crude price slump. The strong dollar also meant that it was cheaper for Americans to buy imports.Export prices fell 1%, as the global economy weakened.

1.33pm GMT
13:33

Over to the US, and retail sales for October have come in better than expected, a positive sign of returning consumer confidence and good news for the economy ahead of the key Christmas shopping period.Retail sales - excluding volatile elements such as cars and gasoline - rose 0.5% last monthcompared to expectations of a 0.4% rise, and the biggest increase since August.Overall they rose 0.3%, higher than the expected 0.2% increase.Sales at food service and drinking places up 0.9% in October. Less spent at the pump. More spent at the bar. pic.twitter.com/JDH5IQvVdRUpdated
at 1.40pm GMT


1.17pm GMT
13:17

The news that Greece has left recession comes as the country is gripped by scenes of protesting students.Our Athens correspondent, Helena Smith, explains:Tensions are very much on rise after overnight riots outside Athens Polytechnic (where the 1973 student uprising set in motion the events that lead to the fall of Greece’s hated military regime) and a student take-over this morning of Thessaloniki University. As I write, students are marching through Athens.Protestors are up in arms over government’s controversial decision to implement a lock-out at all tertiary education institutions in run-up to the anniversary this Monday. Usually, university students have used the three-day period set aside for commemorations to stage sit-ins (that are themselves often marked by clashes between left and right wing students). Tensions have been fueled by anger over tuition costs & other international-mandated educational cuts - and they show no sign of abating ahead of Monday’s anniversary. Videos have been released that also depict riot police using excessive force to remove protestors from the scene of the Polytechnic last night. Riot police resorted to using tear gas and stun guns to remove students from the sight - without giving them any prior warning that they should get out of the way! Outside Athens University’s law School tensions are also high today. On that note, I’m handing over to my colleague Nick Fletcher.Updated
at 1.45pm GMT


1.03pm GMT
13:03

Richard Boxshall, senior economist at PwC, points out that Europe’s core countries are now lagging behind the periphery, such as Spain and Greece. “Today’s figures show continued very sluggish growth in the eurozone, but it has avoided lapsing back into recession. The former powerhouse of the bloc, Germany, grew at a modest rate of just 0.1% in Q3, while France was the surprise with growth of 0.3%. However, the detailed data showed that the ‘French surprise’ was primarily driven by relatively strong government spending growth, which is unlikely to be sustainable in the medium term. Meanwhile, Italy has fallen back into a mild recession.“In contrast, most peripheral countries continue to grow at relatively strong rates with Greece growing seven times faster than Germany, closely followed by Spain and Portugal.”

12.02pm GMT
12:02

Our economics editor, Larry Elliott, writes that eurozone leaders must not shelter behind the fact that today’s growth figures could have been worse.He writes:Policymakers are deluding themselves if they believe that narrowly avoiding recession is the same as being on the road to recovery. The eurozone today is starting to look worryingly like Japan in the 1990s: little growth, crippled banks, export dependent. All it lacks to make the comparison complete is deflation, and one further negative shock would make that a reality too.It’s clear what the eurozone needs. It needs monetary activism from the ECB. It needs fiscal activism, both from individual countries and from pan-European institutions such as the European Investment Bank. It needs Germany to realise that generalised belt-tightening has been self-defeating. And it needs all those things fast.

12.02pm GMT
12:02

A reminder that Germany and France are above their pre-crisis peaks, but the wider eurozone is not - and Italy’s decline is quite alarming. *NEW POST* #graficodellasettimana: l’#Europa che non cresce e l’#Italia in #recessione > http://t.co/wWXnOJ79Ki #PIL pic.twitter.com/N3hsKclDI0