 4.25pm GMT That was ruthlessly efficient from Ireland and it felt like we’d gone back to the tournament’s embryonic days when Italy were plucky but hopelessly outclassed. O’Driscoll was quite, quite brilliant today – far better than I’ve seen him in a couple of years, in fact.So next weekend Ireland will go to Paris to try and take the Six Nations title. Join me again in, er, half an hour for Scotland v France. Bye for now! 4.23pm GMT 15m infield on the right, Jackson slices it wide. 4.22pm GMT The penalty was taken quickly as you’d expect. We had a few phases before Jack McGrath went over from close range. 4.21pm GMT 80 min Cronin bursts through the middle then McFadden chips and gathers his own kicks. Ireland rumble up to with about 6m of the line and shift the play to under the posts. We go left and Trimble kicks through; it goes dead but we go back for a penalty. 4.20pm GMT 79 min Can you guess who was named man of the match? Go on, there’s a prize on offer.**Obviously there isn’t. 4.19pm GMT Ireland trying to stretch the Italian defensive line now. They go right and left, and then infield to Fergus McFadden who steps through then dives over under the posts from close range. Jackson drop kicks the conversion. 4.17pm GMT 76 min That’s a beauty of a penalty from Jackson, kicked from around halfway in the centre of the park right on to the Italian 5m line on the left. The cheering every time BOD appears on the big screen is getting a bit sycophantic now. 4.16pm GMT 75 min Ireland are looking to run and pass everything at the moment and it’s not quite coming off. You get the feeling that if they’d kept things a little simpler as they did earlier on then they might have racked up a cricket score. Although 34-7 isn’t unlike an England cricket score, I suppose. 4.14pm GMT 73 min This is petering out now. Why not keep up with what’s happening in the football world by popping by Gregg Bakowski’s clockwatch? 4.12pm GMT 72 min A rare attacking platform for Italy as they have a scrum just outside the 22. They go right and turn it over, but will get another chance as D’Arcy fires an absurdly wide pass forwards. 4.11pm GMT 71 min Gori is on at scrum half for Italy, with bleached blonde hair reminiscent of a Romanian footballer circa France 98. 4.09pm GMT Rifled through from the touchline. Very nice. 4.08pm GMT Ireland nearly blow the chance as Henry holds on and goes for the line himself with the Kearneys outside of him on the overlap. The ball is stolen brilliantly but Ruddock wins it again and the ball squirts out to Cronin, who shows good pace to go around and into the left-hand corner. 4.06pm GMT 67 min Italy are offside at a ruck in the 22 and Jackson knocks it into the corner on the right. 4.05pm GMT 66 min Ireland getting it wide again before Kearney batters into the defence, knocking them backwards. Ireland owning the gainline in midfield now. 4.03pm GMT 65 min Sexton is off too, with Paddy Jackson on. Ireland have taken off their most creative player for the day as well as the man who’s scored 17 of their points. Have they declared here? Italy are looking tired so fresh legs could hurt them. 4.01pm GMT 64 min Kearney runs down the left and chips ahead, but it goes out of play on the full. 4.01pm GMT 61 min The great player’s days in the Irish jersey on home soil are done as he goes off to be replaced by... no one cares by whom. This has been a vintage latter-day BOD performance, creating three tries with gossamer hands. He gets a standing ovation and will have received few better deserved.(It was McFadden who came on) 3.59pm GMT Right on the left touchline this one and it’s just wide. 3.58pm GMT This O’Driscoll fella is alright, isn’t he? He makes a half-break inside the 22 on the left then throws a wonderful offload out of the tackle and out the back of the hand to Kearney (R), who passes out to his brother, who pops it inside for Sexton to go over in the corner for his second. That was utterly magnificent. 3.55pm GMT 58 min “Anything you can do...” begin Italy, before realising they’re not actually as good as Ireland and much chucking it about results in the ball being handed back to Ireland. BOD makes a break before realising he can’t make it and cutting back across the field to look for support. He gets smashed in a tackle and stays down, but I think he’s only winded. Yes, O’Driscoll gets back to his feet and receives the biggest cheer of the day. 3.52pm GMT 57 min Cronin knocks on as Ireland look to go through the hands again. Ireland forgetting, it seems that their tries have all come indirectly from set pieces.Ross off, Moore on.Derbyshire off, Vosowai on. De Marchi also replaced by Rizzo. 3.51pm GMT 56 min Ireland smell blood as Kearney runs with extreme intent upon fielding a long, aimless kick from McLean. It’s chipped ahead and Italy clear but Dave K runs it back down the left touchline. Knocked on in the 22 though. 3.49pm GMT Healy hurt himself scoring that and goes off to be replaced by McGrath and Ruddock replaces Henderson. Sexton lines up the conversion wide on the right but drags it across goal.Best off too, Cronin on. 3.48pm GMT Quickly taken tap by Reddan once again keeps Italy backpeddling and Healy muscles his way over from a couple of metres. 3.47pm GMT 52 min Slow ball for Ireland in the centre, just inside the 22. It goes left and Sexton passes inside to Heaslip before O’Connell makes ground. Through the hands and right now and Italy concede a penalty on the floor 5m out. 3.45pm GMT 50 min Poor clearance from Italy with their scrum under pressure and Ireland have another lineout in the 22. Here’s how our very own Paul Doyle feels about Ireland’s attacking efforts:Sigh 3.44pm GMT 49 min The penalty is from where the game was due to be restarted with a scrum. Nigel Owens is a quite outstanding ref. It’s kickable but Sexton kicks to the corner on the right and Italy do very well to splinter the maul. Ireland go again but are held up and Italy will get the scrum 5m from their own line. 3.42pm GMT 48 min Fight! Fight! Fight! It’s quite a mild one, as you’d expect from the diminutive Tebaldi standing up to Paul O’Connell. We’re going to check there was nothing sinister but I think it’s just a scuffle. Yes it was a scuffle between O’Connell and Bortolami, then Tebaldi came in and grabbed the Irish captain around the neck and is penalised for it. 3.39pm GMT 47 min Good kick from Sexton to touch on the right, a couple of metres outside the 22. Good chance this and they go off the top, but Furno disrupts the move by going for the interception and knocking on. 3.38pm GMT 45 min Tebaldi sends up a high kick, which Kearney does very well to win from Derbyshire. Ireland turn it over in midfield again though and the dangerous McLean is probing. He holds on though and it’s a penalty to Ireland just inside their own half. 3.36pm GMT 43 min I’ll take my winnings. O’Driscoll gets the ball and chips ahead into the 22, but Sexton was in front of the kicker and we go back for an Italian penalty in the centre of the field, which Orquera kicks to touch on the left, on the Ireland 10m line. Orquera looks a much better 10 than Tomasso “Tommy” Allan. 3.34pm GMT 42 min What a maul from Ireland, who go 20m upfield and win a penalty. Sexton, with no room to work with on the right, sends it up to just outside the Italian 22. Another maul coming, I’ll wager. 3.33pm GMT 41 min Here we go. Dave Kearney spills a high ball and Orquera sends a lovely raking kick into space, and indeed into touch, down the right inside the Ireland 22 behind D’Arcy. 3.32pm GMT @DanLucas86 maybe - think D'Arcy has benefitted more from BOD's longevity than he has. Oh, hang on - was that ANOTHER try scoring pass..? 3.30pm GMT How long can Italy keep up this resolute, physical defence against a very fit and relentless Ireland side? 3.20pm GMT That was enthralling. Very few set pieces, ambitious attacking rugby with no shortage of skill being met by firm defence – and that from both sides. I’ll see you in 10mins or so. 3.19pm GMT 40 min Derbyshire is back on for Voswai now. And that’s that for a brilliant first half of rugby. 3.18pm GMT The try was scored wide on the left, so that’s where the conversion will be taken, as per the laws of the game. No matter for Sexton though, who knocks it over coolly. 3.17pm GMT Crikey this is ridiculous. Ireland come flying at the line time and again but it’s brilliant defence from Italy and they’ve won a turnover! Sarto spies a gap and is this close to being away, but it’s knocked on and Ireland come again through BOD. Several phases now in the midfield before they go left and O’Driscoll pops out a fantastic pass to Trimble who carries it over the line.Updated at 3.48pm GMT 3.14pm GMT 36 min Oh this is wonderful! It’s taken quickly by Reddan and goes through the hands. O’Driscoll and Trimble are the men to make the most headway and before you can say “Oh eff” they’re up to within 10m of the Italian line. 3.13pm GMT 35 min and this is bad for Italy as Derbyshire goes off and the massive Vosawai comes on. Italy win the lineout and look to batter the Irish defence on the 22, but defence is solid and it’s a penalty for holding on. 3.11pm GMT 34 min Ireland are under huge pressure at the scrum and Reddan is smothered. It eventually gets back to Rob Kearney who, again under huge pressure, slices his kick into touch just beyond the 22. 3.10pm GMT 33 min McLean goes through the middle after selling an outrageous dummy just outside the 22! O’Connell and Henry were made to look like chumps there. There’s a very slight knock on though in the 22 by Tebaldi and the chance goes. 3.08pm GMT We’re about 16m infield from the left, just inside the 22. Sexton takes his time over this... still... then thumps it through and Aerosmith urge us to walk their way over the PA. 3.06pm GMT 30 min Finally. Reddan picks up and scampers down the blindside to within inches! Ireland are held up but Bortolami comes in at the side of the ruck and we’ll have a penalty. That was a cynical kill from the Italian captain and should really have been a yellow card. You could even make the argument for a penalty try. 3.05pm GMT 28 min So we’ll have a scrum, which is an apropos time to look at this email from Ben on scrums: “The latest changes have shown what any experienced front row could have told you; reduce the delays in binding, put the ball in straight and show firm, consistent reffing and a few yellow cards for dragging down, and it will soon sort itself out.”I’d guess you were a front row, Ben? That sounds like the common sense, straight talking of a former hooker to me. Although against you, this particular scrum is taking ages. 3.02pm GMT 27 min Chance now for Ireland as Sexton’s up-and-under is badly missed by Orquera. Ireland scrap for, and win, the bouncing ball but there’s no advantage and we’ll go back for Orquera’s knock-on. 3.01pm GMT Oh my. From midfield turnover ball Italy go left and Sarto picks up a scrappy ball on the touchline. Missed tackle by Rob Kearney on Sarto, who then steps inside Dave and scampers under the posts! Orquera levels the scores.Updated at 3.19pm GMT 2.59pm GMT 23 min Turnover ball, well-won by O’Connell just outside the Italian 22. Heaslip shifts it left but Ireland are held up in a maul and it’s a scrum to Italy. Derbyshire has been excellent, making 12 tackles already. 2.57pm GMT 22 min BOD spots space and rolls a neat kick into it behind the Italian three quarter line. It’s well covered by scrum-half Tebaldi though and from the lineout O’Connell, not for the first time today, knocks on. 2.56pm GMT 20 min “So, what’s the gainline?” my flatmate asked me a few weeks back. Italy may as well ask the same question as they’re battered back into their own 22 by Ireland. The home side get to within 10m before knocking on under little pressure. That was sloppy. 2.54pm GMT 19 min McLean clears to touch on halfway down the left. Almost a quarter of the way through the match and not a single penalty, nor a reset scrum, so far as far as I can recall. 2.53pm GMT 17 min Castrogiovanni has reportedly broken his ribs and they’re missing him here as Ireland take the scrum against the head! Ireland are keeping it narrow but losing ground, so play is shifted to the flanks. It’s passed back inside before Reddan switches back to the right and chips across for Trimble, but overcooks it into touch. 2.51pm GMT 16 min Here come Ireland again, with Rob K showing great strength to burst through one tackle and into the 22, straight down the middle. POC tries to carry it on but loses the ball forwards. Another injury though as Conor Murray limps off and Eoin Reddan comes on. 2.49pm GMT 14 min Sexton on the loop again makes a break down the right and the move is carried on by Heaslip. He’s dragged down but offloads well to Trimble, the Ulsterman cutting inside off his wing and gets into the 22. Lovely offloading from Ireland here but they crucially can’t get it away off the floor and Italy’s defence scrambles back. It goes left but is knocked on the 22 and from the scrum Italy clear. 2.47pm GMT 12 min Italy still have possession around the Irish 10m line in the middle of the park and they’re rumbling forwards rather effectively now. Esposito makes a half break and suddenly they’re within 10m, but it’s dropped and Rob Kearney belts it all the way downfield. 2.45pm GMT 11 min It’s a scrappy lineout but Ireland eventually kick clear. Italy run it back and on halfway McLean thinks he’s seen a gap. It proves a mirage though as he’s stopped in his tracks.“Watch the replay again,” instructs Will Corcoran. “Sexton copped a shoulder in the head.”Hmm didn’t see that. 2.43pm GMT 9 min Cian Healy knocks on and Italy go down the short side, Sarto trying to wriggle through and proving slippery. Eventually Heaslip hangs on to him but Italy spread it to the right flank, where Campagnaro is dragged into touch on the 22. 2.42pm GMT 8 min Castrogiovanni is down and won’t be able to continue, so Cittadini comes on earlier than he would have expected. Now Toner steals a lineout for Ireland on his own 10m line and Ireland send it wide, Dave Kearney looking to step through. 2.40pm GMT From right in front it’s easy enough. Sexton, getting up after sliding over, was slightly bumped by one of the Italians and promptly went down like one of those footballers they have now. That was poor. 2.39pm GMT There we go. From a solid scrum 35m out the ball is passed out to O’Driscoll who slipped it nicely inside to Sexton on the loop. The fly-half turns on the gas to go over.Updated at 3.18pm GMT 2.37pm GMT 6 min 20 phases and about zero metres gained. Connor Murray then throws a short pass on to Orquera’s fingertips, but the fly half can’t hold on to the interception. A few phases previously, Orquera put in a mighty tackle on Gordon D’Arcy. 2.36pm GMT 4 min Ireland going through the phases here but being held up on the Italian 10m line. Italy’s replacement forwards holding out in the early exchanges, but it feels like a matter of time. Paul Derbyshire, whose name sounds less like that of a fearsome Italian flanker and more like a journeyman striker who would have played for Blackburn Rovers circa 1995, looks impressive. 2.35pm GMT 3 min Hope for Italy? Not according to Ben: “Ireland to hand out a walloping today, I think. Italy lucked out last year as they occasionally do, that’s all.Perhaps we should have a new trophy, the “Best of the Rest” to be played fir between those perennial tackle dummies, Italy and Scotland? Said trophy to be awarded in perpetuity in the unlikely event of either team ever qualifying from the pool stages of RWC.”A little patronising that last suggestion, but I get where you’re coming from.Updated at 2.35pm GMT 2.34pm GMT 2 min Apologies, it’s an Irish lineout. Which is taken in my Toner and mauled upfield. The ball is spread very wide very quickly and Rob Kearney kicks ahead. McClean returns to the exact same spot from whence it came though. Which is halfway, on the Italian right. 2.32pm GMT 1 min Nigel Owens blows his whistle and Orquera kicks off from left to right for Italy. It’s taken in on the 22 and Ireland immediately go wide and run it up to the 10m line. It’s recycled and Sexton slices an up-and-under badly. The ball bobbles into touch and Italy have a lineout on the left, just outside the 22. 2.27pm GMT A big win for Ireland v Italy today and the 6 Nations' title is their's to lose. 2.26pm GMT Asks Carlo Del Fava if he

ever thought he could succeed despite not being a “looker”
 can see a way for Italy to win this. Remarkably, Carlo doesn’t laugh at the notion but says Italy will win if they “stick to their structures”.Expect said structures to be in rubble within about ten minutes. 2.09pm GMT Northampton are ten minutes or so from beating salary cap-fans Saracens for the third time this season. Back in a minute, I’m off to feel smug. 2.08pm GMT Of course the reason for that song is, presumably, because this will be BOD’s final international home game. With the 2015 World Cup just around the corner, picking him is pretty much pandering to his ego at the possible expense of long-term planning. Still, if anyone’s earned that... 2.03pm GMT This, from Corrigan Brothers Music, is a thing that’s actually been written. I may have been hasty in picking East India Youth for today’s musical interlude...Now BOD is his name, and it has to bea player of such graceas we were faced with him in all of his glorywho will replace him is the only question And yeah yeah BOD is great yeah yeah BOD is goodyeah yeah yeah yeah yeahNow that BOD is gone from USHe’ll be missed by all of USAll the things he’s done for UsIn games Away and games at HomeLook at BODs faceand all his desireto play with such passionand light up the fireof Ireland’s Glorywho will replace himis the only questionAnd yeah yeah BOD is great yeah yeah BOD is goodyeah yeah yeah yeah yeahNow that BOD is gone from USHe’ll be missed by all of USAll the things he’s done for UsIn games Away and games at Home4 triple Crowns, And a Grand SlamThe Best in the Worldthis Irish ManOh BOD you brought gloryand we thank youCoz you were just the best oneAnd yeah yeah BOD is great yeah yeah BOD is goodyeah yeah yeah yeah yeahNow that BOD is gone from USHe’ll be missed by all of USAll the things he’s done for UsIn games Away and games at HomeAnd yeah yeah BOD is great yeah yeah BOD is goodyeah yeah yeah yeah yeahNow that BOD is gone from USHe’ll be missed by all of USAll the things he’s done for UsIn games Away and games at Home 2.00pm GMT Song of the year so far. This is a real cracker. 1.45pm GMT Ireland : 15-Rob Kearney; 14-Andrew Trimble, 13-Brian O’Driscoll, 12-Gordon D’Arcy, 11-Dave Kearney; 10-Jonny Sexton, 9-Conor Murray; 1-Cian Healy, 2-Rory Best, 3-Mike Ross, 4-Devin Toner, 5-Paul O’Connell, 6-Iain Henderson, 7-Chris Henry, 8-Jamie HeaslipReplacements: 16-Sean Cronin, 17-Jack McGrath, 18-Martin Moore, 19-Rhys Ruddock, 20-Jordi Murphy, 21-Eoin Reddan, 22-Paddy Jackson, 23-Fergus McFaddenItaly : 15-Luke McLean; 14-Angelo Esposito, 13-Michele Campagnaro, 12-Gonzalo Garcia, 11-Leonardo Sarto; 10-Luciano Orquera, 9-Tito Tebaldi; 1-Alberto De Marchi, 2-Leonardo Ghiraldini, 3-Martin Castrogiovanni, 4-Quintin Geldenhuys, 5-Marco Bortolami, 6-Joshua Furno, 7-Paul Derbyshire, 8-Robert BarbieriReplacements: 16-Davide Giazzon, 17-Michele Rizzo, 18-Lorenzo Cittadini, 19-Antonio Pavanello, 20-Manoa Vosawai, 21-Edoardo Gori, 22-Tommy Allan, 23-Andrea Masi 1.45pm GMT Right this is a tough one. For me to write that is, rather than for either side. Ireland should win by a landslide here, whereas for Italy the word “tough” doesn’t come close to describing the task ahead.If ever there was a match to epitomise two teams heading in opposite directions over the course of twelve months, then this is it. Italy won last year in Rome and finished a place above Ireland, but they look very much like a team going backwards rather than building on a best-ever championship finish; indeed they’re heavily odds-on with the bookmakers to finish up with the wooden spoon this year. The Italian cause won’t be helped by the absence of their entire first-choice back row either; any team would miss a player as good as Sergio Parisse anyway, let alone one that’s not even looked like beating a decent side (Scotland don’t count folks) since November.Ireland are definitely going the other way. The wooden spoon is what they avoided by the skins of their teeth last season, but this time around and under Joe Schmidt they have to be the favourites to win the competition. While Italy’s back row is absent, Ireland’s has been immense in this year’s Six Nations and it was rather overlooked two weeks ago how well Chris Robshaw did to nullify the brilliant Peter O’Mahoney. Unlike Italy they also have reliable half-backs and this might well present them with their first opportunity this year to set the backline alight rather than simply try to dictate territory.Brian O’Driscoll has always struck me as a man for whom winning is absolutely everything; that the final victory is all that matters and if his own body/Warren Gatland’s reputation needs to take a battering to ensure it, then so be it. As such it feels like Italy are being lined up as road kill this afternoon, a little rabbit in the path of a juggernaut; one of the other women unfortunate enough to be called Sarah Connor.Kick-off is 2.30pm. I’m going with Ireland by 30 for this one.  1.45pm GMT I know we haven’t kicked off yet, but Ireland have already won this one by a street and will thus take the Six Nations crown next weekend when they beat a hitherto rubbish France in Paris.Preamble ends. 1.45pm GMT Dan will be here from around 2pm. In the meantime have a read of Brendan Fanning’s preview of the match:In the buildup to Saturday’s Test at the Aviva Stadium a radio commentator referred to the contest as being “massive for Ireland”. In reality the fixture with Italy is the least massive of the championship. For the home team the target in Dublin – which Joe Schmidt and co are doing their best to avoid articulating – is to win by a street, to tee them up for an assault on the title in Paris next weekend. If you want to talk about things massive then consider the scale of the challenge for the Italians.Hobbled by injuries in their back row, where Sergio Parisse is the most critical casualty ahead of Alessandro Zanni, Mauro Bergamasco and Francesco Minto, Italy are looking at a whole new set of circumstances to those in Rome last year, when they beat Ireland for the first time in the Six Nations. Back then Ireland were playing poorly, having been winless in the previous three games, and a freakish set of circumstances then saw them lose three backs in the opening quarter. The odds on the latter being repeated are so long as to be off the chart. As for the former, Ireland look like a different side.“I think there is another level of confidence that is building in the players in how they are approaching their game and there is also some extra competition within the ranks,” says the defence coach Les Kiss. “When we look across the board at all the players we could select it’s getting more and more competitive and that in itself is driving on standards even greater in our environment.“That’s the nature of the beast in international level. If you look at teams around the world, the All Blacks realised that. They just keep taking that step forward, making positive steps, being innovative but being solid about what they are about. England have made some massive changes through Stuart Lancaster and are really building a solid culture and all that sort of stuff. From our respect, we are just evolving and moving into another phase where the blokes are very confident about what they are doing.”Read the full article here.