In my experience, Steven Soderbergh's movies (which I never miss) are often as interesting for the films they drive me towards as for their own often fine qualities. Soderbergh is a movie-buff's movie buff, as demonstrated by his marvellous book Getting Away With It, whose extended interview with Dick Lester sent me on a month-long Lester binge, for which I'm still grateful. Anyone who enjoyed The Limey can move from it to all the movies it borrows from and riffs off, like Get Carter, Poor Cow, Point Blank and Peter Yates's Robbery. With his Che movies, the rewards are greater still, if you know where to dig. To make a movie about Che Guevara for American audiences, Soderbergh had few Hollywood models to emulate, unless one counts Richard Fleischer's calamitous 1969 movie Che! Just ask yourself this: if you were a revered, lately slain revolutionary hero with an eye on your place in the history books, would you really choose to played by Omar Sharif? I venture you would not. Nor would anyone associated with the Cuban revolution wish very eagerly to see Fidel Castro played by a sweaty and snarling Jack Palance. Nonetheless, this is the pairing that Fleischer presented us with, locked in a faintly homoerotic embrace with one another and the ineluctable forces of history.No, the best models for this kind of film-making are to be found in Italian cinema. From the outset of Soderbergh's Che diptych, I was picking up echoes of Francesco Rosi's 1962 masterpiece Salvatore Giuliano. Like Che, Rosi's film is the story of an island insurgent seeking independence - a sort of refracted biopic with a Kane-like fragmented narrative, in which the titular figure, a Sicilian separatist bandit, mafia ally and anti-communist terrorist, scarcely appears. Rosi was one of the central figures of the politicised post-neorealist 1960s and 70s of Italian cinema, along with Gillo Pontecorvo, early Pasolini, the Taviani brothers, Ettore Scola and Valerio Zurlini. Dealing with a corrupt postwar Italy, Rosi's movies take on sacred cows like the mysterious death of oil magnate Enrico Mattei (The Mattei Affair), the political machinations around gangster Lucky Luciano, and corruption in the judiciary (Illustrious Corpses). They are nakedly political and aimed directly at the state and its rotting institutions.There's never been much of this in domestic American cinema - its pale version of Salvatore Giuliano was Michael Cimino's lamentable The Sicilian - and frankly, there's not much of it anywhere else these days either, except perhaps in Italy. Last year's Gomorrah bravely lifted the lid on a cesspit of Neapolitan sleaze, and now director Paulo Sorrentino has, perhaps like Soderbergh, adopted the Rosi method for Il Divo, his biopic of the deeply dodgy Italian ex-PM Giulio Andreotti. When corruption and malfeasance reach the levels they have lately, breaking out the Rosi example may be the best way for film-makers of all stripes to grasp the octopus by the throat.