Silvio Berlusconi's strange papyrus-like visage is looming over Italian politics again. So much does he resemble something brought up from the underworld that the French newspaper Libération headlined its story on his decision to seek a new term as prime minister "Return of the Mummy".Europe and Italy have reason to know that Berlusconi's considerable political talents have never been allied to a commensurate seriousness of purpose, yet he has repeatedly re-invented himself and found success at the polls. Is another resurrection possible? The answer seems to be that a further stint in high office is almost certainly beyond his grasp. The polls do show a high percentage of undecided voters, and he has always been good at attracting those. But they also show Italian voters pulling in at least a half-dozen different directions. On the evidence of those polls Berlusconi's party would take less than 20%, with the centre-left Democratic party well ahead with more than 30% and the rest split between Beppe Grillo's populist Five Star movement and a scatter of smaller parties.Italy was due to hold general elections in March or April next year anyway, after its widely respected caretaker prime minister, Mario Monti, left office. So in a sense Berlusconi's decision to withdraw support for the Monti government merely brings forward the date of that election by, at the most, a few weeks. But Berlusconi's move will nevertheless do much damage.It will deprive the Monti government of the orderly end to its period in power that it deserved. It will almost certainly mean that much useful legislation in the pipeline will have to be discarded. And it will undermine the reputation for stability that Monti, in a relatively short period, has been able to establish in the rest of the European Union and, above all, in Germany. Finally, it will set the scene for an Italian general election campaign dominated by a simplistic view of the crisis in the eurozone, and one that could easily degenerate into a series of anti-German tirades.This is the way Berlusconi has been leaning since his reluctant decision to support the Monti government just over a year ago. His family newspaper sniped at Monti from the beginning, even as his Freedom People party supported him in parliament.One does not have to be an enthusiast for Monti's conservative brand of economics or a supporter of austerity programmes either in Italy or elsewhere to grasp that he has brought some order and coherence to the European political landscape. Berlusconi proclaims that he is coming back out of a "sense of responsibility". But harrying and hustling the Monti government to a ragged end is the reverse of responsible. It is the action of a wrecker.