Does China have to be top at absolutely everything? Until now, I thought that one field in which we could still claim supremacy was travel misery. As the most densely populated country in Europe (excluding Malta), with more people per square mile than even Holland or Belgium, Britain is celebrated for its traffic congestion. But now China has come up with a traffic jam to make even the M1 on a Friday evening seem like Silverstone – 60 miles of motionless vehicles on the main highway between Beijing and the north-west of the country, with average speeds of between a third of a mile and one mile a day. Even we can't compete with that.When I think of those wretched Chinese drivers, sitting patiently in their cars day after day, paying extortionate prices for food and water along the route, I don't feel I should make too much of a fuss about it taking me 32 hours to make the journey last weekend back from Tuscany to my home in Northamptonshire. I will make a little one, though.I was booked last Friday on an easyJet flight from Pisa to Luton, where my car was awaiting me in the airport car park. I was on the plane at Pisa, ready for takeoff, when Red Cross officials appeared in the cabin to remove a flight attendant who had suddenly been taken ill. It was then announced over the tannoy that, with only two flight attendants remaining, it was against regulations to fly with more than 100 passengers on board. There were 144 of us in the plane, so the last 44 to check in were to be evicted. These, of course, included me.There were two options available to us outcasts – fly late that evening to Gatwick (not Luton) with compensation of £100, or spend a free night in a hotel and fly next day with compensation of more than double that amount. Being eager to get home, I chose the first, but somehow I missed the flight. I got to the departure lounge in good time, where a seething crowd of people were waiting for a number of different flights, but did not hear my flight called and stood by mistake in a queue for a Ryanair flight to Stansted. When I realised my mistake, it was too late. My flight had already taxied out on to the runway.Why, I asked, hadn't anybody called my name? It was not easyJet's policy to call people's names, was the answer. (That seemed to me an extremely odd policy, and one that presumably doesn't apply to passengers with luggage in the hold, but I had only a carry-on bag.)It was now about 10.30pm, more than 10-and-a-half hours since I'd set off by car that morning for the airport, and I was beginning to feel rather cross and tired. There was still a young man in the easyJet office preparing to shut up shop for the night. Although he started by saying it was all my fault for missing the Gatwick flight, so the airline had no further responsibility for me, he relented when I became hysterical and arranged for me to be taken to a hotel for the night, then put on a flight to Gatwick at 12.45pm the next day (the next flight to Luton, where my car was, being already full).The next odd thing was that the excellent hotel to which I was sent by taxi at easyJet's expense was in Lucca, 20 miles away, and not in Pisa, as one might have expected. I and the other 43 people from the Luton flight were beginning to cost easyJet a great deal of money.Next day, I and a small group of fellow passengers were bussed back from Lucca to Pisa airport where, for the third time in two days, I queued interminably for check-in. It was beginning to feel like Groundhog Day. This time I caught the flight and, courtesy of easyJet again, was taken with three others by taxi from Gatwick to Luton, where I found my car and drove home, arriving, finally, at 7pm.Now, I wouldn't want you to think I have it in for easyJet. I don't. But the airline works in a mysterious way. I have spent three days trying to extract from its press office the answers to two questions: why couldn't it find a replacement for the sick flight attendant and thus save itself thousands of pounds in hotel bills and compensation; and why, unlike other airlines, does it have a policy of not calling out the names of passengers who have checked in but have not yet boarded a departing flight? It still hasn't told me.Crazy cat peopleNow, I'm not defending the dumping of cats in wheelie bins, and nor will I attempt to explain why Mary Bale, a 45-year-old bank clerk from Coventry, did such a thing when she herself has no idea. But the fury she has aroused, including death threats, seems even madder than the original offence. Somebody even set up a Facebook site called "Mary Bale is worse than Hitler". The cat at least lived. Six million Jews did not.And while sympathising with the cat, Lola, about the 15-hour discomfort to which she was exposed, let us consider how other cats have been treated. In 2003, an eight-year-old cat called Tinker inherited a three-bedroom house in Harrow and a £100,000 trust fund from its doting owner; last year, in Rome, a cat called Tommasino was left property worth 10m euros by a similarly infatuated woman. I can't decide who is the craziest.