If this were any other country, four prime ministers in as many years would be a sign of serious political instability. Not so Japan. Hatoyama is out, but it's business as usual. The machine of government grinds on, like a kind of self-propelling juggernaut that rumbles forward regardless of who is in the driving seat. The public, meanwhile, go about their daily lives as if nothing had happened. It looks like apathy, but it's not. It's despair and resignation."Shoganai," they say (a popular word with shades of meaning ranging from "c'est la vie" to "tough shit"). This is politics; there's nothing we can do about it. It drives me nuts, of course. I wish people would at least show some frustration, use some strong language, perhaps even resolve to go out to vote (turnout at the last election was under 50%). Only a minority are willing to air their views – often people who have left the rat race: independent bar owners, the odd housewife, mature students, pensioners, and the like. But most people seem too exhausted or busy even to think about it.At first, Hatoyama seemed like a good thing. Before the election, he was promising to shift power away from the civil service, to introduce child benefits, and to remove the US military presence from Okinawa. He had even begun to deliver on some of his pledges, banning civil servants from holding their own press conferences and abolishing high school fees. Two issues, however, have been his undoing. The first is the fact that his mother, Yasuko, heiress to the Bridgestone tyre fortune, allegedly made illegal donations to his campaign using the names of dead and imaginary people. The second is that he bent under US pressure to renege on his promise to make American troops leave Okinawa, choosing instead to honour a 2006 deal to relocate the Futenma base away from Ginowan City to Henoko Bay. Not only has this caused considerable annoyance to Okinawans, it will also damage coral reefs and threaten endangered marine fauna.These two issues – family privilege and US interference – are the essence of what makes people feel so powerless here. Hatoyama, like the majority of the ruling elite, is from a rich and powerful political dynasty. These dynasties, many of them descended from feudal retainers and landlords, established a virtual monopoly over government after the abolition of the shogunate in 1868. Although in the ensuing years they attempted to create a simulacrum of democracy, in reality they did nothing of the sort, and they've had a stranglehold on power ever since.After the war, General MacArthur saw to it that power remained in the hands of conservative upper-class families and instituted a "red purge" which resulted in people with leftwing sympathies being summarily dismissed from the media, academia, the civil service, the teaching profession and industry. Dissent was trampled on, and the way paved for 50 years of Liberal Democratic party rule, vested interests, bribery and corruption. Some people naively thought that the gravy train might finally terminate once the LDP was voted out. But the antics of Mama Hatoyama have put paid to that.However, it's not just corruption and nepotism that keeps people out of politics. Dogged resignation to the status quo is inculcated from an early age here. There is next to no education in civics and no attempt to make children aware of their democratic rights. Children are not encouraged to express an opinion at school, where classes are large and taught by rote. The energies of pushy children are channelled into sports clubs where they learn how to fit into a hierarchy, first learning how to stoically endure discipline from older members, and then, as they get older, learning how to discipline their juniors. Less pushy children, meanwhile, can sleep in class and go unnoticed.There is also great emphasis placed on the individual's ability to gaman (put up stoically with suffering), rather than on problem-solving skills, and children are taught to fear the censure or ridicule of others, which makes them unwilling to stand out. In fact, the education system, with its songs, uniforms, rituals and group-focused activities, has achieved an almost perfectly Foucauldian model of passive citizenship. It's an achievement, of sorts.But there may be hope. Japan has a venerable tradition of popular rights movements, although many were brutally suppressed, and in some places, the spirit of local activism persists. Even though ordinary people are largely kept out of national politics, issues in rural areas still motivate people. Recently, the Okinawans have been taking an increasingly more proactive stance in the issue of US bases. If this local issue grows into a national one, politicians might have to sit up and listen to public opinion. But we'll have to wait until Friday when the new prime minister is chosen to find out how likely that is.