Japanese people know all about earthquakes. So when commentators there describe Sunday's general election result as the political equivalent of one, they are not indulging in hyperbole. Sunday's results have utterly transformed the political landscape of a country which, with one brief interruption, has been governed by the conservative Liberal Democrats since 1955. The LDP went into the election with 296 seats in the 480-seat parliament, against the opposition centre-left Democratic Party of Japan's 113. After Sunday, under Japan's part constituency-based, part proportional-representation system, the tables have been well and truly turned. Now the DPJ has 307 seats to the Liberal Democrats' 119. The DPJ and its leader Yukio Hatoyama, could hardly have asked for a larger or more emphatic mandate.Like Barack Obama in the most recent election in a G7 nation before Japan's, Mr Hatoyama campaigned as the candidate of change in the aftermath of recession and financial collapse. Like Mr Obama, he also promised to put people first, with a series of big government intervention pledges to support consumers, low-income households and the unemployed. And like Mr Obama, Mr Hatoyama ran on a strong commitment to cut greenhouse gas emissions; whatever else happens as a result of the DPJ's win, it is certainly good for the chances of a stronger rather than a weaker agreement in December's climate change talks in Copenhagen.Yet it would be a mistake to exaggerate the extent to which Japanese or US voters are part of some worldwide radicalisation against economic globalisation. Japan's problems, like those of the US, are specific to its own system. Japan's downturn also long predates the credit crunch. The system of de facto one-party LDP rule of the postwar era worked well as long as it delivered an uninterrupted rise in living standards. That ended in the recession of the early 1990s. Since then, the voters have given the LDP several chances to reform itself, which the party has spurned or failed to seize. Those failures have now caught up with the LDP.Mr Hatoyama will bring a more independent approach to Japan's international role. There will be a regional wind of change in East Asia. In the end, though, the real test for the DPJ will be whether it can supply the healthcare, pension and job security that Japanese voters crave. This groundbreaking election was, in many respects, a revolt against the LDP's failure to reverse Japan's economic stagnation and decline rather than an uprising in favour of the DPJ's not always consistently argued alternatives. It is a new political dawn for Japan, but as British voters know, yesterday's landslide can eventually become tomorrow's disillusion.