When Japan's prime minister Naoto Kan described the crisis facing his country as its "most severe... since the second world war", his assessment, extraordinary though it was, did not sound at all overstated. As if 10,000 missing residents from one town alone is not calamitous enough for even the most advanced of countries to deal with, technicians were last night battling to save from meltdown nuclear reactors with failed emergency cooling systems. Only a few weeks away from the 25th anniversary of the world's worst nuclear accident, no one can be under any illusions of what could result if the technicians lose their battle.Disasters can sometimes pull a people behind their leaders; but they can just as easily dissolve the trust that the electors repose in the elected. In 2005, the Bush administration's bungling of the damage done by Hurricane Katrina swiftly became effective shorthand for a president out of touch with his people. The early signs do not look good for Mr Kan.Brought in as a rather unlikely change candidate to run a country bogged down in an economic slump lasting two decades, the prime minister's few months in office have left him looking beleaguered – and with plummeting approval ratings. The country's press has repeatedly accused him of weakness in territorial disputes with China and Russia, while his economic policymaking has often been blocked by the opposition in parliament. And now the government and nuclear industry face accusations that they had seriously underestimated the nuclear plants fundamental vulnerability to earthquakes. There are lessons here for Britain's government, too – as environment secretary Chris Huhne acknowledged yesterday in calling for an official report on nuclear safety. The obvious point for ministers to make would be that Britain does not face the same quake threat as Japan. An important point, but it may not sway public opinion formed by TV footage of Japan's crisis-hit nuclear plants.Meanwhile, the dimensions of this disaster keep expanding: more than 210,000 people evacuated from five prefectures, 3,400 homes destroyed, the coastal area of Miyako and almost all of the town of Yamada submerged. Many of the victims will be elderly. It is the boast of Japan to have a long-lived people, but those demographics may prove one of the defining features of this crisis. In Shintona many buildings withstood the force of a 10 metre-high wave slamming into the coastline at the speed of a jumbo jet; but a number of their elderly occupants could not. A stark reminder that the toll from this tragedy will continue to mount, even after the immediate danger has receded.