Tesco has decided to sell its Japanese business after eight years there. The move is a rare admission of defeat by the grocer.[Japanese] Revenue of £476m last year was less than 1% of group sales. Book value is zero after full impairment last year and we expect the business is making losses. So there will be a book gain. It is good news that CEO Philip Clarke is able to make these tough decisions, not holding on to unnecessary activities. This might mean he will also sell Fresh & Easy if it is not viable, which should be positive for sentiment around the stock.Tesco is to sell its business in Japan with a full sale process to take place over the coming months. This is not a huge surprise given the company fully wrote-down the goodwill attributable to the business at the last results and had already said it wasn't going to allocate any more capital to it.Therefore without any scope to increase densities and drive profitability, it was always a disposal candidate under new CEO Phil Clarke, who is due to complete his review of the business before the interim results (4 October).Tesco operates 129 stores in Japan (small formats), over half of which are profitable. Sales in 2011 were £476m and we estimate the banner made a small loss (£30m) so estimating likely proceeds is difficult and depends significantly on the buying synergies any strategic buyer feels it could extract.Proceeds aside, this should be taken positively as new CEO Phil Clarke is sticking to his 'no sacred cow' mantra and making pragmatic decisions whilst addressing the key investor concern of deteriorating returns on capital in the international business.While immaterial in Group terms, the strategic decision by Phil Clarke to finally dispose of its Japanese business will be welcomed by the market, for Tesco has never made an acceptable return from the business it acquired in 2004. It follows Carrefour, which swapped its Japanese assets for Tesco's Taiwanese asset in 2005, out of the country. Japan will remain a notoriously difficult country to make money out of, as Wal-Mart is also finding, having had a presence in Japan since 2002 through Seiyu (now a wholly owned subsidiary). Tesco has 129 small stores to sell and the disposal process has begun.