Your claim that Japan views moves to construct a new framework for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 2015 as unrealistic and that it favours extending the time allowed to achieve it is entirely without foundation (Reports, 4 November and 10 November). In the climate change negotiations, Japan has consistently supported the expeditious adoption of a new, single and comprehensive, legally binding document which establishes a fair and effective international framework in which all major economies participate. Japan's position is that the new document should be adopted as early as possible. Until there is a new international framework, based on the Cancun agreements, Japan believes all countries should continue efforts to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.Japan emphasises the importance of support for developing countries, in particular those vulnerable to the negative effects of climate change, and so far has implemented more than $11.3bn of $15bn that was pledged at Copenhagen (COP15) to this end. From now on, Japan will put into effect commitments it has announced, and from 2013 will provide help for vulnerable countries in concert with the international community. It will also give due consideration to adaptation to climate change, which is important to developing countries. As well as announcing this stance at the pre-COP meeting held in South Africa this October, Japan has officially handed its submission to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. COP17 is being held in Durban, South Africa, from 28 November to 9 December. It is important that the whole world agrees on the need for a legally binding document, and achieves significant progress in this regard. Japan is determined to join other countries in resolutely tackling this issue.Naoki ItoMinister (economic), Embassy of Japan• John Ashton is right to say we need to at least "commit to commit" to tackle climate change (Comment, 15 November). The trouble is, most countries have done so but failed to spell out what that commitment means. This has allowed some to shrug off the idea that the global Contraction and Convergence framework is required, on the grounds that a grindingly slow step-by-step approach is what ensures buy-in. What this approach actually secures is a series of witheringly small advances in the face of an alarming acceleration of the problem. This is hailed by those involved as a success, in the pretence that action is being taken. Politicians can point to minute triumphs – for their negotiating positions, if nothing else – and life goes on, business as usual. The Poznan UN climate change summit, a year before Copenhagen and a year into the credit crunch, saw minister after minister hailing the green revolution response to climate change as our economy's saviour. Now it is clear they didn't believe a word of it.Colin ChallenFormer chair, all-party parliamentary climate change group, Scarborough