Japan is out of recession. After two quarters in which the economy contracted, growth resumed in the final three months of 2014.However, that was the end of the good news for the prime minister, Shinzo Abe. Growth remains sluggish. There was no expansion at all in 2014. The much-vaunted “three-arrow strategy” is proving a bit of a flop.Three things are particularly worrying about the latest news from the world’s third biggest economy. The first is that consumers are reluctant to spend despite the government’s decision to postpone an increase in VAT planned for this spring. It was the dampening effect of last year’s consumption tax rise that drove Japan into technical recession in the second and third quarters of 2014.The second concern is that companies are not investing. Although profits are high and companies are awash with money, they are sitting on their cash piles rather than spending them on new kit. Abe’s “three arrows” were supposed to mark a break with Japan’s two-decade period of weak growth and deflation. The corporate sector clearly remains unconvinced.Finally, there is the performance of exports. The first of Abe’s arrows involved an aggressive quantitative-easing (QE) programme, with the Bank of Japan (BoJ) creating money through the purchase of government bonds. This drove down the value of the yen, making Japanese exports cheaper.But the pick-up in overseas sales has been modest when set against the scale of the monetary easing, in part because global demand has been less buoyant than expected and in part because Japan is not the only country trying to push its currency lower.Indeed, since the European Central Bank dropped a hint late last year that it was starting it own QE programme, the yen has been rising against the euro.So what happens now? As a big oil-importing nation, Japan is one of the countries that should benefit most from the falling cost of crude. This though, is unlikely to be enough to give the economy the boost Abe is looking for.Consumers and businesses know that this spring’s tax increase has been delayed, not abandoned. They are tightening belts in anticipation of the moment when the government takes action to repair the public finances. The second arrow – fiscal policy – has therefore not really hit the target.The third arrow – structural reform – has remained in the quiver despite the thumping mandate given to Abe in last year’s general election. That only leaves monetary policy, which is why there is speculation that the BoJ will announce further easing.But this has its risks. In Japan as elsewhere, QE tends to have a bigger impact on asset prices than the real economy. The massive purchases by the BoJ are starting to gum up the bond market. And using QE to drive down the yen runs the risk of retaliation. A currency war in 2015 looks like a real possibility.