Japan's economic crisis has deepened with figures yesterday showing its trade deficit soared to its highest ever level, after global demand for its products dried up.Official figures showed that exports fell by a record 46% in January from a year earlier. But as a measure of how accustomed Japan is becoming to bad economic news, the dismal trade figures were greeted less with panic than with a growing sense of resignation.On a day when Japan's once all-conquering car exporters reported dramatic falls in output, the world's second biggest economy could only look to the other side of the Pacific ocean for its salvation.Earlier in the week the prime minister, Taro Aso, urged President Obama, not to retreat into protectionism to kick-start demand, and had won assurances that recovery would be achieved in tandem, or not at all.Even the modest relief from the bombardment of depressing data cannot come soon enough, both for Aso, whose poor handling of the crisis could see him out of office within months, and for exporters, once the driving force behind Japan Inc., now its biggest victims.FreefallThe sharp fall in exports in January widened Japan's trade deficit to ¥952.6bn (£6.8bn), the fourth deficit in as many months - but by far the steepest - and the biggest since records began in 1979. The world's second biggest economy now finds itself in the unusual position of pleading with trading partners to resist protectionism, in a reversal of the "Japan-bashing" 1980s, when its vast trade surpluses prompted calls to boycott the country's products in the US.Its big three carmakers - Toyota, Honda and Nissan - reported staggering falls in production. Freefalling demand for cars has sent shock waves throughout Japan's auto industry. Toyota admitted that exports to the US plunged by 80% last month.Yesterday's figures follow depressing trade data from across the Asia-Pacific region in another sign that it has joined the US and Europe at the centre of the economic storm. In South Korea, exports fell a record 33% in January from a year earlier, while Taiwan and Singapore reported falls of 43% and 35%.Plummeting demand for Japanese products - from cars to flat-screen TVs and digital cameras - has forced manufacturers to shed tens of thousands of jobs around the world and slash production. Industrial output fell by a record 9.8% in December and analysts are predicting an even worse figure close to 10% for the January to March period.Japan's economy shrank at its fastest pace for 35 years in the last quarter, with more contractions expected well into this year. At an annualised rate of 12.7%, Japan's shrinkage was three times the size of that in the US.Analysts said the next quarter is unlikely to bring any respite. "Further downside seems in store for January-March as a whole, based on reports such as suspensions of production in the auto industry," said Chiwoong Lee, an economist at Goldman Sachs.Japan is bracing itself for gloomy employment and output figures on Friday. Unemployment rose to 4.4% in December, its biggest climb for more than 40 years. Japan's finance ministry said exports to the US fell almost 53% in January, reducing its bilateral trade surplus by 75% to ¥132.8bn, and those to Europe fell by 47.4%.SlideIn addition to plunging demand in important export markets such as the US and Europe, Japan's plight was compounded by evidence of a slowdown in Asia. Exports to the continent were down 47%; those to China fell 45%."Exports to Asia, particularly to China, are tumbling at about the same pace as shipments to the United States, signalling that even China's economy may be shrinking," said Takeshi Minami, chief economist at the Norinchukin Research Institute. "We don't see any signs of a pickup in the Japanese economy in the near term. The economy will gradually worsen further."The figures prompted a slide in the yen to a three-month low against the dollar at ¥96.7. The dollar's gains, combined with reports that Japan is about to buy shares in the market to boost prices sent the Nikkei share average up 2.65% in late trading. The Bank of Japan has already launched a trillion-yen scheme to buy shares in cash-strapped commercial banks, while parliament is debating a government proposal to invest ¥20tn in shares of lending institutions.Other Asian markets were buoyed up by reassurances from the US Federal reserve chairman, Ben Bernanke, that the US was not about to nationalise big banks. In Hong Kong the Hang Seng index was up 1.3% and South Korea's Kospi rose 0.3%.