Japan's courts are not usually the subject of massive popular interest in the country. Salacious details of criminal cases fill the pages of the popular weekly magazines and provide fodder for cheap TV shows, but the court system itself is seen as distant, formal and, above all, dull.The courts have long been seen as a rubber-stamping exercise for cases already decided by confession (often coerced) in police cells, and the minutely detailed dossiers of public prosecutors. Added to this was a growing feeling that the courts were too remote from people. So in 2004, a law was passed to introduce a new method of adjudication for some criminal trials, beginning in May 2009. Now, the first trial using this system – a case of murder involving elderly neighbours – has just started in Tokyo.Some have characterised this saiban-inas a "jury" system, but it is actually a lay-judge system. Whereas in the UK 12 ordinary people are called by the courts to hear evidence and make a judgment on the guilt of the accused, in the new Japanese system six citizens join three professional judges. They not only hear evidence, but are also able to question witnesses and help decide the sentence.It seems an onerous task. So it is not surprising that many who were originally shortlisted for lay-judge duty but did not make the final six for the first trial are relieved to have escaped – not because, they found it inconvenient, but because of the burden of responsibility they felt. This has particular cultural components. Strongly stated opinions and absolutes are not favoured in Japan, and people like to keep options open.But why this particular, strange, hybrid system? The answer is that Japan had an almost identical system from 1928 to 1943. Progressives had tried to introduce a full Anglo-American style 12-person jury, but judges, and conservative and nationalist politicians opposed this and forced a compromise: the saiban-in system. The old system was in place for a very short time: it was hardly suited to the militarist regime that gained control in the 1930s, and was eventually ended.However, opposition seems rather different this time around. In the UK, civil libertarians have been fighting to defend jury systems, but in Japan civil liberties arguments have been marshalled by protesters against the new system. Opponents argue that the selection process violates privacy by forcing citizens' personal views to be exposed, and is authoritarian because citizens cannot refuse to serve except for health reasons. Some have even likened the system to a lynch mob, because Japan still has the death penalty.However, dig deeper, and underlying these arguments are conservative concerns and the once-again rising influence of nationalists akin to those of the late 1920s: defence of the "professionalism" of judges, and the arguments about the quasi-sacred integrity and necessary distance of courts from popular influence.More generally, even though this system is the result of a bill passed five years ago, it seems to reflect populist desperation from the increasingly unpopular ruling Liberal Democratic party, which faces defeat for the first time in decades in the general elections this month.If nothing else, the controversy over the legal system has excited Japanese people about the courts, and whatever happens in the future, goings-on in court that result in interest and engagement in criminal justice has to be a good thing.