At Iruma military base in Saitama prefecture, north of Tokyo, Air Force Major Hiroshi Taniguchi is ready for anything. As commander of the 4th air defence missile unit, Taniguchi is on the front line of Japan's much downplayed but scarily real, ongoing stand-off with North Korea, one of several potential conflicts in a rough neighbourhood.Japanese politicians and their US military allies tend to soft-pedal problems with Pyongyang, stressing the need to resume the diplomatic process broken off last year. But no one at Iruma has forgotten the moment last April when North Korea lofted a TaepoDong-2 long range ballistic missile over Japan, sending it crashing into the Pacific – or the North's second nuclear test explosion the following month."If an enemy dares to attack us, that's lucky for us," an unsmiling Taniguchi said. "Once they are within range, it is our opportunity, not theirs."Taniguchi's confidence in Japan's ability to defend itself rests on the weapons under his command – an American designed, Japanese built Patriot PAC-3 missile battery, attached to one of the six ballistic missile defence (BMD) groups girdling the country since 2007.The innocuous-looking, green-painted oblong canisters contain four Patriot missiles each. Mounted on trucks, pointing skywards, and electronically linked to six naval destroyers equipped with Aegis phased array radar, they mark the Japan Self-Defence Force's first foray into BMD. The full deployment will be completed this year.This is the type of defensive missile system the Obama administration plans to introduce in eastern Europe. It is also similar to the missiles the US has controversially agreed to sell to Taiwan, to help counter the growing threat from China.Under Article 9 of its postwar constitution, Japan renounced "forever" the threat or use of force as a means of settling international disputes. But the 1960 US-Japan security treaty made clear that Tokyo has a right to self-defence.Since then, and with accelerating speed since the 9/11 attacks, Japan's defence and security activities have expanded. While still essentially defensive in nature, they include international peacekeeping operations, logistical and financial support in Afghanistan, emphasis on strengthened bilateral and multilateral regional alliances, overseas disaster relief, anti-piracy and coastguard operations, and a pro-active overseas development programme.Defence ministry officials and analysts in Tokyo suggest three factors are driving this evolution. One is a host of regional threats and potential flashpoints. They include territorial disputes with China, Russia and South Korea; China's rapid military build-up (its defence spending is rising in double digits each year); its aggressive oil exploration activities in the East China Sea; and North Korea's unpredictable behaviour."The environment that we face is harsh and difficult and this is making us feel that we may have to be more self-reliant," said a senior defence ministry official. "On the other hand, this makes it all the more important to solidify our alliance with the US."The second factor fuelling Japanese insecurity, however, is growing doubt about that very alliance. A simmering row over relocating the Futenma US Marine Corps base in Okinawa, US troop drawdowns in east Asia, revived concerns about the dependability of the US "nuclear umbrella" and the general perception that US global predominance is weakening in the new "Chinese century" all suggest Japan must do more to look after itself.This thinking is reflected, thirdly, in Japan's domestic politics, which remain in flux after last autumn's watershed defeat of the conservative Liberal Democrats, in power almost continuously since the war, by the centre-left Democratic party.Prime minister Yukio Hatoyama's emphasis on east Asian communal "fraternity" and a "more equal", balanced relationship with the US has put noses out of joint in Washington but appears to have struck a chord with Japanese voters. Upper House elections in July could further embolden the Democrats. Meanwhile, entrenched economic difficulties are also spurring un-Japanese talk of radical solutions.Such problems are for the politicians to sort out. At Iruma air base, Major Taniguchi sticks to the basics, and he draws an unexpected parallel. When it comes to air defence, the RAF's triumph in the Battle of Britain in 1940 is his inspiration, he says. Japan was devastated in the second world war because it could not defend itself in the air.By the look on his face, it is clear that if Taniguchi has any say in the matter, it won't happen again.