Once upon a time, the Tokyo Game Show was the biggest videogames event on the planet, a throbbing hive of amazing announcements, bustling demo pods and saucy cos-players. This year's event has warranted only a handful of cursory mentions in the Western games press. "Man, Japan is over. We're done. Our game industry is finished," veteran Capcom game designer Keiji Inafune is quoted as saying on the show floor. A bleak prognosis, but sadly not an unreasonably alarmist one - Hideo Kojima made similar points at the start of the year.Indeed, Japanese game development has been in gradual decline for a decade. Sure, in the eighties and nineties, videogame culture was absolutely dominated by the big arcade releases - an arena monopolised by Japan. What players wanted from their consoles were pixel-perfect adaptations of coin-ops like Double Dragon, Street Fighter II, Daytona USA and Tekken. But in the mid-nineties, new audiences were drawn to the more expensive and intensely marketed PlayStation. At first they lapped up flashy arcade fare like Ridge Racer and Virtual Fighter, but then older gamers started to look for deep long-term challenges instead of quick 'hardcore' thrills; the influence of the arcade waned, and the whole structure of the industry evolved to embrace this change in appetite. Western developers began to create large, hugely ambitious adventure titles - the likes of Tomb Raider and Grand Theft Auto 3 - which drew their influences from Western culture, rather than manga and martial arts. Rockstar North mashed up mature sex and violence in a way that the big Japanese publishers would not even contemplate, kickstarting a massive new trend for adult interactive experiences far removed from the codified ramblings of Devil May Cry and Onimusha with their comic book mythologies and hyper stylised action. At the same time, the first-person shooter became a major console genre, the likes of Halo, Call of Duty and Medal of Honor bringing the PC gaming experience of choice to a ravenous new fanbase. But, Japanese developers had no background in PC development - the market was almost irrelevant in the country - so the whole FPS culture was alien to them. The same goes for the MMORPG phenomenon.Now, PES has relinquished its crown to FIFA, Resident Evil is in crisis after a weakened fifth instalment, Western developers have stolen, modified and globalised the whole rhythm action genre... Currently, the big Japanese publishers seem content to raid their back catalogues to exploit past glories - Capcom with SFIV, Mega Man and Bionic Commando, Namco with Tekken and Splatterhouse, Konami with Silent Hill, Castlevania and Vandal Hearts... The country's major companies have always been insular, always been keenest to appease the domestic market, but the problem is, no-one else is as interested anymore. So, is Japan really finished as a major force in game development?Well, of course not. For a start, you cannot possibly overlook the enormous impact of the Wii - the machine has revolutionalised the whole concept of the console/human interface, while the Fit brand is one of the biggest in the world right now. You also cannot overlook the fact that Sony is still a massive player in the manufacture of games hardware. And on the games side we're looking forward to Gran Turismo 5, Metal Gear Solid: Rising, Final Fantasy XIII, Super Mario Galaxy 2, Last Guardian, Metroid: Other M, a new Professor Layton game from Level-5, whatever Grasshopper Manufacture is currently working on... the list goes on.But more importantly - and on a more profound level - Japan still makes a singular contribution to the videogame culture and community. Japanese developers draw from a unique aesthetic, an approach to iconography, character design and structure that is unfathomable to studios in the west. The concept of kawaii is the obvious manifestation of this - Loco Roco, Pokemon, Puyo Puyo, Harvest Moon, Cooking Mama - none of them could have originated anywhere else. But it goes much deeper than that - into uses of digital space (Echochrome), movement (SFIV), metamorphosis (Resident Evil), psychological horror (Fatal Frame, Silent Hill), time and seasonality (Animal Crossing), etc, etc. Japanese developers are also more likely to toy with the arcane possibilities of the hardware - for example, introducing light sensors (Boktai), getting you to swap controller ports as a tactical gameplay element (Metal Gear Solid) - this isn't all just going to disappear.Look at Nintendo again - after the relative failure of Game Cube everyone had pretty much written off the company, then there was a moment of tangential genius - the Wii - and it's back to the top of the class for Miyamoto and co. Right now, Japanese development teams are embracing Natal; it is likely they will think of stuff that, say, Activision and Ubisoft wouldn't come up with in a hundred years of dedicated R&D. Some of it won't travel, but some of it will be astonishing, epoch-shattering even.This is, though, clearly a period of transition. It seems Japanese publishers are having difficulty adjusting to the mega-budget Hollywood-style development system required to create chart-topping titles for the current gen consoles. Studios wishing to make a global impact are going to have to take a broader cultural outlook - embracing Western tropes and influences. One way to smooth this process is creative co-operation; it's something Capcom has tried with Bionic Commando and Dead Rising 2, both of which were co-operative projects involving in-house Japanese producers and Western studios. It didn't work out with the former (indeed the Bionic Commando developer, GRIN, has now folded), but the Dead Rising sequel looks promising. The game isn't over; Japan has plenty of lives left.