The man who will today become prime minister of the world's third largest economy compared himself yesterday to the dojo loach – an eel-like creature which scavenges in the mud for snails and leftovers. Yoshihiko Noda's self-depreciation was rhetorical but the quantity of muck he faces is real enough. He inherits a legacy that was enough to finish off five predecessors in as many years, and the list of problems only seems to grow as one failed leader hands over to the next. Mr Noda inherits a nuclear crisis, a north-eastern coastal area devastated by the tsunami, tens of thousands of people yet to be permanently rehoused, an economy in recession staggering under the weight of its public debt, soaring health and social security costs, a divided parliament, a party in crisis and a country that lost faith in its leaders to govern.Japan's debt, at 210 % of GDP – the highest in the industrialised world – may paradoxically be the least of his problems. First, because it is sustainable, 95% of it being held by the Japanese themselves. That and a combination of low interest rates means that the treasury has a ready source of cash to finance its debt. Last week's downgrading by Moody's may not have the same effect there as it has had on less indebted economies and could actually help in the long run by lowering the value of the yen. Reducing the debt is a political calculation about which generation bears the greater burden of financing it. The current generation is by European standards lightly taxed. The VAT rate is one-fourth of the British one. Mr Noda, who served as finance minister in the previous administration, has some leeway to raise taxes.The political waters Mr Noda has to navigate are less clear. He emerged the winner of the two-day contest to find the next leader of the governing Democrat party through a process of attrition. He started off as the favourite neither of fellow parliamentarians nor the popular vote. The problems of this party have nothing to do with what is going on in the rest of Japan, but centre on the divisive but still powerful figure of Ichiro Ozawa, a man who continues to control the party's biggest faction despite facing trial in a political funding scandal. The battle to stop the candidate backed by Mr Ozawa was paid for by the most popular candidate, the former foreign minister, Seiji Maehara, whose supporters backed Mr Noda. This is a political loss as Mr Maehara will undoubtedly one day make a strong leader. But the result is the choice of a man with no natural power base within the party.It could be that the man of whom so little is expected succeeds where others have failed. Mr Noda yesterday stressed his humble origins to a political class which hold seats as a matter of family tradition. But the enigma of Japan's inability to find a leader the country can rally around remains. For some analysts, the lack of an entity that can hold true authority over the bureaucrats and industrialists who run the country is a function of modern Japan's continued dependence on Pax Americana, which anyway is a commodity in short supply. But that does not wholly explain the emergence of popular leaders like Junichiro Koizumi who managed to struggle above the fray. For others, there are structural reasons why the office of prime minister is undervalued – its relatively low salary and short term. That Americans had no clear understanding of the dynamics of Japanese power that led to the Pacific war, and that a post-war country characterised by weak politicians and strong bureaucrats suited Washington's military interests, are not now sufficient explanations for the crisis of Japanese leadership.The prospects for Mr Noda's political longevity are not bright, but the first and most basic task he faces is to seize control of his party and his government. In this, his choice of fish is not encouraging. Dojos make good pets.