For the past year, the Guardian has followed seven survivors of the Japanese tsunami as they attempt to put the 11 March tragedy behind them and rebuild their lives and communities. After the first anniversary of the disaster, they explain how their lives have changed, and why they draw strength from the memory of the tens of thousands of people who died that day.The sisters, who set up a makeshift kitchen for survivors in their temple refuge after the tsunami, are cooking again – this time, at their family-run restaurant, Morinoya, which reopened in a temporary mall earlier this year. For Sasaki, 61, being able to serve their signature dishes of soba noodles and tempura on rice to her old regulars is a big step for her family, if not for their city. "After months of being in shock, there are signs of movement in the city again," she said. "Many of our former customers eat at our place, and the atmosphere is a little like the old days." Sasaki runs Morinoya – the restaurant's original sign, recovered from the debris, hangs above the premises – with her sister, Niinuma, 59, her husband, Kazuyasu, and her 81-year-old mother, Takiko. She is more optimistic about the restaurant than she is about Kamaishi, an industrial city where the disaster left 1,200 of its 40,000 residents dead or missing. "It's better than it was six months ago, but no decision has been made on where, or how, to rebuild," Sasaki says. The family marked the anniversary on Sunday at a memorial service, and then lit candles for friends and neighbours who were among the victims. She says: "At that moment, I realised how important it was for me to go on – for them."Takahashi is continuing his personal mission to decontaminate his town, some of which lies inside the 12-mile nuclear evacuation zone. The Fukushima Daiichi accident sent tens of thousands of Minamisoma's 70,000 residents fleeing; a year on, about 20,000 have yet to return. "Radiation levels are coming down, and if we can deal with the remaining hotspots then I think this will be a place in which it is safe for children to live again," Takahashi said from his gynaecology practice. "About 95% of the people here who have had internal radiation checks showed no abnormalities, and the rest had very low, safe readings." Between March and May last year, just two children were born in Minamisoma, but since then there have been 42 births. The 73-year-old is now fighting a more personal battle, after being diagnosed with cancer in the middle of last year. "I'm continuing with treatment and working at the same time, so I've been feeling tired lately," he said. On the tsunami anniversary, Takahashi and his neighbours lit candles sent from Kobe, where more than 6,000 people died in an earthquake in 1995. "Last year's disaster suddenly came back to me," he said. "For a moment, I was full of fear again."Shimizu's home, on a hill overlooking the city, was spared by last year's tsunami, but the impact has never been far away. Several of her dance students died, and she became a surrogate mother to a teenage brother and sister who were orphaned by the tsunami. The siblings live with their uncle in temporary housing, and are performing well at school, but Shimizu continues to play an important role in their recovery. "Their uncle is quitting his job next month," she said. "He says he no longer feels like working, and I worry about the effect that will have on them." The children visit Shimizu every afternoon, do their homework, and eat dinner before they go home. "The boy mentions his parents a lot now," she said, "but his sister has stopped talking about them." Last summer, Shimizu danced for the first time since the disaster at a local festival; she will do the same this year, alongside past and present pupils, whom her son has encouraged to get involved. "It will take years for this place to be rebuilt," she says of Rikuzentakata. "I tell the children that they have to think about that time in the future when I'll no longer be around. They are taking that in their stride. This time last year, they were just kids. They have had to grow up very fast."Kono's mission to rebuild his company is proceeding at a pace that surprises even him. This May, Yagisawa Shoten, the business his family has run for over 200 years, will reopen in its own factory in a town just outside its original location, in Rikuzentakata. For the past few months, another firm has been making Kono's products under licence, using recipes passed down through generations of his family. "Having our own factory will help us rebuild our brand and our relationship with our customers," he said. "It's a shame we can't reopen on the old site, but the damage there was so serious that it would take years. This way, we can keep the company going." On Sunday, Kono and his staff gathered to remember their head of sales, a 30-year-old volunteer firefighter who was killed while trying to close the harbour gates. "It was an extremely sad day," he said. "I told him that we would honour his memory by making our business work again."Within weeks of the tsunami, Yagi had started turning the frame of a convenience store in the town's Okirai district into the new headquarters of Sanriku Toretate (fresh from the sea) Market, his ruined online seafood business. A year later, he is paying rent on the property and has installed storage space and a state-of-the-art freezing unit that will mark the next step towards recovery. Local women who last year earned money making bracelets from damaged fishing nets will by the early summer be creating dishes using locally caught seafood. "It will be the kind of thing that a typical fishing family eats around here," the 35-year-old said. The local catch will be sold directly to retailers and individual consumers; by selling less through wholesalers, Yagi reckons he will be able to deliver better profit margins to the fishermen he is working with. He also plans to build a processing facility where tourists can gain firsthand experience of the fisheries industry, and to open a restaurant. But the usually indomitable businessman admits he occasionally feels overwhelmed. "To be honest, I am permanently worried about the future," he said. "Many people around here don't see themselves as survivors, but as being forced to live on. "But we owe it to those who died, and to ourselves, to make this work."On Monday, the day after his hometown, Ofunato, marked a year since it was engulfed by the tsunami, Kumagai launched a fisherman's association with the help of a 3m yen donation from South Korea. Later this year, Kumagai, who lost his boat in the disaster, will acquire a new vessel and start supplying Yagi's company with locally caught seafood. "A few of us decided to get together because we stood to gain more as a group than as individuals," Kumagai said. "But it's only a start. We still haven't bought any equipment ... and that's very expensive. We couldn't wait any longer, though ... I have to eat." For Kumagai, the anniversary was a time to look ahead. "I see it as the start of year one; next 11 March, it will be the start of year two. My only goal now is to make things better year by year. The Okirai district's fishing fleet is much smaller, and its members much younger than before the disaster: at 53, Kumagai is the oldest in the new organisation. Many older fishermen have lost the will to rebuild, says Kumagai, who couldn't bring himself to stare at the sea in the aftermath of the tsunami. "Ideally, I would like life to return to the way it was," he says. "We've made a start. But it's only a start."