The meltdown in Asian markets continued today, with Japan's Nikkei stock average falling another 5.7% to its lowest close for two years amid continuing fears over a global slowdown prompted by a looming US recession.The Nikkei, which lost almost 4% yesterday, dipped 752.89 points to close at 12,573, its lowest close since October 2005. Today's loss was the biggest percentage decline since October 8, 1998, when shares plummeted 5.78%.The broader Topix index fell 5.7%, its biggest one-day loss since the September 11 terrorist attacks.Today's fall wiped out about $225bn (£115bn) in market value - about equivalent to the size of the Irish economy.The Nikkei has now fallen almost 18% this year - and more than 9% this week - as Japan wrestles with the bigger-than-expected effects of the US sub-prime mortgage crisis. A stimulus package announced by George Bush last week failed to raise confidence among investors from Wall Street to London.In Tokyo they offloaded shares amid fears that a US economic slowdown will weaken demand for exports, damaging Japan's attempts to keep its own economic recovery on track.Financial stocks were battered for a second day, with Mizuho Financial falling 8.2% and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial by 7.8%."It's like a funeral in here," Ken Masuda, a senior equities dealer at Shinko Securities, told Reuters."No one knows what is going to happen tonight in New York. It's like we've gone blind - you don't know what's coming. Until we see New York, all we can do is sell."With the government insisting it had no immediate plans to take action, the pace of this week's falls appear to have wrong-footed officials."Stock markets across the world are falling and it basically stems from the US," the economy minister, Hiroko Ota, said. "It is difficult at the moment to consider Japan taking action alone. Instead we need to cooperate globally."The yen's recent strength against the dollar, meanwhile, is hitting exporters' overseas earnings and damaging sentiment. Shares in Toyota, Japan's biggest carmaker, fell 7.2% to 4,880 yen (£23) today; Sony, meanwhile, lost 6.9% to close at 5,110 yen.The Bank of Japan governor, Toshihiko Fukui, warned that the impact on Japan of the US slowdown was turning out to be worse than expected.The central bank, which today left interest rates unchanged at 0.5%, said Japan's economic recovery remained on track but that the pace of expansion would slow."All in all, it remains likely that the Japanese economy will sustain its growth with stable prices, while a favourable cycle of output, income and spending remains in place," he told reporters."While the global economy continues to expand with areas in growth spreading, we are paying attention especially to the US economy. Private consumption and capital investment remain on a moderate rising trend there, but there are prolonged adjustments in the housing market."The unemployment rate is also rising somewhat recently. A slowdown in the US economy is intensifying. We need to continue to watch developments in the sub-prime problems and their impact."Some analysts said Fukui's remarks hinted at an underlying caution that could reveal itself in the coming weeks."Fukui is not acting hawkish," said Seiji Shiraishi of HSBC Securities Japan. "His comments about uncertainty over the outlook in the economy suggest that he is toning down his view in accordance with market moves."If upcoming hard data turn out weak, Fukui could revise his view on the underlying economy downward."