Hometown: Guildford.  The lineup: Marco Giuliani (music, production).  The background: Marco Giuliani aka Last Japan is a Jack of many electronic trades and if you think we're going to now say "master of none" you've come to the wrong place. Fact is, the 23-year-old Guildford boy has released a series of EPs over the last few years that demonstrate a more than working knowledge of everything from drum'n'bass and dubstep to 2step, grime and UK funky, with further allusions to house and Detroit techno, even Warp-style electronica and a dread-bass pulse that we are tempted to term reggaetronic. That kind of compliment, about their dazzling eclecticism and dextrous familiarity with all manner of genres, gets paid a lot to DJs and producers but in this instance it's true. There is a Derrick May-ish sense of shimmering propulsion towards an unknown destination on one track while another is titled L.F.O., surely a nod to the Leeds techno duo.Reading on mobile? Click here to listenHe's young, he's good-looking, and he's a walking bass encyclopaedia who can seemingly open the latter at any page and make a club track out of it. We hate him. No, we like him but through our admiration there is envy leading inevitably to spite. He's remixed the great and the good - which reminds us, we must write about Bondax before they hit puberty - he presents a bi-monthly NTS radio show called Circadian Rhythms, he's produced music for Nokia and "leading sound design company" (it says here) Radium Audio, he has been able to play guitar, drums, trumpet and piano since childhood, and he has a degree in music production. He's prolific, too, with a series of EPs - available on Spotify - that show his a) range and b) increasingly accomplished sound. If you like Magnetic Man, try Every Time I, with its soulful female warbles and noirstep beats. If you want to test your speakers and make inanimate objects vibrate across your room, try Float. If you fancy some retro-eski to take away the horrible taste from that Dizzee/Robbie debacle, try Paid In Full featuring Merky ACE, who MTV recently crowned the "new Prince of grime". If you want bass-sick (not basic - this is maximalist stuff, great for headphones), try Hidden. And if you want something a little less, shall we say, vigorous, try Settle Down, which fits quite nicely, thank you, next to the Lovers 2step of Disclosure's White Noise. Actually, thank Last Japan. The buzz: "A veritable feast of sounds ranging from Detroit techno to grime, Miami Bass over to Warp-style electronica."  The truth: He's the new poster boy of post-2step (and assorted other bass music tangents). Most likely to: Sound good after darsk. Least likely to: Play trumpet on his next EP. What to buy: The Darsk EP is released on September 8 by Space + Time.  File next to: T.Williams, Jamie Grind, Derrick May, Disclosure. Links: soundcloud.com/lastjapan. Monday's new band: Miss DeeVee.