Japan might seem like a remote destination with a culture quite dissimilar to ours. But in fact the UK has much in common with the Japanese, another island race. Respect flows both ways in business.Business reports from Japan tend to focus heavily on the negative. The country's "lost decades" of economic decline, which began in the early 1990s, are often referred to. More recently, the earthquakes of 2011, and their effect on the country's nuclear energy infrastructure, added fear to a tale of decline. But entrepreneurs looking to enter this huge and profitable market would be best advised not to dwell upon such issues. For Japan is still the world's third largest economy and a big importer. It has a population of 128 million people, high living standards and a taste for British goods and brands. Therefore, for exporters of premium and quality goods it can be an excellent place to do business.FormalitiesJapan's business culture is very formalised and subject to many protocols. It's easy for an outsider unaware of the appropriate etiquette to cause offence accidentally. Gaining advice in advance is a sensible precaution. Greg McCray is the chief executive of Acal Energy, a hydrogen fuel cell company based in Cheshire, which is expanding into Japan. McCray also spent over a decade trading with Japan at a previous company and has learned much about doing business there. "Japanese businesses are very formal, you don't walk in and start telling jokes. You wear a suit and tie, follow protocol and respect the hierarchy of the business," he says.RelationshipsJapanese businesses like to get to know their partners well. In the past, the keiretsu system – which referred to the tight-knit relationship between connected companies – dominated the economy. This is not so much the case any more, but its legacy continues. "Relationships are important in any business, but none more so than in Japan," advises McCray. Entrepreneurs will need to spend a lot of time getting to know their buyers and partners, who will ask many questions, far more than is usually the case between British companies. Introductions should be considered as a compliment and a vital first step to making a deal. Nonetheless, the pace of agreeing and signing a contract can be slow.ConsensusSeniority is an important part of Japanese culture and this is particuarly true in business. The head of the company must be treated with respect. But while Japanese businesses are hierarchical, they also like to operate with the approval of the majority. Nick Hines is the chief executive of the Institute of Diplomacy and Business, which advises companies on trading overseas. He says Japanese businesses combine a mixture of hierarchical leadership with consensus. "Japanese businesses are hierarchal by nature, but there is also culture of consensus which can involve many people," he says. Therefore, it is important for entrepreneurs to pay the boss his dues, but then to wait while he convinces his own people.PolitenessRather like the British, the Japanese place a lot of value on politeness. During discussions with trading partners, they are especially keen not to offend the other party. The concept of "loss of face" is important to understand. Rather than saying 'No', the Japanese are more likely to say something would be 'difficult'. While they are happy to tell you what they like, they also tend to avoid outright criticism.Entrepreneurs have been known to fail spectacularly in Japan by inadvertently causing offence. Here's a few faux pas to be aware of:1. Business cardsReceiving and giving business cards is taken very seriously, so don't just stick them in your pocket or drop them on the table. Ensure you take time to look at them and thank the provider.2. Nose blowingPeople from Japan are particularly sensitive about nasal discharge. Nose blowing in the boardroom could cause outright revulsion. The habit of putting a used tissue back in your pocket is also beyond the pale for the Japanese. If you have a cold, then cancel the meeting.3. Yes and NoThe polite Japanese often say "yes" but rarely "no". So don't mistake politeness for a confirmation of an order and understand that the worst thing they can say really is "no".4. Closing the dealPressure selling is not appreciated, so allow the Japanese to take their time. However, once a deal is made, it can last for years, if not decades.5. Loss of faceAlways show your contact true respect, avoid causing embarrassment and never go behind their back even when progress in negotiations is slow. Causing loss of face can poison relations indefinitely.Hannah Beaumont founded organic clothing company Beaumont Organic in 2008 at the age of 24. She began trading with Japan the following year. Sales to Japan now represent around 50% of its revenues."We won best textile product at the National Organic Awards and gained a lot of press attention. A Japanese buyer who was in the country at the time contacted us and wanted to sell our products," Beaumont says.After the products had been tried, Beaumont went out to Japan to get to know her contacts better and meet key staff at the department stores. UK Trade and Investment, the government agency that supports British exporters, also assured her the distributor had a good reputation and she agreed to an exclusive deal. "The distributor is responsible for everything in Japan from pricing to sales and marketing. We basically contact them to tell them the goods are ready, they buy off us in bulk and take them to Japan."Beaumont enjoys working with her Japanese distributor, but says that Japanese business culture is very formal, efficient. Initially, there tend to be many questions. "As long as you are prepared to communicate with them it is fine. Japanese businesses are quite demanding and there were lots of emails and questions to answer."Finally, Beaumont says there's a great market in Japan for British businesses that sell quality products. " They do value quality and British products as well as brands that look British sell well over there."This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To receive more like this you can become a member of the Small Business Network here. 