Director Satoshi Kon sadly passed away on Tuesday, succumbing to pancreatic cancer. He was only 46, and his legacy of work is a mere four completed feature films and one television series. So, it's likely many of you have not heard of the man – doubly likely since his films were all animated.There has long been an argument regarding the validity of animation as a medium for adults. It's easy for many to dismiss animated film as being automatically for kids or, worse, for teenagers. But for myself and others, animation is just another way of telling a story or getting a message across to an audience. This is why I referred to Satoshi Kon as a "director" in the opening paragraph: his films are so involving and cinematic it's easy to forget that they are constructed one frame at a time. What's more, they are definitely not for kids. These days, rather than give unbelievers in the power and potential of animated features the short thrift they clearly deserve, I'll point them in the direction of Kon's slim catalogue. Perfect Blue, Millennium Actress, Tokyo Godfathers and Paprika are all extremely accomplished films.Like many, I first encountered Kon's work upon the release of his 1998 directorial debut, Perfect Blue. The early 90s had seen a glut of anime releases over here following the success of Katsuhiro Otomo's Akira. I managed to catch most of them on video, enjoying a crash course in a culture and artform offering much that was novel to the western viewer. But precious few were anywhere near Akira's level of achievement, and plenty were simply hideous, so my interest waned. When Perfect Blue came along, I wasn't in any hurry to sit through another hard-to-follow story of ultra-violence and tentacle rape. Concerning a J-pop sensation trying to go solo, it seemed designed to keep audiences away. But the reviews and rumours kept referencing Hitchcock, Lynch and Scorsese. This was clearly not a run-of-the-mill production.Based on a novel, Perfect Blue was allegedly intended as a live-action feature, but with money hard to raise it was downgraded to direct-to-video, then direct-to-video-animation. When Satoshi Kon took the reigns, it was no one's idea of a hit – which is probably why he was able to get the gig in the first place. But when his vision took hold it was soon headed for theatrical release. Without giving too much away, the film starts off in stylish yet straightforward fashion as pop singer Rumi leaves her successful band to pursue an acting career. Her fans are in uproar; her stalker goes over the edge. As the pressure and trauma mount, Rumi's grip on reality becomes fractured – and then things start to get really interesting. It was special enough for Darren Aronofsky to secure the rights, and though his live-action remake never got past the starter's gate he did lift two very striking shots for Requiem For A Dream, while the trailer for his forthcoming Black Swan seems to have a little flavour of it, too.Kon's next films surpassed all expectations. It became clear with Millennium Actress and Tokyo Godfathers that he was doing something very different from his peers. The first, which tells the story of a popular film star who withdraws from public life, proved he was a director-aficionado with a deep knowledge and even deeper love of cinema. Chiyoko's narrative is interspersed with memories/clips from her films that blur together – telling not only her own history but also a potted history of Japanese cinema. The actress was based on Setsuko Hara and Hideko Takamine, muses of the great directors Yasujirō Ozu and Mikio Naruse respectively. Millennium Actress also touched on Kaiju Eiga, the Japanese monster-movie genre. There aren't any other animated films I can think of that assimilate such a range of references.Kon's brief sojourn in the world of television also yielded spectacular results, with the bizarre Paranoia Agent. This series, again best approached with as little foreknowledge as possible, starts with a designer of cutesy characters trying to come up with a new creation to match the popularity of her iconic pink dog, Maromi, as a series of seemingly random people are brutally attacked by a kid wielding a golden baseball bat. Reality is not to be trusted and the oft-employed comparisons to the work of David Lynch are not too wide of the mark.For me, his finest work was his last: Paprika. Again it's completely unfair to condense it into a brief synopsis, but it deals with a machine that can place an avatar into another person's dreams. I wasn't the only one to notice, when the first trailer from Christopher Nolan's Inception hit, that it looks a bit like the 2006 animation – though I wouldn't call it a rip-off, there are enough similarities to suggest he has at least seen it. For my money, Kon's is the better film – the Japanese director really wasn't afraid to "dream a little bigger" . Paprika is more spectacular, imaginative, fun and emotional than Nolan's hit. Now, there's a live action version with director Wolfgang Peterson mooted.Satoshi Kon left us with one final film, The Dream Machine, still in production. Little is known about this project other than that it concerns robots and is aimed at younger viewers – though we know how little that really means. Beside my sympathy for his family and friends, Kon's death did shock and sadden me on a personal level because in him I had found a director who didn't disappoint, one I could trust wholeheartedly – which is incredibly rare. To speak selfishly, I feel sadness that I will never see him complete a new film. Here was a director I felt I could depend on to reaffirm my faith in cinema – a faith that gets a good battering almost daily as I sit through films that do little more than waste my time. But Kon's films are ones I foresee myself returning to many times in the future.And as for those children, the supposed target audience for his animations? Well, they have plenty of time to grow into them.