It is 140 years old, one of the world’s largest financial bodies and a much-loved Japanese national institution. And soon, investors will have the opportunity to claim a stake of their own.Plans to float part of Japan Post’s business, which were announced in December, represent the culmination of a lengthy process with much at stake politically. The holding company, one of the world’s largest financial bodies, and two of its four subsidiaries – tasked with banking and insurance – will be opened to investors.The holding company will continue to manage postal services and mail delivery, to which the Japanese are very attached due to the extensive network reaching even the most remote corners of the archipelago.The project will be submitted to the Tokyo stock exchange in June, with the goal of organising an initial public offering between August and December. “The law on privatisation of Japan Post requires us to bring in private equity as soon as possible,” said CEO Taizo Nishimuro, adding that listing the three parts of the business at the same time “was the best way to ensure fair valuation”. Eleven banks, including JP Morgan and Nomura Holdings, will manage the operation.Privatisation will involve several steps. The first phase should raise ¥1tn to ¥2tn ($8.4bn to $16.8bn) according to Japan’s ministry of finance, which has given the go-ahead for the initial public offering. The proceeds will be used to rebuild areas devastated by the earthquake, tidal wave and subsequent Fukushima nuclear disaster that hit Japan in March 2011.The holding company – in which the state can legally retain a 30% share – will gradually divest itself of its interests in banking and insurance, until it owns only 50% of the whole. The two activities will thus gain a degree of independence, opening the way for diversification.The banking division manages deposits worth ¥178tn, consisting mainly of pensioners’ savings. The funds are used to buy low-yield treasury bonds, which finance public debt and infrastructure spending in Japan.Under the changes, the banking division hopes to be permitted to make loans to big business and issue mortgages. Its distribution network will be enlarged and there are plans for partnerships with regional bodies. One of the objectives is to offer financial services in areas where there are few banks.The insurance division, which has so far concentrated on life insurance, is also keen to diversify.The question is whether investors, particularly from abroad, will find the offering attractive. Between April and September Japan Post generated ¥217bn in profits, but its postal services division is running at a loss. Furthermore its business is concentrated in Japan, where an ageing population may well be a limit on the scope for growth. The holding’s various divisions will consequently need to look overseas. Related: Japan Post offers $6.5bn to take over Australia's Toll Holdings Privatisation of this venerable public concern was one of Junichiro Koizumi’s priorities. As prime minister from 2001-2006 he worked hard to achieve this goal, even calling an early general election in 2005 as a form of referendum on the matter. A bill he proposed provided for a 10-year transition period, starting in 2007, at the end of which the banking and insurance divisions would be privatised.Koizumi was delivering on a promise made in 1993, as minister of post and telecommunications. He was keen to rid Japan of the lobby formed by postmen, numbering 260,000, a third of all public servants. His grandfather, Matajiro Koizumi, held the same position in 1929-31 and attempted in vain to privatise the post office.Koizumi Jr’s plan was delayed when the Democratic party of Japan came to power in 2009. In 2012 new legislation authorised the banking and insurance divisions to diversify their activities. After the Liberal Democratic party’s general election victory in December 2012 the government put privatisation back on the agenda. In addition to the influx of ready cash, it seems a good opportunity to showcase its reforming spirit. This article appeared in Guardian Weekly, which incorporates material from Le Monde