The states of Nevada, Colorado and New Mexico are key to what has been called Barack Obama's Western strategy. All three states helped send George W Bush to a second term, but they are all leaning, even if slightly, to Obama. New Mexico shows why these states have been challenging for Democrats and also why Barack Obama might win here.We're now in Colorado. We've been to Nevada and New Mexico, and here is The Nation's Ari Melber talking about Obama's western strategy:Western Democrats, a different breedPolitics in these western states is very different than on the coasts. Take Democratic Bill Richardson for example. He touts his support for gun rights and won the endorsement of the National Rifle Association. He has a permit to carry a concealed weapon, said Heath Haussamen who covers politics for the New Mexico Independent.John McCain's message of "drill, baby, drill" also plays well in this oil and natural gas producing state, Heath said. The Yates Petroleum Company headquartered here is the largest holder of oil and gas drilling leases on federal land in the West, and it's been an important industry for the state.This is a traditionally Democatic state, but the majority of Democrats are conservative Hispanic Democrats, Heath said, and they supported President Bush on the war longer than many other groups."They are pro-drilling, pro-life, big 2nd amendment supporters, but they also believe in welfare and unions. New Mexico voters have tended to send moderate Republicans to Washington, but the state has been trending leftward," Heath said.Economic concernsThe state is one of the least affected by the housing crisis, and 25% of jobs in the state are for either the state or federal government, said New Mexico political blogger Joe Monahan. Despite that, as with the rest of the country, the economy is the biggest issue.When I interviewed Joe, he was working on a story about a possible budget crunch in the state, and the state's most populous county had just announced a $10m budget shortfall.Heath lives in Las Cruces in the south of the state, and there are $200m in state or federal construction projects in the city alone. "People are concerned that the government will have to cut back on spending to pay for financial bailout."A month ago, New Mexico was a toss-up state, but now, "the consensus is that Obama has the edge," Heath said. RealClearPolitics shows Obama with an average 8.4% lead based on polls in the state.Two things in the last four years that have changed to help Barack Obama, Joe said. "National security issue is not quite as dominant as an issue, and economic security is."Obama's organisationOne thing that we're seeing in the states we're driving through is the presence of the Obama campaign and the enthusiasm of his supporters. In New Mexico, Obama has 40 field offices to McCain's 10. That number of field offices is unheard of, Heath said.Barack Obama has also been reaching out to Native American voters, which make up 10% of the state. They have volunteers and paid staff focused on getting out the vote in the native nations. They have held rallies focused on Native voters. "The Obama campaign isn't taking anything for granted," said Trip Jennings, the news editor for the New Mexico Independent.Joe says that it's important not to over-emphasise the advantage in field offices and ground organisation by Democrats because theri voters tend to be less reliable. They have to work harder to get them to the polls. John McCain has run a more traditional campaign relying on phone banks and direct mail. Republicans appeal to a "more likely voter" so don't have to put as much effort to get voters out, he said.Also in Obama's favour is that Governor Bill Richardson has also been a strong ally since he decided to endorse him over Hillary Clinton, even though he had served in Bill Clinton's administration, setting off the former president's famous anger.Governor Richardson has been a major fundraiser for Obama, bringing in $2m for the presidential campaign at a recent event, and he's helped Obama navigate the unique politics of the state.The final stretchTwo weeks before the election, Joe says that Obama doesn't have the kind of lead that assures victory. "There are a lot of voters who can be influenced by whatever is the last thing they see. While this election looks likes its trending Democrat and Obama, I don't think the margin is enough to rule out some kind of major development that could lead to an upset."The campaigns are fighting hard for the state's votes. Joe Biden campaigned in southern New Mexico this week, and Sarah Palin is coming to Roswell.A number of people I've spoke to along the way have said that whoever wins the presidential election will actually lose because the problems facing the country are so great, but Joe disagrees.He said: "The next president is going to have a terrible job, but out of a terrible situation can come often come greatness. You would not have had an FDR without the Depresion. You would not have had a Lincoln with the Civil War. This is really going to test whoever wins the White House."