The devastation of the 1985 Mexico City earthquake was swift. In just over a minute – in the early hours of 19 September, while the city was still asleep – 100,000 houses crumbled, 5,000 people died and roughly five million residents were left without electricity or potable water. On the Televisa broadcast that morning, newscaster Lourdes Guerrero maintained her smile as the room around her began to move. “It is still shaking a little,” she said into the camera. “But we must remain calm. We will wait a second so that we can continue talking.” The feed cut to static.Just a few blocks away, the historic city centre, or El Centro, was in pieces. Cathedrals, hospitals, museums and other monuments to Mexican history were destroyed. The Hotel Regis, once the neoclassical centrepiece of the downtown area, was all rubble and ash.Situated between three large tectonic plates, Mexico is a seismological nightmare. Mexico City is its most vulnerable city, built as it is on a sinking lake bed. With a magnitude of 8.1, the 1985 earthquake pushed Mexico far past its breaking point.Three decades later, however, El Centro bears almost no trace of this devastation. With millions of dollars poured into development projects by Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim, the rubble of 1985 has been replaced by new sidewalks, public furniture, freshly painted tenements and outdoor Wi-Fi. City officials maintain that building codes are enforced, and the mayor’s office has developed a six-point plan in case of future emergencies. In the 30 years since the earthquake, the city government has managed to transform Mexico City’s wealthy centre into a major tourist destination.Yet, in the peripheral zones, beyond the tourist’s reach, informal settlements continue to proliferate. There, codes and regulations are irrelevant. Residents build with whatever materials they can find and afford, and they continue to struggle to gain access to basic services such as water and electricity. For all the improvements of the last 30 years, roughly 60% of the city is made up of these unregulated, informal and vulnerable zones.The growth of these settlements over the last three decades attests to the persistence of poverty and inequality in Mexico City – and as a result, its vulnerability to its next big earthquake.The 1985 earthquake revealed the government’s disregard for the plight of the urban poor – 30 years on, that remainsIn 1985, Mexico City was the world’s largest urban area. With more than 16 million residents, the city had been growing at a ludicrous rate – over 4% annually through the 1970s, with a growth rate of close to 40% in the city’s periphery. Its economic boom, known as the Mexican Miracle, encouraged heavy migration, and few politicians were eager to stem the flow of incoming labour with strict building codes or regulations. As a result, informal settlements exploded across the city, from expanding tenements in the city centre to makeshift structures along its outer rings.The earthquake revealed the precarity of Mexico City life. Residents of the city’s informal settlements were already travelling long distances each day to reach work. And they were struggling to find water at home. Their fragile routines collapsed in the earthquake. Public transportation halted, water pipes burst and public health facilities – few of which were built to code – crumbled.In the days that followed, the ruling-party, PRI, struggled to provide emergency services. While many Mexican residents were still trapped in the rubble, President Miguel de la Madrid focused instead on managing the PR crisis. He did not speak publicly for two days, ordering a media blackout to prevent coverage of the earthquake. When he did speak publicly, he downplayed the death toll and rejected international aid in favour of a PRI-led emergency effort. That effort reached few survivors, focusing almost exclusively on distributing services to loyal PRI supporters.This wasn’t surprising in the context of Mexican political culture. But in the widespread devastation of the earthquake – with the international community paying close attention – they appeared excessively corrupt. Resistance to the PRI and its single-party rule had been growing since the 1960s. Their post-earthquake fumbling merely offered the occasion for a broader swath of Mexican society to join the movement.“The dramatic experience of the earthquake of the September of 1985 switched on the light,” writes Pedro Moctezuma, an activist in Mexico City at the time, “to see the fragility and corruption of the system of construction and the political party apparatus.”In this political vacuum, local grassroots groups organised the rescue of victims – known as damnificados – and reconstructed homes for them. “Those were special days,” said Leslie Serna, founder of the Unión Popular Nueva Tenochtitlán Sur, in a recent interview with Mexico City daily newspaper La Jornada. “The city was just different. Wherever you looked, there were people taking and bringing aid.” One month later, over 40 of these local groups formed the Unified Coordinator of the Damnificados (CUD), a powerful social movement to pressure the PRI to address the needs of the city’s dispossessed.“After the earthquake, it’s a whole new story to be told,” says Boston University professor Susan Eckstein, who conducted research on the damnificado movement in the 1980s. “The earthquake provided a context in which poor people’s movements could really start to take hold.”United, the damnificados pushed for – and won – major concessions from the ruling party. One month after the earthquake, the PRI expropriated the damaged areas of El Centro to prevent landlords from using the earthquake as an opportunity to evict residents. One year later, under pressure from a strong and organised CUD, the government launched a major reconstruction effort, providing low-income, prefabricated housing to the displaced victims. These reconstruction efforts were part of the broader Renovation of Popular Housing Program (RHP), which produced over 45,000 new housing units under pressure from organised victims.These successes were not merely local. In exposing the weakness and corruption of the PRI, the damnificado movement became the first major step in Mexico’s democratisation. In the years to come, the grassroots alliances of the earthquake mobilisation would link up with politicians who were defecting from the PRI to support a new opposition known as the Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD). Hundreds of activists – once shut out from the political system – migrated into the party, hoping to topple the PRI, bringing their pro-poor agenda with them in the process. This “party-movement,” led by PRI-defector Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, challenged the PRI in the 1988 election– the largest opposition in 70 years – and set in motion a reform process that brought more power to the local level and away from the PRI’s political castle.The earthquake was, then, both tragedy and opportunity. “What happened that morning?” asked journalist Felix Cortes Camarillo. “Channel two left the air, the public power of the President of the Republic and his head of the government of Mexico City failed to appear, and the Mexicans of the Federal District realised that they did not need them.”In exposing the corruption of the government, the reform movement became the first step in Mexico’s democratisationIn the three decades since, reconstruction efforts have expanded. The city centre – whose historic buildings were hit hard by the earthquake – has been completely remodelled. In 2002, the city government launched a public-private partnership with Carlos Slim’s nonprofit foundation, Fundación del Centro Histórico de la Ciudad de Mexico, to funnel resources into the downtown area. Together with a wave of private investment, the project has installed a new telecommunications infrastructure, renovated old properties and constructed new pedestrian malls.Meanwhile, the government has made major strides in earthquake preparedness. They have established monitoring systems to detect earthquakes before they arrive, new agencies to coordinate responses to a potential earthquake and they have raised crucial funds in case of future emergency. When a 7.4-magnitude quake hit in March 2012, the city was well-prepared, initiating its six-point emergency plan and evacuating public buildings. There were no casualties.Yet these improvements have been limited, by and large, to the city’s central areas. As the epicentre of the 1985 earthquake, this region became the most active site of grassroots mobilisation and, in turn, reconstruction funding. Over time, however, as the private investment in the area intensified – turning downtown into what many Mexicans call “Slimlandia” – many of the poor who had previously lived in the city centre began to migrate elsewhere.In 2001, the government introduced “Bando Dos,” a policy aimed at incentivising growth in the city’s central delegations and away from its expanding periphery. Yet “Bando Dos” has merely intensified pressure on the city centre, pushing up property prices by 30-50%. Low-income residents, many of whom have been living in El Centro for generations, either faced soaring rents or saw an excellent opportunity to sell their hard-won property and pursue cheaper land on the city’s periphery.“The end of the story is that the market takes over,” says Eckstien. “The inner city area ultimately falls apart as a unit. The value of the land becomes so important that people give up the land. A lot of people gave up their rights to the housing they acquired in the damnificado movement, undermining the community and solidarity built up in the earthquake response.”On the periphery, conditions remain dangerous. Informal settlements continue to crop up on cheap land – cinderblock units constructed with little attention to earthquake safety. According to a recent UN report, building codes rarely impact these construction methods. Mexicans have a long history of modifying their housing stock – adding new floors or new rooms to accommodate an expanding family unit – making it more vulnerable to earthquake damage. “This back and forth between regular and irregular states,” the report notes, “reflects the reality that vulnerability-reducing regulations may not reach large classes of housing, nor will be effective long-term without continued enforcement.”Yet these settlements are systematically denied that enforcement. The Mexico City government maintains a “zero-tolerance” policy with respect to informal settlements – neither state infrastructure nor state services flow there. That approach was meant to discourage migrants from settling on the urban periphery. Instead, it has denied a large swath of Mexico City’s population – some 3 million people in 900 settlements – crucial resources, and done little to stem the construction of new settlements along the way. Under the city government’s “zero-tolerance” policy, the very population most vulnerable to earthquakes has been shut out of the project of earthquake preparedness.The root causes of these vulnerabilities, then, are social and political, not merely physical. While urban planners seek to improve codes and expand enforcement, they have done little to address the problems of poverty and displacement that are generating the informal settlements in the first place. “In relation to social vulnerability, we are more vulnerable, overall because of the high index of poverty in the population,” claims Mario Garza, a government official, in the UN report. “We are more vulnerable precisely because of the high population density and the large quantity of high-risk settlements that proliferate in the metropolitan zone.”The Solidarity Plaza in Mexico City’s El Centro is a simple monument. Three large copper hands reach up from a cement block to grip a flagpole. A few feet forward, the date “Septiembre 19 de 1985” is inscribed in the cement, a commemoration of the earthquake that demolished the Regis Hotel that once stood there. It is intended to remind passersby of the courage of the damnificados, and the progress that has been made as a result of their fight. Trees line the perimeter and, on most days, it is a blurry bustle of tourists and office workers.Yet the spirit of the damnificado movement has all but vanished. Following the earthquake of 1985, hundreds of thousands of Mexico City residents mobilised to improve housing conditions for the poor. They formed grassroots alliances – the CUD, the Movimiento Urbano Popular, the Asamblea de Barrios – to challenge the corrupted political machine and construct their own communities. Today, those alliances are either in pieces or disbanded completely. While the government has focused on beautifying El Centro, Mexico City’s civil society has in many ways grown indifferent to the poverty, inequality and vulnerability that continue to beset it.“The movement died, as far as I can tell,” says Eckstein. “To keep movements alive, you need new issues. And the damnificados got their housing, got their right to stay. The conditions for sustaining their social movement dissipated.” Theirs was, in many ways, a devil’s bargain, typical of Mexico’s political culture – gifts in the short term for status quo in the long one. Related: The tragedies of Mexico City’s Tlatelolco housing complex – a history of cities in 50 buildings, day 31 In their destruction, earthquakes expose more than the physical foundations of the city. They also expose its social and political foundations. In the case of Mexico City, the 1985 earthquake revealed the government’s disregard for the plight of the urban poor. Thirty years later, though, that plight remains.To learn from the Mexico City earthquake of 1985, then, will require more than reconstruction or regulation. If much of the damage of the earthquake was caused by dangerous, informal construction, then the government must address directly the reasons why residents resort to these construction methods – displacement, poverty and inequality. To address these, the city must first discard its zero-tolerance approach to work proactively with its low-income communities to develop infrastructure, services and homes that are safe for residents in the long term. And it must protect its residents from the rising property prices that displace them from the centre and give rise to vulnerable settlements in the first place.As for the courageous damnificados, Eckstein asks, “why did the movement not transform into a broader fight for more issues over a longer period of time?” Why has the legacy of the earthquake mobilisation faded so quickly? “Well, that’s not so easy,” she says. “And it is entirely up for debate what those issues will be.”David Adler is a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University studying welfare policy in MexicoFollow Guardian Cities on Twitter and Facebook and join the discussion