The Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion that killed 11 workers on 20 April has the potential to transform the face of oil exploration. But what it really needs to do is to serve as the final siren signalling the end of the US addiction to oil. It will not serve BP's ambition to stave off that day if its chief executive plays down the scale of the crisis as he did by suggesting in his interview with this paper yesterday that the oil that has spilt so far is – to paraphrase only a little – just a drop in the ocean. Tony Hayward's remarks came at the end of another tough week not just for BP but for everyone whose livelihood depends on the environmental health of the Gulf of Mexico. It was a curious remark from a man who acknowledged that his job now depends on how well he is judged to have managed the crisis.Mr Hayward is generally considered to have done much to restore BP's ropey reputation after the 2005 Texas fire in which 15 died, and the Alaskan oil spill a year later. Strictly speaking, he is right that the 100,000 barrels of crude oil that has leaked so far does not yet put the Deepwater Horizon disaster in the top 50 of the grim league table of oil spills, although – if last night's attempt to stem the flow has failed – it is heading that way. Meanwhile, evidence is emerging through the congressional inquiry that suggests safety is still not the priority it should be. The bosses of BP, the rig operator Transocean and Halliburton – which was responsible for concreting the well into place – have all been passing the buck in front of senators. Meanwhile investigators working through 1,000 pages of material from the main players have uncovered reports suggesting that tests immediately before the pipeline blew indicated that problems were developing in the operation to close the well, but the decision was taken to ignore them – saving some tens of millions of dollars.The knock-on effects of this decision are already beyond estimate. Further oil exploration in Alaska has rightly been held up while Shell is challenged to prove it can prevent a similar disaster. It now seems possible that states bordering the Gulf of Mexico will be entitled to rule out oil exploration in coastal waters, prompting the International Energy Agency to warn against what it sees as an overreaction. Oil experts point out that the only politically viable alternatives – Angola and Brazil – involve drilling in even deeper waters. Disasters like Deepwater Horizon are the tip of the iceberg of the environmental harm caused by burning fossil fuels. Yet even as the crude begins to wash up on beaches, it seems that the attempts by senators John Kerry and Joe Lieberman to get the US signed up to a comprehensive clean energy bill are doomed. The love affair with oil goes on.