Afonso Dhlakama, leader of former rebel group Renamoin Mozambique, who came out of hiding to sign a landmark peace treaty with President Armando Guebuza. The treaty marks the end of a two year conflict in the country. Al-Anbar governorate in Iraq, where the World Food Programme has resumed its deliveries for the first time since May. Dalai Lama, who has cancelled a trip to South Africa after officials said his visa application had been denied. Human rights in Mexico, after Amnesty International reports a 600% rise in the number of reported cases of torture and ill-treatment in the past decade. Our quote this week comes from Helen Clark, head of the United Nations Development Programme, speaking at the International Conference for Small Island Developing States in Samoa this week.The stance of small island developing nations is clear – they are advocates for, and role models of, the transformative changes towards sustainable development which the world needs to make. In response to our article ‘Development: not for people from different work and ethnic backgrounds?’ one contributor argued:The development sector is professionalising and getting a job in development is something that requires serious knowledge and the ability to add significant value to the projects and communities you’re supposed to be supporting. Getting a job in development is not a right.1 billion people drink water contaminated by faeces, says Unicef and World Health Organisation report. £600bn is lost by poor countries due to corruption, causing an estimated 3.6 million deaths a year.95,000 children and teenagers - most of them in Latin America and the Caribbean - were murdered in 2012. 1,900 people have died so far from Ebola according to the World health Organisation. One in 10 girls are sexually abused says UN report Hidden in plain sight.Chile has opened its largest ever wind farm. The El Arrayan farm cost £180m and consists of 50 turbines that are expected to provide 20% of the country’s energy. Indian prime minister Narendra Modi has completed his first 100 days in power after winning a landslide victory in May. Health experts have met in Geneva to discuss fast-tracking experimental drugs for Ebola as the death doll continues to rise in West Africa. Israel has seized over 400 hectares of West Bank Land. Anti-settlement activists claimed it as the largest land grab in 30 years. This week at World Water Week in Stockholm, Unicef India shared insights from their ‘Poo to the Loo’ campaign against open defecation in the country. Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow @GuardianGDP on Twitter.