Alabama's gubernatorial primaries last night delivered shocks for both parties, with Democratic voters delivering a landslide defeat for an African American candidate and Republicans still waiting on the last votes to be counted in a knife-edge result.In New Mexico, though, Republicans rejected a candidate backed by Karl Rove and instead voted for Susana Martinez, the first Hispanic woman to be nominated for governor by either party.Pre-election polling had put Artur Davis in the lead for the Democratic nomination, in his bid to be Alabama's first black governor. But the primary instead delivered a crushing defeat for the congressman, with his opponent Ron Sparks cruising to a 62%-38% victory.The Birmingham News called it "one of the more remarkable upsets in Alabama primary history". A Research 2000 poll two weeks ago had Davis up by 41% compared with 33% for Sparks among Democratic voters. But once again, primary polling turned out to be unreliable: the polling blogger Nate Silver of the 538.com blog noted that the error would be the fifth largest in his database of 4500 polls.Low turn-out seems to have hurt Davis, although Sparks was endorsed by four major African American political groups as well as the Alabama Education Association teachers' union. Sparks' big policy idea is to bring high stakes gambling in the state, and use the revenue to invest in educationThe Republican governor's nomination remains up in the air, even in terms of which two candidates will go through to a special run-off in two weeks time. The leading candidate was Bradley Byrne, who qualified for the run-off with 28%, while two other candidates, Robert Bentley and Tim James, were separated by just 140 votes, after 99% of the votes had been counted, making a recount a certainty.While Byrne and James were expected to be the top two, Bentley's performance was a surprise and thought to reflect unhappiness with aggressive campaigning and attack ads from the front-runners.Also in Alabama's fifth congressional district, the Democrat-turned-Republican congressman Parker Griffith suffered an even worse fate than Republican-turned Democrat Arlen Specter last week. The Swing State Project blog sums up:Parker Griffith capped off one of the more embarrassing party switches in recent history with a blow-out loss to Madison County Commissioner Mo Brooks by a 51-33 margin. It was such an ignominious loss that Griffith refused to speak to the media or even show up at his election night reception to thank his supporters.Sadly – for fans of his campaign video – Dale Peterson came third in his bid for the Republican nomination for state agriculture commissioner. Which proves something about the power of advertising. Or maybe not. Better news for the wonderfully-named Young Boozer – he will represent the Republican party in the election for state treasurer (and beat George Wallace's son to boot).In New Mexico, Republicans nominated Susana Martinez, who is the first Latino woman to be nominated for a governor's mansion by either party. It also means that New Mexico will have its first woman governor in the state's history, since Martinez's opponent on 2 November will be the unopposed Democratic party nominee Diane Denish.