Race in America isn't simply a black and white issue. Here in New Mexico it's a black-brown issue, with tensions between the state's Hispanic community and African-Americans as well as between Hispanics and newer Mexican immigrants.It is those tensions that claimed a Republican leader last month after a blog-driven uproar over comments about whether the state's Hispanics would vote for Barack Obama.Demographically, New Mexico is unique. No ethnic group makes up a majority of the population, and the state is one of a handful of "minority majority" states in the US, said Trip Jennings, the news editor for the New Mexico Independent. It makes the racial dynamics of the state more complex than most states in the US. Hispanics make up 44% of the population, Native Americans 10%, African-Americans a small percentage and the rest of the population is whites or Anglos as they are commonly referred to in the Southwest, Trip said.Even within the Hispanic community, there are divisions. The fact that the word Hispanic, or Hispano, is still commonly used sets New Mexico apart from other states. Hispanic fell out of use because it refers to someone of Spanish descent. The broader term Latino is more common in the US now. But many Hispanics in northern New Mexico still use this term because they trace their ancestry to the Spanish conquistadors, who first came to the area in the 16th Century. There is a tension between Hispanics who have been here for hundreds of years and newer Mexican immigrants, and there are historical tensions between Hispanics and the Native American nations here.These racial issues took the spotlight after comments by the chairman of the Republican Party of Bernalillo County, which includes the state's largest city, Albuquerque. Last month, a BBC reporter quoted Fernando C de Baca in a blog post as saying that "Hispanics consider themselves above blacks". Mr C de Baca added:The truth is that Hispanics came here as conquerors. African-Americans came here as slaves. Hispanics consider themselves above blacks. They won't vote for a black president.He said that his comments were taken out of context and that he wasn't referring to his own beliefs but rather those of Hispanics who grew up before the Civil Rights movement. "That stirred a whole hornet's nest of controversy," Trip Jennings said.Despite his claims that his comments were taken out of context, he was forced to step down.Trip says based on reporting on his site that some, albeit a small minority of the Hispanic community, still feel some animosity towards African-Americans. This minority of the Hispanic community feel that blacks "got a bigger piece of the pie" due to the Civil Rights movement, Trip said.These views have also been expressed by Democrats. Earlier this year, a Democratic state senator Mary Jane Garcia here told the Rocky Mountain News in neighbouring Colorado:"I don't know one single Hispanic over 50 who will cast a vote for Obama." She also conceded that "there have always been conflicts between blacks and browns."In the primary races, Barack Obama lost the Hispanic vote by 61 to 35 percent to rival Hillary Clinton. But polls show that Barack Obama is doing well with Hispanics which might be one of the reasons that recent polls give him a lead in this state that George Bush won by the narrowest of margins in 2004.