Mangroves and lagoons stretch along the northern half of Mexico's Campeche coast, home to countless flamingoes, while to the south the narrow bands of white sand beaches have always been cordoned off for turtles, not tourists. In the aftermath of the swine flu outbreak, Cancún, on the opposite side of the Yucatan peninsula, has been missing its usual planeloads of holidaymakers. But Campeche has never courted vast numbers of visitors and, while welcoming the few that come, can get by just fine without them. Lacking the Yucatan east coast's turquoise seas and sweeping beaches, this ruggedly beautiful western coast epitomises independent spirit. It's certainly safe again to bring your body here for healing winter sun; but more to the point, this area has always provided a unique medicine for the soul. Its inhabitants are justifiably proud of their abundant wildlife and rich cultural inheritance, while Campeche city itself is one of the most beguiling places in Latin America.Beat-up cars rattle through the narrow cobbled streets, a rusting Dodge parked up outside the pastel blue manicured splendour of a colonial house. The whole city centre is listed as a Unesco world heritage site: a perfectly preserved 16th-century Spanish colonial streetscape, where the fierce tropical sun tears shadows through curving wrought-iron balconies and window grilles, across the painted walls. Despite its overwhelming beauty, historical importance, and extreme safety, Campeche city is no stuffy museum piece. The vigorous thrum of Mexican daily life beats everywhere just beneath its stuccoed skin. The streets are filled with independently-owned shops selling pens, or tinsel, or radios. Women and old men pray beneath the chandeliers inside the finely-kept churches, or come to read their newspapers in the pews, finding sanctuary for the flesh as well as the soul in the cool limestone walls. Pelicans dive into the navy waters of the Gulf of Mexico beyond the city's sea walls, splashing down between small fishing boats, while Mayan women from the countryside sell mangoes on street corners and lanky boys shoot pool at battered green tables in antique colonnades.By night, the young Campechanos head out along the city's modern seafront, the Malecon. Open-top Beetles fly by with girls perched up on the back hood, holding on, brown knees bent against the sea wind; palm trees billowing high spikes sideways in the sky above. The strip is lined with bright taquerias where I ate creamy hot rajas – green pepper tortillas – with new friends as the Mexico vs US baseball match played on TV. Afterwards, everyone goes to Rouge for salsa dancing, or to elegant old stone bars such as El Iguana Azul on Calle 55. For late-night eating, we visited the 24-hour La Parroquia restaurant on Calle 55; for top-class cuisine there was the romantic terrace restaurant at Puerta Campeche; while my favourite eating experience was in Sabor a Mexico on Calle 16 – a tiny colourful kitchen you can walk into from the pavement. I breakfasted here on chilli eggs, black beans, tortillas and a local drink made with jamaica flowers, for a handful of pesos, and was served by the owners' sweet-mannered children.On Friday evening at the city's heart, in the plaza in front of the cathedral, musicians were playing from the bandstand steps for their regular weekly audience. Lamplight caught the brilliant gold braiding on the mariachi jackets of the players, while fairy lights twinkled in the trees above the applause. Afterwards, I wandered back to the old arches of the Castelmar hotel, across terracotta tiled floors and courtyards to where the deep pool shone quietly underneath a soaring ochre wall and the night sky. Doing a lazy backstroke, gazing at Orion and Venus overhead, I could hear faint rushes of salsa from the cars in the streets; someone singing in a room.  In a Yucatan city with no beach, a hotel with a pool is almost a prerequisite. I loved the affordable Castelmar, with its high ceiling beams and big hardwood beds. I also stayed at the Puerta Campeche for a night of total indulgence. Housed in one of the city's old forts, its sybaritically minimalist suites are arranged around a garden courtyard filled with the sound of tumbling water and a series of interconnecting bathing pools that meander in and out of the buildings, between ruined walls.A few blocks away, the streets around Calle 10 are lined with shops selling jewellery and panama hats, as well as boutiques and panaderías where you can pick up a bag of sugared pastries. I bought carnival masks and cream-stuffed boletas – all you need to eat cake in disguise. Later, at the rows of tables outside the cathedral, I joined in the evening game of bingo with amiable locals who managed to keep me right.On the west side of the cathedral plaza you find Casa 6, the old house of Campeche's founding father, Francisco de Montejo, now refitted to look as it would have in his day, and open as a museum. On the north side is the airy library, which I fell in love with, and its amazing collection of historical old books published soon after the Spanish conquest of Mexico. As Damián Dzib of the Instituto Campechano, put it to me: "They [the Spanish] preserved the history of what they found by writing it, even though they were destroying it." In one rare and mottled book, Brief Relation of the Destruction of the Indians, collected by Don Fray Bartolome of the Order of Santo Domingo, printed in 1552, a brave bishop pleads with the Spanish emperor for the indigenous people to be treated fairly. Other books give more idea of Campeche's past: an 1857 pamphlet on penal law for deserters; or an 1883 copy of Pirates and Aggressions of the English, 1690-1777. I wondered if my Anglo-Caribbean pirate ancestor, Stede Bonnet, was in there, but thought it might be more tactful not to find out.Pirate attacks were the reason for Campeche's fortifications. The town had been repeatedly plundered, and you can still see why. A solid silver altar and silver lectern gleam in the crystal-specked shadows of the checker-floored cathedral, while even the smaller churches are fitted out with gold and precious stones. To the ancient Mayans, jade was more esteemed than their plentiful gold. At the fort of San Miguel, built just outside the city as part of its defences, I spent a late afternoon exploring the collection of Mayan jade funerary masks and astrological stelae in its museum, watching the sun set over the old cannons and the now-peaceful sea. After several days of the city, I took off for a day's fishing in the mangrove inlets up the coast. I caught nothing more than sargassum seaweed, but was happy enough to drift through the amber shadows under the overhanging branches beneath occasional clouds of pure white garza herons; and to take a defeated doze beneath my sombrero, listening only to the sound of water lapping against the boat, the rustle of smaller birds close by in the leaves.The little ruined Mayan city of nearby Edzna has a similar air of peace. Campechanos sometimes come here for a walk, but it was very quiet when I visited and the place had the quality of an empty cathedral, or a garden at dusk. Its soft grey stones faced each other in perfect alignment, high above the planes of smooth green grass that had once been its squares and ball courts. As I stood on the top of its pyramid, the brilliant blue magpies rising from the canopy of trees in the surrounding woodland were the sole movement. Somehow they only accentuated the stillness.For my second week, I went to spend a few days out at a hacienda called Blancaflor. There are plenty of luxurious ex-hacienda hotels around, but the interesting thing about this less-luxurious place is that it still functions while also welcoming hotel guests. There were rows of tasselled, hand-stitched saddles by the gate, and old jeeps parked up outside, ready to help bring in the crop from the aloe vera and sisal fields. The food and the showers were basic but fine, and the house itself was stunning, with its antique furniture and arched walkways, and a shallow bathing pool filled from a freshwater well in the scented garden. I felt like a leisurely ranchera, out exploring the estate in the midday sun before collapsing sunburnt into my comfy candlewick bed. Packing an outback rucksack, I drove south along the highway for a couple of hundred miles to Calakmul, a vast and remote wildlife reserve near the border with Guatemala and home to jaguars. The stony peaks of one of the largest, most important Mayan sites in Mexico – from which emperors ruled long before Chichen Itza existed – rise up from this pristine jungle and give it its name. The 6,000 ancient structures lie 60km inside the reserve: I spent the night camping in a forest tent at Yaax'Che, just inside the reserve's perimeter, with anteaters snuffling around the canvas. I woke at five and drove on under a full moon, slowing for wild peacocks on the road. Dawn broke through chechen and ceiba trees thick with wild orchids, loud with howler monkeys, as I walked towards the ruined city. Ancient carved faces and symbols of birth surrounded a ziggurat with trees growing out of its steps; halfway up another stood an ornate stelae to an unknown female god. From the high top of Structure II, I watched the clear morning sunlight steam across a flat sea of green treetops, stretching to each horizon, broken only by the three nearby peaks of other smaller pyramids; a view unchanged for centuries. This whole area is full of intriguing sites. I spent another night at a forest cabin in Puerta Calakmul, next to Balamku. Jose and Luis, two excellent young English-speaking guides on a UN-funded training programme, pointed out various birds to me as we walked around the Balamku ruins: the wood-rails and yellow orioles darted around the opening to a hidden chamber inside the main pyramid, which was filled with spectacular carvings of gods and jaguars. Using a modern cottage at Chicanna Eco-Village as a base for my third night, I wandered the stones at Becan for hours. Likewise the ruins of Xpujil, and of Chicanna itself. As I climbed a temple to stand beneath the overhanging beak of a Chicanna deity, the sun chose to disappear. Raindrops clattered on the stone and on my head; I stood there, getting completely drenched as the rain ran ever louder into the thick leaves of the jungle. After the sky had cleared, I walked back down the path towards the gaping stone mouth of a Mayan earth god and a couple of rare visitors. The air was dry and bright once more, but now there was the sound of the rain that had been caught in the leaves, falling on to other leaves beneath – a second rainfall. Like rain that falls even after rain clouds have gone, this corner of Mexico gives you a peace and tranquillity that sustains, long after you've gone home.Several major airlines fly into Mexico City; from there take an Aeromexico flight direct to Campeche. The cheapest way to reach Yucatan is to get a charter flight to Cancun, then catch the coach across the ­ Yucatan (about US$15 each way, six hours).Where to stayHotel Castelmar (00 52 981 811 1204, castelmarhotel.com), doubles from $61. Puerta Campeche (+981 816 7508, thehaciendas.com), doubles from $234 (plus tax). Hacienda Blancaflor (+999 258 042, blancaflor.com.mx), doubles from $135. Campamento Yaax'Che (+983 871 6064, email ciitcalakmul@prodigy.net.mx). Puerta Calakmul (+998 892 2624, puertacalakmul.com.mx), doubles from $110. Chicanna Eco-Village (+981 811 9192, ­ chicannaecovillageresort.com), from $110.Further informationMangrove fishing: Campeche Tarpon (+981 816 4450, campechetarpon.com). Trips: Maya NatureSophie Cooke is the author of The Glass House and Under The Mountain, published by Arrow Books. 