How bad is drug-related violence in Mexico? Here's an idea: The war in Iraq has cost the lives of some 4,600 soldiers since 2003. In Mexico, there were 5,400 drug-related deaths in 2008 alone. We're talking of a supposedly stable nation, with no foreign or civil wars, which has more violent deaths due to an "underground" conflict than the war in Iraq has caused.Public safety is one of Mexico's top problems. Narcotics-related or not, violence, which long ago was something unheard of, has been permeating all layers of Mexican society. Whereas in other countries murders make the news, they don't in Mexico, unless it's a high-ranking government officer, public personality or drug-related mass execution.We've become galvanised toward violence. We take it for granted. Far from being a distant concern one might read about in the newspapers, one would have a hard time finding any Mexican who hasn't been a victim of violence. Indeed, most people are grateful to have lived through their personal ordeals, rather than angry at the violation of one of man's most basic rights: the right to safety.Drug-related violence has escalated to a point of total war, particularly in northwestern Mexico. Coincidentally, these are the states bordering the US, and as such, control of these territories will grant (or deny) access to the world's largest market for narcotics. The fact that coverage of these events doesn't reach much farther than the US, which is understandably concerned about the situation, might be owed to Mexico's reputation abroad as a wonderful vacation paradise with low prices and warm beaches.Tourism is one of Mexico's largest industries (behind oil and money transfers from nationals working abroad), so the government wanting to keep a lid on the true nature of the problem is understandable. However, the current government has proven its ineptitude at a variety of levels, and news of Mexico's plight is starting to be heard overseas. Other than the rampant violence, there's one thing very clear: the government can't stop this problem.The Mexican government has been touted as "illegitimate", due to the shady circumstances under which president Calderón was elected in 2006, and marred by a weak, inexperienced cabinet and a president without any real vision as to where the country should go. Their efforts to reassure people that they know what they're doing, mainly through expensive publicity bombardment, have had little effect. Calderón promised better public safety, and so far his strategy to achieve this has been to attack, head-on, the drug cartels.This strategy has backfired horribly, and with two drug cartels (Cartel del Pacífico and Cartel del Golfo) engaging in firefights between themselves and the military, the de facto war in the northern states is slowly spilling to the rest of the country, with drug-related violence reaching as far as Guerrero (eight soldiers found beheaded near Acapulco last December, showing the drug cartels have no fear or respect for the military), Mexico City (where bodies routinely appear in the mountains surrounding the capital) and Yucatán (where a general was murdered in Cancún in early February). For the one factor the government has failed to understand is that as long as there are such fabulous amounts of money to be earned, and as long as the Mexican legal system is so deficient and run by corruptible officers, the drug cartels will continue to fight to their last man.The government's failure to control Mexico's two main problems, a rapidly tanking economy and public safety, are likely to cost the ruling party (PAN) the power it won in 2000, come the next presidential elections in 2012. However, many Mexicans feel that waiting until then to see if things change will be a disaster. Social unrest is mounting, and while the mid-term elections in July 2009 might provide some hope by renewing about half of Congress and the Senate, the president and cabinet still man the helm – and they need to rethink their strategy, for many analysts are already predicting uprisings and violent toppling of the government.I think it all boils down to safety. The drug business promises enormous profits, but it is a dangerous occupation. And right now most Mexicans live in danger. Our safety is not at all certain. Sound economic policies will provide jobs and growth (sorry, but stability, unlike what the government tells us, will not suffice when our economy has not grown significantly in the last 30 years) and reduce the amount of people who devote themselves to a life of crime. Trustworthy police and military will further deter criminal behaviour.Once this is achieved, the number of people willing to live a life of violence and risk working for a drug cartel will probably diminish. A safer, quieter climate will also foster more economic growth and the kind of foreign investment the government is so proud to show off in economic reports. Only they fail to mention that a lot of that investment is leaving in droves due to the climate of insecurity and violence.Simplistic as this approach may seem, the government seems loath to get involved in economics, preferring a "to the death" neoliberal approach and choosing to attack other problems separately (security is chief among them) in hopes of providing a "benign economic climate" for companies to freely thrive. But it is naive to think that the government should not jump-start the economy, as perhaps companies share one trait with drug cartels: They're in it for their own benefit and profit.Mexicans hope that the government is right when it says, both here and abroad (to reassure foreign powers), that the "drug cartels' actions are the product of desperation", that nine out of every 10 deaths in the drug wars are on the cartels' side, and that "we're winning the war". However, we have learned to distrust our government, so we know the reality is quite different from what they tell us. Sadly, we've come to know because, more than ever, the violence is real and on the streets every day.