The tiny village of Yelapa is the only vestige of civilisation for miles around, and it's a world away from the tourist bustle of the inexplicably popular Puerto Vallarta. This is Verana on the Pacific Coast of Mexico, a hotel that has somehow gone under the radar but whose anti-ostentation ethos feels so right now. Along Jalisco's Costa Alegre, you only have to venture a few steps from the beaten path to stumble upon sleepy fishing hamlets and unspoilt beaches. Verana's not the easiest place to get to, though: this all-huts hideaway can only be reached by a 20-minute boat trip followed by a mule ride through the jungle (and a couple of celebratory margaritas in our case).But once you're stretched out in your cotton-draped king-size, looking out across jungle and ocean, you'll be glad you made the effort to get here. Verana's European owners are Hollywood set designers, so the architecture is dramatic and pared-back, and the decor epitomises easy-going living. The cluster of thatched bungalow huts has a Bauhaus-meets-boho sensibility: bright Mexican colours and textiles pop against polished concrete; and the pool is surrounded by stepped terraces lined with orange loungers and parasols. One terrace wall has even become an unofficial guestbook, scratched with assorted declarations of love - it's that kind of place: the perfect antidote to urban anonymity and chain hotels. Nature rules this roost: frangipani blooms across the hillside, bougainvillea trails in and around bedrooms and window frames, and birdsong rouses you from afternoon naps. Some of the villas have full-length windows looking out over the sea; some don't bother with walls at all, so you can get the full David Attenborough experience without getting out of bed. Lo-fi and sustainable at heart, Verana eschews all carbon-hungry electronic goods - candles are used where possible, and food is sourced locally (as were all building materials). Private beaches secluded by rocky outcrops, inspired architecture, a jungle spa, and salsa-packed fresh-Mex food ... This place is a modern-day Eden. • Verana, Jalisco. Doubles cost from £195 per night (www.mrandmrssmith.com; 0845 034 0700)