It was 6.30am and I was standing in pitch darkness on a mountain top in central Mexico, waiting for what the locals call the best show in town. It's clearly a misnomer: round here there's nothing resembling a town, and the only shows are the religious processions in the tiny villages to mark saints' days. But as a fire-red ribbon of light threaded itself on to the horizon, I saw what people were raving about. The cavernous valleys were filled with frothy white clouds: as daylight began to glow I got what looked like a God's-eye view of a giant cup of cappuccino, backlit for extra panache. We watched in silence, until the sun flooded the valley with daylight and the dawn spell was broken.Heroic sunrises are one of the highlights of this mountain region north east of Oaxaca city: but until recently no tourists ventured here. It's not that the mountains of the Sierra Norte are especially remote: in fact, they're only about a two-hour drive from the centre of town. The problem was lack of places to stay - and no one was promoting the mountains as a place to visit.Things changed when the state of Oaxaca got a new director of tourism who frequently travelled to Europe. His experiences there gave him an idea few Oaxacans thought would catch on, which was that - as in Europe - the mountains, as well as the cities and the beaches, could lure the tourists too. How, though, to provide an authentic taste of mountain life - and how, in a state that is aware of the sensitivities of ecotourism, to do it without compromising ordinary life in the hilltop villages? Los Pueblos Mancomunados - the mountain community closest to Oaxaca city - seemed uniquely placed to pioneer this new kind of tourism. Its members, descendents of the Zapotec people of pre-Hispanic Mexico, have farmed the land for more than 400 years, and in 1961 the government, in an extremely unusual move, agreed to give them the 29,500 hectares of land on which the community was living.Since then the people - only 3,800 in all - have eked out a living bottling spring water, selling fruit, mushrooms and bread at Oaxaca's markets. So when the director of tourism suggested they branch out into building wooden cabins in each of the area's eight villages, and welcoming tourists into the heart of their community, they leapt at the chance.The scheme - known as Tourist Yu'u (pronounced you) - began in the mid 1990s with eight beds in two cabins: now there are 290 beds in 64 cabins. It's simple, wholesome accommodation: mine was one of the most luxurious, in a village called Llano Grande (population 150). Set amid pine trees up a dirt track, it had two comfortable double beds, a wooden sofa and armchair, a small wardrobe and a coffee table. The bathroom was passable, though there was no loo seat and only a dribble of hot water for a shower.The villagers are proud of their mountains, and visitors to the lodges are offered an impressive array of activities. For around £5 we hired a guide to take us trekking - worth every penny - and show us where to go for the best rambles through the valleys and across the hills to marvel at waterfalls and be wowed by breathtaking views across ravines and canyons. The area is acclaimed by the WWF for its huge diversity of wildlife, so you're bombarded with information about the local flora and fauna as well as let in on a few handed-down pre-Hispanic medicinal tips (a leaf called tolao is apparently perfect for hangovers - so much so that nightclubbers in the city are often given a couple of leaves on their way in to brew into a tea later). As well as hiking there are bicycles or horses for hire (around £2.50 per hour), and for the more adventurous there are zip-wires strung between the pine trees in some areas. After all that exertion I took a temazcal or steam bath, with laurel leaves and other herbs, lying in what resembles an oven, wrapped only in a towel, for an hour or so, followed by a massage by the local medicine-woman. Champneys it definitely isn't - the medicine-woman, 81-year-old Manuela Luiz Martinez, plies her trade in a wooden hut with a slightly grubby bubble-gum pink nylon bedspread covering her massage table. But for a genuine soupcon of rural Mexican life, it doesn't come much more real than this - and all for around £12, too, which is about the price of having your big toe massaged at Champney's.Evening entertainment isn't top priority in Pueblos Mancomunados. Just about all there is to do is amble down to one of the village fondas, or kitchen-cafes (there are one or two in each village) and have a beer as a local mother makes your tea over her firewood stove. Our cook was hampered by her two-month-old and two-year-old sons, so while she made our chicken tacos I held baby Alejandro and my husband chatted to toddler Miguel. We sandwiched our trip to the mountains between a couple of days exploring Oaxaca city and three days on the world-famous surfing strip at Puerto Escondido on the Pacific coast, a 30-minute flight away. But it's that Sierra Norte sunrise that will stay in my mind, even when the rest of the trip has faded.· Book through Pueblos Mancomunados (sierranorte.org.mx). Cabanas £23 a night, sleeping up to two adults and two children; camping £2pp. After booking online, you're advised to confirm your reservation with the ecotourism office in Oaxaca city (Bravo No 210-1, Centro Historico, Oaxaca; 0052 1951 5148271). British Airways (ba.com) flies London-Mexico City for around £740 rtn.