New Mexico this week became only the second American state to ban the death penalty since it was reinstated by the US supreme court in 1976, though the state's governor, signing the ban into law, said he still had grave doubts about his decision.Bill Richardson said his conscience compelled him to approve the ban, voted in by New Mexico's legislature, because the criminal justice system could never be perfect, and innocent people might be killed. "But I am still troubled," he told reporters at a news conference in the state capital, Santa Fe, recounting "the most difficult decision" of his political life. "I am not totally, totally convinced that every argument that I have just said to you is accurate."Richardson, who recently withdrew as Barack Obama's commerce secretary amid an ongoing corruption investigation, had visited the state penitentiary to inspect the execution chamber, he said, along with the cells that might hold those sentenced to life without parole. He concluded that "those cells are something that may be worse than death. I believe this is a just punishment." Even so, he added, "my decision probably is not one associated with perfection".New Mexico has only executed one person since 1960, a man who raped and murdered a nine-year-old while on release pending appeal for raping a six-year-old. For years, the law there has only allowed judges to impose the death sentence on those found guilty of murdering children, trial witnesses, and police or prison officers. The ban, which comes into effect on 1 July, will not affect the sentences of the two men already on New Mexico's death row.In 2007, New Jersey became the first state to outlaw capital punishment since its reinstatement, though 12 states and the District of Columbia never reintroduced it after 1976 in the first place. Almost half of the 1,156 executions in the United States since the supreme court decision have taken place in Texas and Virginia.Though local law enforcement officials had opposed the ban, a local campaign in support of it enlisted former president Jimmy Carter, and the US Conference of Catholic Bishops, and deluged Richardson with letters. In a statement, the American Civil Liberties Union called the ban "a historic step, and a clear sign that the United States continues to make significant progress toward eradicating capital punishment once and for all".Campaigns to end the death penalty have made recent headway in Kansas and Montana, but polls suggest 60% of Americans continue to support it.