It is the gateway to one of Mexico's most famous tourist destinations. But the sleepy mountain town of Creel was shown in a very different light this week, when a leaked CCTV film showing a group of heavily armed hitmen gathering on a street corner before a massacre was broadcast on national television.The footage, apparently filmed by a police surveillance camera, gives a rare – and terrifying – glimpse of the impunity with which the footsoldiers of Mexico's warring drug cartels are able to operate.Around 30 gunmen are seen arriving in SUVs at a crossroads just outside the town that is the starting point for the spectacular sightseeing railway winding through Mexico's Copper Canyon.With assault rifles slung across their backs, the men gather around one vehicle, where they snort a white power handed out by a man in an SUV who appears to give orders.At one point the camera tracks a contingent of gunmen as they run across a frosted field to surround a house, shooting through the windows and kicking in a door.Later they stop a passing car, haul the driver out and kick him on the tarmac. After a few moments he rises to his feet, shakes the hand of one of his assailants and is allowed to drive away. The film ends with the gunmen disappearing into the mountains in a convoy of 15 vehicles.The images come from a massacre occurring on 15 March in which eight people were killed in and around Creel and a nearby town called San Juanito. They included a 14-year-old girl shot dead inside a different house from the one attacked on film. The rest were abducted, killed and then dumped outside town, or killed in their vehicles. Six people were also injured."The shooting lasted about 15 minutes," a hardware shop owner in Creel told the Guardian on condition his name not be used. "They attacked the house of a hotel owner, but he wasn't there. I haven't seen him since."The incident itself received little press attention amid the spiralling drug-fuelled violence, which has escalated steadily since President Felipe Calderón launched an offensive against the main trafficking groups in December 2006. Since then the official death toll has risen above 22,700, with 3,365 killed in the first three months of this year alone.The region around Creel is notorious as an area of smuggling and marijuana cultivation but the town is not considered particularly unsafe.Further north in the same state of Chihuahua lies the border city of Ciudad Juárez where eight drug-related murders is considered a relatively quiet day.But the leak of the video, which was shown last week on national TV, has put the state authorities under pressure to explain why security officials apparently stood by and watched as the gunmen took control of the town."There are only five or six state police officers in Creel and four municipal police officers," José Reyes Baeza, the governor of Chihuahua, told local media this week. "We are investigating, but the police presence is low."However, he did not explain why police or army reinforcements were not sent immediately.State prosecutors, meanwhile, have seemed more concerned with tracking down whoever leaked the video to the media."It's outrageous," said local priest Javier Avila Aguirre, who said that the security forces didn't arrive at the scene in any significant numbers until hours after the massacre when they had a brief look around and then left. "The people of Creel feel abandoned."Not that everybody in town is happy with the attention the video has brought."This kind of thing happens all over the world, you just don't see it on TV," said local hotel manager Federico García. "They had left before we got out of bed and the violence doesn't affect us in Creel. What hurts are journalists intent on destroying a tourist destination and the economy of a country."