"Do I really, seriously have to explain that I don't believe that all Muslims have lasers in their eyes? I hope not," said would-be New Mexico candidate for Congress Adam Kokesh last week. He was referring to a flier he had helped produce and distribute in 2007 on the campus of George Washington University mocking Islamo-Fascism Awareness Week.The headline read, "Hate Muslims? So Do We!!!" The flier helpfully explained that the "typical Muslim" has "lasers in eyes, venom from mouth, hatred for women, suicide vest, hidden AK-47, [and a] peg leg for smuggling children and heroin." Students who wanted to find out more were told to "come to Islamo-Fascism awareness week" put on by GWU's Young America's Foundation. The supposed sponsors of the flier were "Students for Conservativo-Fascism Awareness."The intent of the flier is clear enough: to ridicule YAF's efforts. Yet when it was distributed around campus, powerhouse conservative pundit Michelle Malkin called it a "fake hate crime". Last week she wrote on her blog that Kokesh and company had "weaseled out of the attacks by claiming they were 'satire.'"But they were satire, if slightly sophomoric. Kokesh said that he was motivated to jab at YAF because he thought their event "was really just part of the general government fear tactics of saying, If you don't give us more power, and give up more civil liberties, and pay us more taxes and put more power in the executive branch of the federal government, terrorists are" – gross exaggeration alert – "going to jump out of your television set and kill you and then subject you to sharia law.""When people are trying to raise a spectre of fear like that," Kokesh said, "satire is a good way to punch through it." Now the offended parties are punching back.Malkin wrote that the organisation that Kokesh is part of, Iraq Veterans Against the War, had a membership that included "bomb-threat bullies and death-threat nutballs who threatened to assassinate me," as well as "fake army vet Jesse MacBeth". She charged that Kokesh was "arrested for defacing signs and travelled to Germany to urge soldiers to abandon their posts … He is an anti-war smear merchant in GOP clothing."Kokesh, a retired marine who was involved in the first battle of Fallujah, denied the charges. Of his arrest in 2007, he said, "We were actually putting up posters. We weren't defacing anything. And we were doing it very deliberately in line with the code of the District of Columbia. And we were arrested for political reasons, then acquitted." I pressed him on the question of troop desertion:Q: If a soldier is out in the field and he all of the sudden decided that this war in unconstitutional, does he have an obligation to desert his post?A: No, no, no, no! But to raise the issue, and if he feels the need, in conscience, to say, "I'm not going to participate anymore" there is a legal way to do that under the [Uniform Code of Military Justice]. But, no. We've never said "Walk away from your post." That's a gross distortion of what we're talking about here and something I've never advocated.Kokesh said that he understood why Malkin was angry and talked of the death threats that his own advocacy has provoked. He had, he told me, voted to kick the veteran who threatened her with a "fatwa" out of Iraq Veterans Against the War. And he generally deplored the times when his fellow anti-war veterans threaten their critics. He called it both wrong and counterproductive.But heading into the New Mexico state GOP nominating convention last weekend, Kokesh refused to give an inch. "I'm running for office to continue my oath to the constitution that I swore when I joined the Marine Corps," he said. He aims to "take all the powers" the federal government has "taken on illegally" and "at very least, restore a republican form of government."Some polling indicates that Kokesh has a shot to win the seat currently held by Democrat Ben Ray Luján, but first he has to get the nomination and that could be a problem with prominent conservatives like Malkin pushing against him. "Obviously I'm not a party line Republican," said Kokesh, in the understatement of the week.