Road Trip, Day 7. This morning we set off early for a long drive north from Albuquerque to Colorado Springs, where we hope to get a whiff of the famed evangelical Christian fervor the city is famous for, and see Sarah Palin in person at a rally on Monday morning. One hour out, we decided to stop off at a political rally in Santa Fe, where state politicians were supposed to lead locals in an early voting drive to the polls. When we got there the place looked dead, and we decided it was a bust. But one of the team had to find a toilet, and disappeared for the longest time into a building. Finally reappearing, he motioned to us to follow him around the corner. And there were the voters: not 10 or 20, but a good 75, waiting in the sun for as long as 2 hours, with more people joining the line all the time. So here in Santa Fe was first proof of what both Republicans and Democrats fear, though for entirely different reasons: a huge turnout that is certain to favor Obama, but would also swamp the polls and overtax the state's voting system. Brian Egolf, who is running for state representative from Santa Fe, told me he believed the turnout would be an unheard of 85 percent. Emerging from the voting booth in his wheelchair, Joe Parker, a state employee, told me that he had been turned away from voting at the primary and wasn't going to have that happen again. "I want to be sure there are no problems," he said with a tight smile, explaining that ballots in New Mexico had a way of getting "lost." By voting early with a paper ballot, he hoped to ensure that his vote would be actually be counted. Others expressed the same sentiments, fearing for the worst in a state with a wretched recent record of failure at the ballot box.Our researcher Jean Casella, who is tracking voter suppression from state to state as we cross the country, sent me the following rundown of the massive problems that plagued the 2004 election here in New Mexico: The results showed a sky-high rate of "undervotes"—ballots that have been cast but do not include a vote in a particular contest. According to the group VoteTrustUSA,New Mexico led the nation in the undervotes with an astonishing one out of every 36 ballots missing a vote for president. The total undervotes came to over 21,000—more than five times the margin of victory in that election, which George W. Bush won by fewer than 4,000 votes. Because New Mexico's five electoral votes would not have changed the outcome of the 2004 race, this massive loss of votes received relatively little attention. But it drove home the risks of electronic voting. An analysis by VotersUnite.org revealed that "more than 80% of New Mexico's undervotes were recorded (or, more accurately, not recorded)" on Direct Recording Electronic (DRE) voting machines," with no verifiable paper trails. Amid protests and lawsuits, Governor Bill Richardson in 2006 signed a state law banning the machines and requiring paper ballots. He warned other states against the technology, saying, "One person, one vote is in jeopardy." That year's election saw a huge drop in the undervote rate. With mandated paper ballots, New Mexico is not likely to relive the travesty of 2004. But now there are worries about the machines that count the paper ballots, as well as about shortages of ballots and of polling places. Once burned, New Mexicans have good reason to be worried about their votes being counted.• This article was amended on Monday October 20 2008. Above we said that New Mexico has four electoral votes, it has five. This has been changed.