On 18 August Mexican security forces discovered the body of the mayor of Santiago "handcuffed and blindfolded" and dumped on the side of the road. Edelmiro Cavazos's death was the latest in a conflict that has claimed 28,000 lives over the past four years. But it was also a symptom of a deepening crisis.The folly of prohibition and violence to suppress the narcotics trade is as damaging and misguided a practice as it is mystifyingly popular with almost every government on the planet. And few have gone about it with so much vigour as Mexico under Felipe Calderón.It is now nearly four years since Calderón dispatched 4,000 troops to his home state of Michoacán to try and restore the rule of law: the first act of the Mexican drug war. The message was clear – only a few weeks after being (dubiously) elected, the new president was putting on a show of strength for the drug smugglers and pushers. Gone were the days of quiet subversion and occasional armed intervention, in favour of all-out war. Since then his presidency has become synonymous with the military approach. Calderón staked a lot on this venture, and his political career will be shaped by the outcome of the war.It should not be surprising, then, that the floor has finally opened to the debate on legalisation. There has been talk of legalisation across central and south America for years, mostly from former leaders, but it was only a matter of time before an incumbent would start the discussions – and it had to be Calderón who did it. The polls are starting to show war fatigue. There should be little question that his way has failed and alternatives must be sought.Four years ago the battle was against organised crime, but now it has taken on the form of something approaching a civil war. Areas that were once relatively stable have been dragged into the conflict. The city of Monterrey, traditionally a wealthy spectator to the troubles, was the subject of an armed blockade last weekend. Panic ensued. Increased tension caused business leaders to take out advertising space in the local newspaper pleading for extra protection. Elsewhere, there have been terrorist attacks on television stations and the execution of journalists in an attempt to silence the media. One courageous blogger continues to defy them.While remaining bullish over the virtues of continuing to press the attack, to his credit Calderón has been able to drop his own ideologies in favour of pragmatism. It is – finally – a sensible approach. But those who may think of legalisation as the cure to all of Mexico's ills should follow his lead.Imagine that Mexico legalised all drugs tomorrow. One could only speculate what would happen next, but it is unlikely to confer much immediate advantage. It may be that deaths fall to pre-conflict rates, but that is unlikely. The last few years have brought bitter conflicts between the cartels. Though violence may ease in the direction of the state, those gang rivalries would be intensified. That cannot and will not be allowed to happen. For that reason, one must be careful not to mistake legalisation with the end of military intervention, especially with major cities threatened. With the continued presence of the army would come further human rights abuses. The likely outcome would be stalemate with Mexican civilians losing the most.Neither would legalisation undermine the trade itself. Mexican legalisation would be unilateral. For the most part, Mexican cartels serve as middlemen between the producers in South America and the consumers in North America. With that in mind, it is hard to see how the Mexican government can put meaningful pressure on the traffic passing through their borders. Gang profits cannot be in any way endangered unless some manner of legalisation also happens in the United States as well. Soon California will vote on Proposition 19 to legalise cannabis. As the main cash crop of the traffickers, this would be an invaluable step. But the fate of the proposition is uncertain, and even if it passes how likely is it that other states would follow suit?So why push for legalisation at all? Because the alternative – continued aggression – has become unthinkable. The people are weary of four years of gratuitously violent stalemate that an aggressive policy has unleashed. Defence spending has risen from 0.5% of GDP in 2008 to 4% in 2010. Some of the money can begin to be directed elsewhere. Furthermore, this is a sudden flash of inspired common sense by the Mexican government that needs to be given as much support as possible. It is the only option that offers a glimpse of a better future for Mexico.Mexico may well be ahead of the curve. There is an increasing feeling that the use of force to control substances is ineffectual bordering on counterproductive. Even Sweden, the champion of a zero-tolerance approach, has experienced a growth in drug-related crimes recently.It is time that tolerance was given a go. Gore Vidal wrote about the futility of fighting banned substances with bullets in the 1970s. It is amazing how little has changed. The policing of drugs around the world is based on outdated measures and uncompromising ideologies that need to be dropped. Who knows, Mexican legalisation could prove to be a catalyst for an educated discussion of our own.