Going, going, nearly gone. Hands stayed conspicuously down and eyebrows in control when the Mexican government tried to auction off a huge diamond ring assumed to have belonged to a leading drug trafficker. "Buying that would be too risky," said a man who identified himself only as Patricio. "You might find an armed convoy at your door sent to get it back."The man's ring was supposed to be the star attraction of an auction of watches and jewellery confiscated from organised crime, the proceeds of which are to be ploughed back into the government's offensive against the cartels.With a diamond over half an inch in diameter and 48 smaller gems encrusted into an 18-carat gold setting, the ring was successfully used to promote the auction, but its fame seemed to put off bidders in a hall also filled with reporters. Even if its starting price of 1.4m pesos (£70,000) was, according to the experts, a steal.The opportunity to buy narco bling accounted for just a small proportion of the two-day auction of 12m items ranging from scrap metal to cuddly toys, mostly confiscated at customs posts or in lieu of unpaid taxes. But it grabbed all the attention.Mexican drug traffickers are known for gaudy displays of wealth in their mansions, and famous for gilding their favourite guns, some of which are displayed in a military museum. Their taste in personal adornments had never been put under such scrutiny or under the hammer before. And if the ring failed to get the hall going, bidding was brisk on other glittering items of illicit luxury, particularly the more anonymous ones.An 18-carat gold Audemars Piguet Swiss watch was sold to a gentleman in a tan jacket for around £44,000. He secured the piece when a baby-faced young man with a bleached quiff, black suit and scarlet waistcoat bowed out of the contest. "It's worth much more than that," Lorenzo Huerta commented from the sidelines. He had just placed the winning bid of around £9,000 for a gold Rolex.Huerta said that while the fact that the jewels had once belonged to kingpins added a certain frisson to the occasion, for serious buyers the auction was about obtaining opulence at knockdown prices: "There are some bargains around today." He was buying items to sell on to clients, and would not reveal what kind of people they were.Although gold and diamonds were the dominant theme in both men's and women's watches, bracelets, rings and the like, the auction suggested drug traffickers also have a penchant for sapphires, emeralds, rubies and religion. Religious images ranged from numerous crucifixes, gem-speckled images of the Virgin of Guadalupe and many an official and unofficial saint, inevitably including the apocalyptic figure of Saint Death. Animal representations were dominated by felines, such as the bracelet clasped by sparkling jaguars.The auction was due to continue today when lots included a fleet of luxury vehicles and three Cessna light aircraft, all probably seized in anti-cartel operations that have intensified since President Felipe Calderón declared war on the traffickers four years ago and organised criminal violence ballooned.Blaming the need to protect the security of the bidders, the authorities refused to reveal the origin of any of the items, which opened the door to speculation.An obvious candidate was Sandra Avila Beltran, who was detained in 2007 for allegedly trafficking cocaine through Mexico with 169 fine jewels in her possession. "I can't resist them," the middle-aged beauty dubbed the Queen of the Pacific told Mexican journalist Julio Scherer in a series of prison interviews in which she insisted her only crime was to be part of the narco-social scene. "My husbands, my boyfriends and, when I had them, my friends, gave me a lot of jewellery."But only a few of pieces from her collection, that Scherer enumerated in his subsequent book on her, matched those on offer at the auction. The original owner of that diamond ring, and almost everything else that sparkled in the auction, seemed destined to remain a mystery.