In US political maths, Florida is considered the ultimate battleground. But the home of the 2000 recount has not been the most competitive state during the past two presidential elections. Nor was Ohio, despite its controversial role in George Bush's 2004 re-election. The biggest new battleground in America is an unlikely one: New Mexico. Mostly rural and famously quirky, with a total population just shy of the city of Las Vegas', the state chose Al Gore in 2000 by a mere 300 votes. Bush won New Mexico in 2004 by only 6,000 votes.With the Democratic primaries coming to a close last week, both Barack Obama and John McCain laid claim to the state's five electoral votes in duelling speeches on the Memorial Day holiday.No sooner had the presidential hopefuls departed than Bush swung through New Mexico to raise more than $300,000 in two hours for the congressional campaign of Darren White, a popular county sheriff.Times have changed, however, since White served as Bush's state re-election chairman. The sheriff did not appear publicly alongside the president, and local Democrats staged a protest of the Bush visit that featured White's likely opponent, Martin Heinrich.Why is New Mexico, which offers one-fourteenth of the electoral votes needed to win the presidency, so pivotal? The answer lies in the map. If Obama won each state that chose John Kerry in 2004 - a much less promising year for Democrats - he would emerge 18 electoral votes short of the presidency. Victory in Ohio or Florida alone would put Obama over the top. But working-class Democrats in Ohio have hesitated to embrace Obama, and the tussle over seating Florida's delegates has put his party in a poor position. What's more, the 2000 and 2004 elections have shown that counting on one state to deliver victory often backfires. If Obama can follow in Gore's footsteps by winning Iowa, the scene of his first primary win in January, he could beat McCain by winning only two of the three so-called "mountain west" states: Nevada, Colorado and New Mexico."When you look at New Mexico, Colorado, Nevada, you look at how the elections have been trending there and you look what the people in the west are concerned about, it's going to be a good match for Obama," Arizona governor Janet Napolitano told MSNBC this week.Obama has two potent weapons in New Mexico, which is the fifth largest US state by size but ranks 36th out of 50 in population.The first is Bill Richardson, the state's governor and former Bill Clinton adviser who broke ranks to endorse Obama. Richardson hosted Michelle Obama at two New Mexico fundraisers this week, boosting his standing on the vice-presidential shortlist.The second benefit to Obama comes from the wild free-for-all in the state congressional ranks. One of New Mexico's two Senate seats opened up this year for the first time since 1982 - a possible promotion so enticing that the state's entire delegation in the House of Representatives leaped into the contest. Now every congressional seat in New Mexico is up for grabs.In a state where registered Democratic voters outnumber Republicans by more than 100,000, the astonishing number of elections in New Mexico could boost voter turnout for Obama.