Of all the operators in Mexican politics, few have been so successful or controversial as teachers' union leader Elba Esther Gordillo. Now, some say, the end could be nigh for the woman known simply as La Maestra, or The Teacher.This week, the former head of the social security fund for state workers, and a onetime ally of Gordillo, publicly alleged that in February 2007 he refused her demand to be paid $2m a month from the fund, apparently to finance the activities of her allies' political party. "Elba Esther's only interest in life is power and money," Miguel Ángel Yunes said. "She is like a kind of King Midas. Everything she touches she corrupts."Gordillo described the accusation as "rash, frivolous and slanderous" in a written statement.But political analyst Ricardo Aleman pointed out that Yunes was close to President Felipe Calderón, and said he believed the president was preparing an assault on Gordillo's power and reputedly fabulous wealth. "This could be the beginning of an intense war against everything Gordillo stands for," Aleman told W Radio.La Maestra's power is rooted in the 1.5 million teachers who are members of the union she has controlled since 1989. In 2008 she was caught on camera buying the loyalty of regional union leaders with gifts of brand new Hummers. She is said to have a dozen luxury properties around the world, while the national newspaper Reforma said she was carrying a Hermès handbag worth $5,500 last week and wearing shoes valued at $1,200.Gordillo, 66, also set up a political party in 2005 that has become notorious for obtaining privileges and key appointments in return of its support in elections. Last week she confirmed long standing speculation that she helped Calderón obtain the narrow victory that made him president in 2006 as part of a deal that allowed her to put allies in the government, including Yunes. "It is not something I am ashamed of," she said. "I do politics."The recent allegations from Yunes, whose appointment to the social security institute was part of the deal, suggest the alliance with Calderón is now definitively over, but some analysts are wary of predicting that the president will dare to go further and try to bring her down in the dying months of his administration."It would be like beating a wasps nest," said Jorge Zepeda Paterson, pointing out that the union could cause havoc by shutting down the nation's schools. "The president doesn´t have the skill or the time to depose her more quietly."