As controversy over his remarks about Mexican immigrants to the US continued to attract international condemnation and damage his commercial relationships, the White House hopeful Donald Trump drew heavy fire from Marco Rubio, a Hispanic member of the 14-strong GOP presidential field.On Friday, Rubio released a strongly worded statement which said: “Trump’s comments are not just offensive and inaccurate, but also divisive.”At the launch of his presidential campaign two weeks ago, Trump said: “[Mexico is] sending people that have lots of problems, and they are bringing those problems to us. They are bringing drugs, and bringing crime, and their rapists.”The government of Mexico called the comments “prejudiced” and “absurd”; the Venezuelan president, Nicolás Maduro, said Trump was “mentally ill”.Hispanic leaders in the US called on Republicans to condemn Trump’s remarks. Many candidates have been cautious and relatively mild. The former Florida governor Jeb Bush, the frontrunner whose wife was born in Mexico and who speaks fluent Spanish, said Trump was “wrong” and added: “Maybe we’ll have a chance to have an honest discussion about it onstage.” Related: Hispanic leaders call for Republican candidates to condemn Donald Trump Trump, running second in some polls, is on course to appear onstage in the first Republican debate, which will be hosted in Cleveland by Fox on 6 August. Only the top 10 in the currently 14-strong GOP field will be allowed to participate.Rubio’s statement continued: “Our next president needs to be someone who brings Americans together – not someone who continues to divide. Our broken immigration system is something that needs to be solved, and comments like this move us further from – not closer to – a solution. We need leaders who offer serious solutions to secure our border and fix our broken immigration system.”On Saturday, speaking on the Fox & Friends morning show, Trump attacked Rubio for being “very weak on immigration”. He also said the former New York governor George Pataki, who has criticised his remarks, was “a sad figure” and “a terrible governor of New York” who had “zero numbers in the polls”.Trump said he “respected” the Texas senator Ted Cruz, who has defended his remarks on immigration.On Friday, Trump lost the support of another US institution when the chairman of Nascar said the auto-racing series would not host its season-end awards at his Trump National Doral resort in Miami.TV networks Univision and NBC and department store Macy’s have said they will cut commercial ties with Trump. In response, Trump has imposed a ban on Miami-based Univision executives using the golf course at his Doral resort, and filed a $500m lawsuit over the network’s withdrawal of support for the Miss USA beauty pageant, in which he holds a stake.He has also clashed with the actress America Ferrera, who posted an open letter on huffingtonpost.com in which she wrote: “What you just did with your straight talk was send more Latino voters to the polls than several registration rallies combined! Thank you for that.”In response, via Twitter, Trump said: “Thank you America Ferrara for supporting lawless criminals from Mexico.”On Fox on Saturday, Trump said: “This isn’t good for my brand. I think it’s bad for my brand. Maybe I’m leading in polls, but this is certainly not good. I lose customers, I lose people.”He added: “I had one of the top shows on television, The Apprentice, and I decided not to do it because I wanted to do this. Who gives up a top, top show? “Plus, I gave up hundreds of millions of dollars of deals because I’m doing this. And then you hear about Nascar, and NBC, and you hear about different people who drop Trump because Trump wants safety.”On Friday, Nascar spokesman David Higdon said: “We looked at everything we saw coming down and what we heard from our sponsors and our partners and what we feel we should be doing, and that’s what led us to the decision today.”Marcus Lemonis, chief executive of one such sponsor, Camping World, released a letter which said: “Due to recent and ongoing blatantly bigoted and racist comments from Donald Trump in regards to immigrants of the United States, I would like to inform you that I will not, nor will any representative of Camping World, participate or attend in the ceremonial event if it is held at any Trump property.”Undaunted, Trump doubled – or possibly tripled or quadrupled – down on his controversial comments, telling Fox News the shooting dead of a 32-year-old woman by an illegal immigrant with an extensive arrest record in San Francisco was “yet another example of why we must secure our border immediately”.“This is an absolutely disgraceful situation and I am the only one that can fix it. Nobody else has the guts to even talk about it,” he said.