Elisa Guerra is a teacher at Colegio Valle de Filadelfia in Mexico. She set up the school in 2004 and this year is opening two new institutions in Brazil and Costa Rica.   I originally wanted to be a writer and studied Hispanic literature in college. My father lost his job so I was only able to stay for one term. I had to leave to help support my family. For a couple of years I was a model. My mum owned a clothes shop and I used to be in her fashion shows. That led to work in magazines and commercials. It was fun for a 19-year-old, but had little meaning. I didn’t want to be on the cover of a magazine because of my looks, I wanted to be there because of something I’d done.Having children inspired me to become a teacher. In my twenties I got married and had children – they’re now aged 12, 17 and 20. At first I was a stay-at-home mum and I had all of this time with my son. I wanted it to be joyful and for him to love books like I do, so I began teaching him. I started reading everything I could find on education and took a course in Philadelphia, US, at the Institute for the Achievement of Human Potential. It’s an amazing international organisation that specialises in working with children with brain damage as well as those who are healthy. It taught me about brain development and how to create the right environment for learning. After I completed the course, I started volunteering with the organisation. I now run their office for Latin America and teach parents about child development. A lot of it is about helping families realise that all is not lost and that their kids can learn to do many things. When I looked for a pre-school for my children there was nowhere I liked, so I created one myself. The places in my city were very traditional. My eldest son attended one for a while, and although he enjoyed parts of it, he kept saying, “I get bored, we do the same things every day”.I got together with a friend and we rented a house. My father was back in work and he gave me $2,000 (£1,341) to help with costs. At the beginning we weren’t earning, but then the school grew and after a few years we had 100 students. Five years later my friend and I went our separate ways, as we had different views on how the project should develop.In 2004, I sold my car for $15,000 (£10,064) and set up another school. For the first year it was tough, because I was doing everything – acting as the principal, answering the phones, teaching classes, and being a mum. My husband wasn’t helpful, and I’m a single mother now. This made me realise that I had to make things happen for the project and my family – I support everyone now on my income. And I was very lucky because I got to go to work every day with my kids in tow. I know that most people can’t do that. My children have been a huge part of the project. The pre-school has grown to 164 students and we go up to ninth grade now. It’s a private school, and our students are mainly middle class, but we offer scholarships.In December last year, 43 trainee teachers disappeared and we still don’t know what happened to them.This year we’re opening schools in Costa Rica and Brazil, and I have schools in four other Mexican cities. I never intended to set up places elsewhere, but a mum and pre-school teacher who sent her son to my original school moved to another city and asked if we could open something there. I didn’t have the money, so we came up with a franchise model. It’s still very personal though, the directors own the school but I train the teachers and visit when I can. The other schools have stemmed from people approaching me.The model the schools are based on is focused on ensuring students explore a wide range of subjects and have the space to pursue their interests. We follow the national curriculum, but we have an enrichment curriculum on top of that. It covers art and music, and each month we look at a different country in detail. Teaching children about diversity is important and the textbooks I’ve written always include an element of learning about other ways of life. I started writing them because I didn’t think the ones available in Mexico were challenging enough. It was a long journey to getting published, I started out printing them for students on a Xerox machine until the publisher Pearson took them on.I recently travelled to schools in China, Japan and South Korea as part of a research project. They have a great respect for teachers in these countries, which we don’t have in Mexico. The climate here isn’t very good; teachers tend to be seen as lazy or troublemakers. People who go on protests are viewed particularly negatively. In December last year, 43 trainee teachers disappeared and we still don’t know what happened to them. No bodies have been found, but we presume that they’re dead. The media has reported that the authorities paid the local drug cartel to kill them. I love my country, but we have a saying, “You hurt me, Mexico”. It is very painful to see what is happening because of corruption. I don’t know why the profession isn’t valued. I remember interviewing a girl fresh out of college for a position. She wanted to be a teacher because she said she was looking for something “easy and not stressful” to do. That’s the last thing she’d find in the profession. There’s no easy way to change things, but it has to start with teacher training. I’ve never been formally trained, but my country introduced a programme that was a real blessing for me. If you have five years experience teaching, but don’t have a degree in education, then you can take a national exam to gain a certificate. I ranked first in the country and was able to do a masters in education. Many of my colleagues have been formally trained, though, and I know that courses are very poor. They focus a lot on theory and very little on what it means to teach. We can only really change things by showing respect for the profession and improving training.