For Britons living in Monaco and commuting to work in the City of London this week, the drab weather - more Cornish coast than Côte d'Azur - could be a sign of things to come. Today's budget is likely to make life harder for the 2,000 millionaires who call the handkerchief-sized tax haven home. Until now, tax rules that allow "non-residents" 90 days a year in Britain have contained a crucial loophole: the taxman has not counted "travel days" entering and leaving the country, allowing businesspeople to commute in on a Monday, leave on Wednesday, and claim to have spent just one day in the UK.It has in effect allowed Britons to spend most of the year - up to 270 days - working in Britain, while claiming to be residents of tax havens such as Monaco and to avoid paying tax. That will change under a stricter enforcement of the rules to be unveiled today which has unnerved tax lawyers serving Britons in several tax havens.The change - likely to count travel days or overnight stays in the residency total - will particularly affect the so-called "Monaco mob", millionaire City workers whose commute entails a seven-minute helicopter ride from Monaco to Nice for a connecting flight to London, often by private jet, before a swift return to the Riviera.But millionaires claiming residency in Monaco have told the Guardian they plan to circumvent the new rules by abandoning their weekly commute or transferring board meetings to offshore locations. Many said they would simply work in London several days at a time to cut down on travel days.At Monaco's harbour, a row of British Cayman Islands flags fluttering above the yachts behind him, Keith Luxon, a banker and seven-year Monaco resident, said the change was "completely unjust. It will have a big impact. "Whether it's here, Jersey, Guernsey or the Isle of Man, the guys will have to change the way they work. The classic example is someone who flies in and out of London 90 days a year for work. Under the new rules he is suddenly a UK resident for tax purposes. Some people are talking about taking this to the European court of human rights."Rob Rutter, who works in finance and, as president of the British Association of Monaco, represents 600 expatriates, said the rule change could see more Britons abandoning the commute to the City to work from home in Monaco.Many already work by tele-conference from flats which overlook the Mediterranean. He added that while his members "will have to be careful", none were prepared to abandon their lives in the principality."It's not just tax - it's about lifestyle. The streets are immaculate, there's no crime. You can have breakfast on your terrace, go skiing in the morning, and be back to the beach for the afternoon. I don't know a single person going back. They'll change their lifestyles - it's a nuisance - but they'll get round it."Roger Munns, who runs two property businesses for Monaco multimillionaires - "millionaires don't cut it in Monaco" - pointed to another way round the rules. Those unwilling to change their commuting patterns, he said, were restructuring their companies to funnel money into their spouses' Monaco bank accounts. "These people are quick thinkers," he said. "They can move quicker than the government."The principality's two square kilometres of high-rise flats jostle together to use every inch of tax-free space. Property is in such high demand - £3m will buy a small flat - that the authorities are reclaiming 25 acres from the sea.In one bar a group of City bankers, speaking on condition of anonymity, confirmed they would "play the rules" to find a way to continue spending time at their desks in London while maintaining non-residency status and paying zero income tax.In Monaco's decadent playground - a favourite for Britons since 19th-century industrialists first rolled dice in Monte Carlo's casino - it is easy to see how the state has proved popular for Europe's most moneyed expatriates.The night for many "in-crowd" expatriates begins at the Bar Américain, with its Bentleys and Rolls Royces parked outside. The same faces dine in one of the two Michelin-starred restaurants in the Hôtel de Paris, and end the night in Jimmy'z, a nightclub where two shots cost €40 (£30) and the manager, Cyrille Regottaz, knows the "west London set" from his days running the Mayfair Club.Another feature of the local nightlife is the well-dressed prostitutes with forced smiles who, more than one British resident admitted, are what "some of us spend our money on". For the less extravagant, there is Sunday roast at the Columbus hotel, owned by David Coulthard, or trips to French streets across the border for normal priced lager and football.However they spend their money, there is a unease among Monaco's British residents at the Treasury's attack on their way of life. "Most of these people running businesses [and living in Monaco] had got the whole system worked out - and it worked just fine," said Damian, a middle-aged "retiring accountant" and long-time Monaco resident. "And now the Treasury has moved the goalposts. It's not on."John Christensen, director of Tax Justice Network, which campaigns against tax avoidance, said it was unsurprising Monaco's exiles had devised ways to circumvent the tightened 90-day rule. "What a lot of normal people don't realise is that this is a massive game, almost pathological: 'We do not want to pay tax.'"In Bar Américain in the early hours of Sunday, that attitude was on full display. Men with British accents blew cigar smoke at the ceiling, while women speckled with pearls sat beside them and waved champagne into their glasses. In the corner, through thick smoke and spinning waiters, the band played on.The number of British residents in the tax haven of Monaco 2,054Monaco's total number of residents 32,020Square kilometres: the size of the principality. The authorities are also reclaiming 25 acres from the sea to satisfy the demand for residential development 2Cost of a small flat in Monaco £2-3mThe price of a 30-minute executive tax ride from Monaco to Nice airport, to board a commuting flight to the City of London £878