As this tiny kingdom – population 35,000, of which only 7,000 are Monegasque – attempts to kick-start the dream machine with its royal wedding, the principality's real asset, private banking, is in crisis.Outwardly nothing has changed: the diamond-clad women, the Rolls Royces and Maseratis in front of the Hotel de Paris, wild gambling in the casino and gleaming bank signs. However, looks are deceptive. In 2010 the assets of the 36 banks and 40 asset-management companies established here were worth a total €78bn ($110bn). That's a pittance, the equivalent of half the equity capital of an average Swiss bank. Having enjoyed a steady and secure income since the 1970s thanks to the arrival of rich Italians fleeing the Red Brigade, Monaco Inc's flagship industry is losing its momentum.Certainly, Monaco has always obsequiously welcomed the rich. For their part, the principality's foreign residents are mainly drawn by zero income tax, the promise of capital gains, the facilities and the housing. Monaco is a tax paradise."Today if you've got dirty money, Monaco is not the place to put it," insists Michel Roger, the state minister, Monaco's equivalent of prime minister, who is both Paris's eye on Monaco and Prince Albert's leading adviser. "I don't see Monaco's future in receiving illicit funds. Rather, it lies in transparency and having a state of law." The banks in Monaco come under the prudential control of the Banque de France. They are strictly supervised by the Service d'Information et de Contrôle sur les Circuits Financiers (Siccfin), the national authority dealing with the fight against money laundering, terrorist financing and corruption. Offshore companies are closely scrutinised and their property transactions are now taxed.More importantly, Monaco is no longer on the OECD's 2009 tax haven "grey list". To get itself off the list, the principality had to sign 24 agreements on the exchange of tax information, including with the US, Germany and France. Italy and the UK, whose nationals make up the largest contingent of foreign residents. "I don't see Monaco staying away from the trend towards real international co-operation that's emerging globally," Roger said.However, the stated desire for transparency is not to the liking of the private banks specialising in tailor-made financing. Today banks in Monaco can no longer count on dubious funds from former Soviet bloc countries or "politically exposed persons" in French-speaking Africa to replace the assets of the wealthy Europeans who fell victim to the 2008-2009 financial crisis.Furthermore, Monaco-based banking subsidiaries are now obliged to set up an expensive administrative arsenal of controllers and compliance officers.With the crisis, the clientele has also become more demanding about yields. The simple and lucrative days of simply "turning over" portfolios are gone, and the more sophisticated clients wanting to invest offshore are demanding yields as well as absence of risk – squaring the circle.Real estate in Monaco is another problem, since the housing stock will never be sufficient to meet demand. Despite their penchant for the Côte d'Azur, Russian oligarchs and Arab sheiks deem three-room flats to be unworthy of their status. As a result, the former playground of the millionaire jet set, which once provided homes for the Onassis and Agnelli families, now has to make do with the merely wealthy instead of the super-rich."Property in Monaco is a unique market of foreign investors who pay cash. We have the highest housing prices per square metre in the world, ranging from €25,000 to €50,000 because of the chronic shortage of supply," said Michel Dotta, a major estate agent in the principality.Despite Prince Albert's internship with JP Morgan in New York after graduating from Amherst College in the US, he is not interested in banking, except for socially responsible investment products dealing with ecology and sustainable development. Yet financial institutions pay massive corporation tax, and despite having no debt and a €2bn strategic investment fund, Monaco has an operating deficit of between €70m and €80m per year.Aware of these budgetary constraints, the Monaco government has begun to modernise its financial laws, and make them a better fit for its Anglo-Saxon clientele. The government also wants to diversify the geographic origins of its non-residents by attracting banks from emerging countries. Recently a Lebanese bank and a well-known Indian one have set up subsidiaries. The new finance minister, Marco Piccinini, was Monaco's former ambassador to Beijing.In addition, the prince has given the green light to a joint venture between Monaco and the Qatar Sovereign Fund to set up a chain of luxury hotels-cum-casinos across Asia.Monaco's magic has to serve both legend and business.This article originally appeared in Le Monde