It's a playground for the rich, a Mediterranean tax haven crammed with luxury apartment blocks, where moneyed visitors will flock this week for the grand prix. But Monaco, the second smallest country in the world after the Vatican, has a problem: it has run out of space.Prince Albert II, who took over from his father in 2005, is staking his name on a daring project to expand Monaco's less than one square mile of territory by building a new district out to sea. Like Dubai's artificial islands, it will be a world landmark, designed to boost the economy by attracting new residents, business and luxury tourists. But rather than an island standing alone, it will jut out from the shore on stilts, inspired by the design of oil rigs, and could set a precedent for coastal expansion elsewhere.The project will take 10 years to build and will enable Monaco to boost its 33,000-strong population and perhaps also its 360,000 registered bank accounts. As well as apartments, shops and mooring for yachts, the development will have a showpiece of mega-architecture, likely to be a museum. The prince is studying five bids "in top secrecy" and architects including Norman Foster and IM Pei have been linked.For more than 100 years, the cramped principality has reclaimed all the land it could from the sea. But some environmentalists on the Cote d'Azur say the unprecedented move risks irreparably damaging marine flora and fauna. Hélène Granouillac of the Terre Bleue NGO based in Nice warned against disturbing the reserves of coral and the Mediterranean sea plant Posidonia oceanica along the limited Monaco coastline. "If a new development is simply placed on top of the sea where these ecosystems are, they will be starved of the light that gives them life. That is very difficult to defend."Albert - a self-styled eco-champion - does not take this lightly. While international celebrity magazines still focus on the royal family descended from Grace Kelly, Albert has tried to put Monaco on the map with environmental measures. The prince introduced car-sharing schemes for workers, drives an electric car, and set up an eco-foundation, travelling to the north pole.Robert Calcagno, Monaco's councillor for the environment, and close to the prince, argued that the project was being developed so carefully that it would boost marine life."Not only will we protect the ecosystem but we will actually better the environment by putting in man-made reefs to allow species to thrive," he said.Calcagno added that the development would not be built over areas that were home to coral and sea-plants. Instead a zone had been chosen where "nothing remarkable" grows.The new neighbourhood would be a model of sustainable development using 10 times less energy than a normal area. "This will be our showcase of the world's best eco-technology," Calcagno said.