French police are reported to have arrested the daughter of a Monaco heiress fatally injured in a shooting in May. Officers picked up 19 suspects on Monday in raids in Nice and Marseille in the south of France and Rennes in the west, as part of their inquiry into the assassination of the wealthy property owner Hélène Pastor, a friend of the principality's royal family.Among those believed arrested is the murdered woman's daughter, Sylvia, and her businessman son-in-law. A possible contract killing is among the theories being investigated.Pastor, 77, so well known in Monaco that she was nicknamed "the vice-princess", was shot on 6 May in what police described as an ambush as she left a hospital in Nice where she had been visiting her son Gildo, who had suffered a stroke.In the attack, a gunman wielding a hunting rifle and a sawn-off shotgun opened fire twice on Pastor's Lancia Voyager car, injuring her and her chauffeur, Mohamed Darwich, 64. Darwich died four days later. Pastor was taken to hospital with face, neck, chest and abdomen injuries, and died a fortnight after the attack.CCTV images showed the gunman running off with a second man. The car continued a further 20 metres before crashing into a parked vehicle and coming to a halt.Afterwards a French judge opened an official inquiry into "attempted murder and assassination by an organised group". Police said they were looking into whether the attack had been carried out by Italian crime gangs.Pastor was the sister of Michel Pastor, a former chairman of Monaco football club who died in February. She was described by shocked friends as a "model of wisdom and discretion".The Pastor dynasty has a huge portfolio of property and land in Monaco estimated at 50,000 sq metres established by Pastor's grandfather, Jean-Baptiste, an impoverished Italian stonemason from Liguria, who arrived in Monaco in the 19th century.After constructing Monaco's first football stadium, Pastor's was taken over by his son Gildo who snapped up Mediterranean seafront real estate at bargain prices after the second world war. When Gildo died in 1990 his three children, Hélène and her late brothers, Michel and Victor, inherited his fortune.There are three branches of the Pastor family said to own between them as many as 3,000-4,000 flats of a total of 20,000 in the 0.8 square mile (2 sq km) principality. Their property is worth an estimated €20bn (£16bn) .After the attack, Monaco's ruler Prince Albert said he was "deeply upset" and offered the Pastor family his "very deep support".Police, who first described the attack on Pastor's car as an "ambush" and an "attempted execution", admitted they had no idea whether it was Pastor or her chauffeur who was the target, and said the choice of weapons did not suggest a professional assassin or the Mafia.