The Cannes film festival has seen some atrocious films in its time, largely born of the desire to get big names on the red carpet regardless of the actual quality of their cinematic vehicles. But none have stunk the place up to quite the extent as Grace of Monaco, the Grace Kelly biopic that was handed the shop-window slot at the beginning of this year's festival; the programmers, presumably, were banking on yards of Nicole Kidman paparazzi shots to boost the profile of Cannes' opening days. It also helped, no doubt, that Grace was a French film, from a director, Olivier Dahan, who had proved with La Vie en Rose that he could take on Hollywood's big-hitters and beat them at their own game.It didn't quite work out that way, unfortunately: Grace of Monaco drew almost universally derisive reviews. The narrative stew that pulled together Hitchcock, Monte Carlo, Maria Callas and Charles de Gaulle ought to have pushed every cultural button; instead, it proved a massive turn-off.It is with some trepidation, therefore, that I am ushered into the presence of Dahan the day after the disastrous gala premiere. There is no chance he won't be aware of our critic Peter Bradshaw's instantly legendary takedown. Will Dahan be a haggard wreck, a cigarette shoved in every orifice? Will he burst into tears and beg forgiveness? Or will he simply come at me with a flick-knife before I have the chance to get a word out?On top of this Dahan has, unfortunately, a bit of a reputation. A widely circulated photograph of him "directing" Kidman was so painfully staged it looked like a joke. A British producer of my acquaintance, who wishes to remain anonymous, described him as an "absurd, pretentious git … complete with wardrobe out of central casting for 'arty French director'". Blimey. Plus we've already seen him in action at the Cannes press conference, waffling away with a bulky ageing-hipster cap clamped on his head.So it is perhaps a slight disappointment to find Dahan in a fairly chirpy mood, happy to chat and seemingly unaffected by his drubbing a day ago. What's his secret, I wonder? He fixes me with a confident stare and says: "I don't read the critics." Well, that will do it. But the chronology of Cannes is pretty fixed: press screening in the morning, reviews out by lunchtime, red-carpet gala in front of screaming fans and hysterical media in the evening. Surely some sense of the cataclysm will have seeped through – and hasn't that taken the edge off? Dahan, the way he tells it, is all Teflon. "Cannes is a sort of gladiators' arena, and that's the fun part of it. When you accept to come here to open the festival, you know you are going to be criticised. I have no problem with the fact that I expose myself and the movie, and it's normal that I can disagree with the way some people feel."Perhaps it's true, perhaps it isn't, but Dahan won't budge. He's not rattled, and that's that. Ensconced in the super-rich preserve of the Hôtel du Cap, with Roman Abramovich's summer place around the corner and high-rolling Hollywood types booking out the rooms, the hustle of the Croisette and the Palais do seem a long way away. In his film-making as well as his dress sense, Dahan may have something about him of Baz Luhrmann and Pedro Almodóvar, but he seems considerably more relaxed than either.But we're forgetting something: Dahan has just spent three years working on Grace of Monaco – ever since the producer Pierre-Ange Le Pogam bought the much-fought-over script by Arash Amel that had featured in the 2011 Black List of unproduced screenplays. If we agree that no one sets out to make a terrible film, there must be reasons why it ended up the way it did. Besides, Dahan is no pushover: he had the cojones to call out Harvey Weinstein in public over the latter's demand for a substantial re-edit of the film. It was a complicated spat: Weinstein has the US distribution rights and is not – unlike with, say, The Artist – credited as a producer, so could not enforce any changes. But so powerful is he, and with such a distinguished track record, that film-makers defy him at their peril, however much they gripe in private. Telling the media that Weinstein's re-edit was "a pile of shit" was entirely unprecedented, and won Dahan a renegotiated deal that reduced his payments but preserved his right to veto any changes. (Though in all honesty, Weinstein's instincts that Grace had big problems proved absolutely correct.)With the kerfuffle seemingly behind him, Dahan can afford to be generous. "It happened when I was actually still making the movie, so my mood was completely different from today," he says. "When you are in the middle of the process, you are not so open. I am a very collaborative person, and it was about the lack of collaboration with Harvey. He was not there so that is why it happened like it did. I am a free person."I was never against having a slightly different cut for the US, because it's a special place, for sure, and Harvey knows the average American viewer better than me. But now I hope we can finally collaborate."Preparing to parse his film, Dahan again fixes me with his level, confident stare, and explains why he wanted to make Grace of Monaco in the first place. "I was interested in making a portrait of an actress," he says. "I was not so much interested in the princess, more the artist." He points out his Edith Piaf film, La Vie en Rose, which got Marion Cotillard the best actress Oscar, was also "about a woman artist, an artist who could never give up, never surrender, never quit her passion". Grace Kelly, he says, "was the complete opposite: it showed how an artist can quit. It was also part of herself she quit."So if we're reading that right, Dahan aimed to make a film about the retreat from creative afflatus, the lure of marriage, children, a fairy castle? "Exactly," he says. "In the film, it is six years after the wedding, six years after she left Hollywood. She is in between. She is not yet the real princess she is going to become later, but she is not an actress any more. She is in no man's land."At this moment, as happened in real life, Hitchcock came with Marnie. It was the spark that put the little light on. She wants to go back to Hollywood – not to leave the family, but just to be herself. It must be possible to combine marriage with a husband, with a passion and a job. That's the condition of women in general. I started to think of Grace of Monaco as a metaphor for women in general."So the film is about a standard working mum trying to juggle career and family – not the story of a self-pitying, overprivileged type who just wants to defend Monaco's position as a tax haven and billionaire's playground? "It's true it's about a fairytale and a princess story and there is a danger with that. For most women, they are a trap. Grace is herself the best example: she goes from a Hollywood cage to a royalty cage. It is the story of a woman who tries to please everyone, and loses part of herself as an artist."As Dahan explains his thinking, it makes his movie sound almost reasonable – interesting, even. Especially his decision to ask Nicole Kidman to play the lead. "She had her own experience in marriage. Not just an ordinary marriage, but when she was married to someone – you know who I mean." Polite to a fault, Dahan won't let the words "Tom Cruise" pass his lips. "It was like she was married to another, third person at the same time, someone with a certain kind of power underneath the person. It was actually so similar to Grace, and for me as a film-maker it was very interesting." He talks about cutting in the film between shots of Grace, of Kidman herself, and "a mix" of the two; something, I have to admit, that completely passed me by.Maybe there are hidden depths here after all? Is this a subtle endorsement of Monaco's tax system? "I understand you thinking that, but I'm not pro-Monaco, pro-banker or whatever. I'm pro-woman. I'm not against Monaco – I'm just not interested in it. I'm interested in an actress who became a princess, and then was almost trapped in that, losing maybe the best part of herself. I'm on the artist's side, not on the political side or the principality or the royalty. I am only on the side I understand."Dahan's thoughts then turn to the future: he says he'd like to make a third movie about an artist, to complete the trilogy. "Piaf and Grace are opposites, but with the same result, a kind of death. I will do a third movie; it will make something complete for me. The difficulty with telling stories about real people is you have to find a way of mixing yourself into the matter. So I have to wait for more experience in my life to be able to make that third movie. But I will."It sounds like a threat.• Grace of Monaco is released in the UK on 6 June. Full coverage here