One of my trader buddies, Mark, made an announcement this morning. During a brief moment of calm in the markets he paused to tell us of his discovery. He has done the research and found out that all 38 West Ham Premier League games can be watched live in full HD from his new sea-facing living room in Gibraltar (something he can't even do in east London, next to the stadium itself).The fear that new tax laws will bring about the mass emigration of our wealthiest is not a new phenomenon. Since taxes began, people have moved away from them. Today it's a bit more complicated. While there are advantages to moving to somewhere near the UK, like Jersey, where income tax is a flat 20% and there is no VAT, you would be living in Jersey. Spain has always been popular for UK emigres, and with a top band of about 45% it still offers a 10% saving at least for our top earners. Israel announced at the end of last year that any new immigrants or returning citizens would be entitled to 10 years of untaxed foreign income. Then you have true tax havens such as Monaco, which levies no tax at all on its citizens.The problem is that tax implications are only one of a multitude of factors considered when moving abroad. Usually, wealthy expat communities tend to grow about high-quality international schools. Sometimes, when one is not available, they have to build it. Political uncertainty is another factor; although all the examples listed above are fairly innocuous, many people have moved to Asia and Africa and suffered the consequences of a lack of economic infrastructure. Think also of the traditional Muslim family who have moved to Switzerland and lack a place of worship. The cost of moving is an immediate concern and while properties in Spain are cheap even with the euro soaring, Switzerland and Monaco still maintain a premium on property value.On the other hand, the spread of low-cost flights and airports has made returning ever easier. International commuting is a very real prospect for many. But more than tax and travel, it is technology that has allowed bankers to emigrate with real confidence. Most trading is now done by computer, linked directly to the exchange by dedicated fibre optics. From my desk I can trade on any market in the world, so why does it matter where the desk is?It is a balancing act, and one that will tip away from the UK whenever there is a tax increase. I wonder which outcome people would prefer: bankers leaving and taking their money with them, or claiming Zac Goldsmith-style non-domiciled status and at least spending some of it here, with the VAT going to the Treasury.