For five days, a wave of grief had been held at bay in the small mining communities around Greymouth. Against the dictates of reason and the realities of fire and gas, hope was all the relatives and friends of the 29 missing miners had. Then, in one raw moment this afternoon, all hope was dashed.A second explosion at Pike River mine, bigger than the first, ripped through the mine as rescue teams were in full gear and ready to begin searching. Perhaps the 29 men were already dead; certainly, it is believed they are now. At 2.37pm, when the Pike River chief executive, Peter Whittall, was at the mine, smoke started spewing from the main shaft."In my subjective opinion it was larger and stronger and lasted longer, and it was not what I wanted to see," he said.News travels fast in small communities but at 4pm the families and relatives of the 29 walked into the afternoon briefing in a Greymouth hall unaware of the new explosion. The briefing began as these briefings had for days, with technical talk of boreholes and robots."It got started as normal and there was quite a lot of optimism because of the fact the robots were getting down there," said the mayor of Grey District, Tony Kokshoorn. Then, when Whittall told the miners' relatives that a team had been getting ready to go underground the families applauded, thinking that a rescue was about to start."I had to wait till they stopped clapping to tell them … that the second explosion occurred," he said afterwards.He told the families: "There was an enormous explosion, there's no way anyone could have survived it.''Anger rose up quickly. The police, who some believed had frustrated rescue efforts with an overcautious approach, were the first target.But love and comfort won out. "We just started consoling each other. But there were some distraught people," said Kokshoorn. "This is the west coast's darkest hour, I'm telling you. It doesn't get worse than this. It's just devastation. They don't know what to do. They just sobbed openly and just fell to the floor."Police superintendent Gary Knowles witnessed both explosions. "I was at the mine myself when this occurred and the blast was horrific," he said. "I had to break the news to the families and they are extremely distraught. This is one of the most tragic things I have had to do as a police officer."For five days, families and relatives had formed a stern and sombre parade in front of the media on their way into and out of daily briefings. They went in sombre again today but left weeping and heartbroken. "It's just blown up. That's it, they're all dead. It blew up again," said Lawrie Drew, father of Zen, 21.He was one of several relatives whose frustration had boiled over with the pace of the rescue process.Mining folklore says the moments after an explosion are the safest time to enter a mine, but with no teams allowed in, a robot was put down the tunnel and promptly broke down when water dripped from the mine roof. With the hours ticking by, a search began for another robot. Safety was paramount.But not all feel that way. Neville Rockhouse had borne more suffering this week than any man should have to. The mine's safety and training manager, he had two sons down the mine.Daniel Rockhouse, 24, was one of only two men to survive the first blast. After that miraculous escape came the news that night that Neville's father had died from a heart attack. Then yesterday, more grief: Ben, 21, was not coming home.Rockhouse was the first man to reach Whittall after the news was announced. "He gave me a big hug and said: 'We did everything we could,'" the mine manager revealed. Some will still cling to hope and perhaps recalculate the chances of an even bigger miracle of survival. Whittall refused to rule it out, even as the focus switched to recovering bodies."My team are going to have to start assessing tonight: what next?" he said. "What do we do with the mine?"Regardless of what's happened, if the men are no longer alive, which is most likely, I still want them back and the families want them back, and we'll be doing everything we can to make that happen."But a further explosion is possible, and Prime Minister John Key has warned it could take time to recover the bodies. The mine is still not safe: methane is still being released and the fires burn on.David Bell, an expert in engineering and mining geology at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand, said methane levels had made a second explosion "almost inevitable''.