It was a warm, sunny day, so after a quick lunch we drove to one of Auckland's regional parks. We passed through suburbs with spring blossoms: white magnolias and pink-flowered cherry trees.Duder Regional Park is on a peninsula with high cliffs. The original farmhouse, not part of the park, is on flat land by the coast at the base of the peninsula. We walked up a gentle track past fenced gullies with remnants of native forest through bright green fields. The rolling, sheep-grazed hills reminded us of England.A ewe, hugely swollen on each side, watched as we entered a field where lambing was in progress. One ewe had a tiny lamb suckling, wagging its tail vigorously. On the ground nearby lay another lamb. Its umbilical cord had been cut by the mother. The lamb was still covered by yellow brown foetal membranes though its face had been licked clean. It lay there twitching, ignored by its mother.Should we do something to help or would helping a sickly lamb allow an adverse genetic trait to spread and weaken the flock? Not knowing either the answer or what we could do, we walked on past small, sleeping lambs and others, alert and watching our every move. One even tried to adopt us.It was a pleasant walk to the end of the peninsula where earthworks marked the site of an abandoned Maori pa, a native New Zealand fort, rather like iron age hill forts in Britain. After inspecting the pa and admiring the island-covered sea and wide blue sky, we set off back the way we came.The mother now had a third lamb, which she was licking clean as it searched for a teat. The second lamb, which we had thought near to death, had been cleaned and was walking around confidently. The mothers of all placental mammals must have the instinct to cut the umbilical cord and to clean their newly born, and the newly born need to know instinctively where to find the life-giving teats.Today we are far removed from many of our basic instincts. We readily intervene to save the individual to the possible detriment of the wellbeing of the species. The regional parks provide an opportunity to experience something of rural life, though on our drive home I wondered how many visitors realise that the white fluffy lambs they see are the source of meat in the supermarket and on their dinner plate.