New Zealand was afforded a rare honour on Thursday – a visit by Leon Panetta, the first American defence secretary to visit the country since Caspar Weinberger back in the cold war days of 1982. But some local inhabitants seem a tad ungrateful. They have labelled Panetta, a former CIA chief, the "warlord of the world" and say he should be arrested and sent for trial in The Hague. They pay no heed to Washington's "anti-China" Asia-Pacific security agenda.On balance, it always seemed unlikely Panetta would be handcuffed and led away. But he should tread carefully, all the same. New Zealand surprised and deeply angered Washington in the mid-1980s when the government of David Lange famously banned the presence of nuclear-armed and nuclear-powered ships from New Zealand's waters. The Reagan administration retaliated by suspending defence co-operation. The tripartite Anzus pact with the US and Australia lost its third leg.New Zealand's independent spirit remains undimmed. But political and security relations with the US have recovered in recent years, driven primarily by Washington's growing focus on Asia-Pacific in general, and China in particular. This has produced some significant joint initiatives, as Robert Ayson, director of the Centre for Strategic Studies at Victoria University, noted."We had the Wellington Declaration in 2010 where the government [of prime minister John Key] and the Obama administration committed themselves to co-operating more in the south Pacific. New Zealand has joined US humanitarian missions in this region. We have also had US marines and army personnel training in New Zealand," Ayson wrote.This rapprochement culminated this year with the Washington Declaration on building up a joint maritime security presence and deployable capabilities. Ayson warned: "We've even said, in language not too far from Anzus, that we are prepared to respond 'in accordance with national approval processes' to regional contingencies. And we don't just mean the Pacific. The canvas is the wider Asia-Pacific region. That means New Zealand is more likely to be seen as a participant in America's rebalancing in Asia."This is also how it is seen in Washington. "The central purpose of the secretary's visit is to explore opportunities for deepening defence co-operation. Following the Washington Declaration, a key area of focus is likely to be maritime military issues in the west Pacific," said a briefing prepared by the Center For Strategic & International Studies.The prospect that, on this basis, New Zealand might one day be drawn into a Sino-American military confrontation over disputed Japanese islands such as the Senkakus, or Taiwan, or North Korea, is alarming to many, and rightly so, for it can hardly be said to serve the national interest. New Zealand's relations with Beijing are cordial and China is its largest trading partner after Australia, said New Zealand Herald columnist Brian Rudman, so why play Panetta's game?He said: "Turn off the lights. Hide behind the curtains. Pretend we're visiting sick rellies [relatives] in Sydney. The warlord of the world, Leon Panetta, slips into Auckland this week … Panetta is here to try and sign New Zealand up to his team trying to encircle and contain the rampant dragon that is China."He continued: "When you look at the devastation that is Iraq and Afghanistan and the upheavals throughout the Muslim world and read of US unmanned Predator and Reaper drone aircraft bombing village wedding parties by remote control, is this a 'friend' or 'valued partner' we really want to get any closer to? We joined them in the Vietnam calamity, and the Afghanistan debacle. Now they want us to join them in putting some sort of corset around China ... It's nice of Panetta to drop in. But the price he asks is too high."Panetta travelled to New Zealand after a three-day visit to China, where he toured Chinese warships and gave assurances that Washington wants a non-confrontational relationship based on trust and respect. But commentators point out that as US-China regional rivalry grows, pressure from both countries to take their side in future disputes will inevitably grow, too – and New Zealand cannot satisfy both. Better in that case to pursue a balanced policy rather than tilting towards Washington.Complaints also persist that the US has not broken a habit of bullying that dates back to the nuclear dispute (the nuclear ban remains in force). While New Zealand took part in recent US-led, 22-country naval exercises off Hawaii, its ships, the Te Kaha and Endeavour, were not allowed to berth in Pearl Harbour alongside the other participants – a painful snub."We need to strongly oppose the fact that our government is sucking up to the USA because we are too small to have any great influence and need to preserve our values and our sovereignty," said blogger "Mariana P" in response to Ayson's article.Some New Zealanders would go further. Another blogger, "tjh", wrote: "Panetta was deeply involved in the illegal Iraq war – and in the CIA's rendition, torture, and illegal imprisonment activities. He should be arrested the moment he steps on to our soil and referred to the War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague. If we could get Bush and Blair there as well, so much the better."