After 14 attempts I am still unable to reconcile Christmas Day with the hot sunshine of the north-east New Zealand city of Gisborne. Every December, as the sweat runs from my brow, I cannot shake off the thought that Yuletide is a winter festival best celebrated under cold, iron grey skies. Christmas spent on a beach among chilly bins, barbecues and surfboards can never compare to the contentment of toasting one's backside, and loved ones, in front of a blazing fire with a schooner of pale sherry in hand.Shops begin their Christmas sales drive in early spring when the public mood focuses on the summer holidays. The two events are a tragic coincidence. To my eye, plastic holly and imitation pines decorated with Chinese baubles look oddly out of place in the hot city. The juxtaposition of Christmas trees peppered with white cotton wool, and the cooling breeze of air conditioning units, has a surreal effect on my seasonal spirit. Unreality heaped upon unreality.Pictures of snow-covered lanes are themes on northern Christmas cards. Many of my neighbours have never seen snow in the raw. They have rarely felt the cold. As our road tarmac softens in midday heat, greetings cards will depict a jolly Santa riding a surfboard while a smiling Mrs Santa prepares a barbie.Christmas lunch? Forget roast turkey, stuffing, cranberry sauce and vegetables. Don't even imagine a homemade pudding, four months old and slathered in brandy sauce. This is the great outdoors, so think grilled steak or crayfish followed by fruit salad and ice-cream washed down with a few stubbies from the ice coffin. Alfresco lunch is taken, usually with friends and family, under a sun umbrella or marquee. It really is summer and only by wearing a sun-bleached paper crown am I reminded that it is also Christmas.While in Britain the population stirs itself to listen to the Queen's post-prandial speech, Kiwis will not. It does not help the royal cause that this commonwealth nation is 12 hours ahead of Her Majesty and at the very moment she might have captured her subjects' undivided attention, she is still abed.I suggest an alternative to Christmas in the heat. Why don't we transfer Yuletide to June 25? It is winter then and we can all stay at home with the doors shut and wear our new woolly jumpers. My family looks at me as if I'm daft.Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a 'Letter from' one of its readers from around the world. Submissions should focus on giving our readers a clear sense of a place and its people and be sent to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com 