The capital of New Zealand was once thought of as a tame colonial outpost. But not any more. These days, Wellington's home to so many A-list movie types – most famously Peter Jackson – that part of it has been nicknamed Wellywood. Those who know the city well speak of it as "achingly cool" with "a taste for the outrageous". Mark Baldwin, a choreographer brought up in these parts, points to Wellington's dazzling community of drag queens. "There's a fabulous night club called the Purple Onion, full of enormous Maori queens." Fellow choreographer Javier de Frutos regards the city as food and drink heaven: "The bartenders mix perhaps the best vodka martinis I've ever tasted."But there's another reason why famous names in dance are so fond of Wellington: it's home to the Royal New Zealand Ballet (RNZB), a highly enterprising company that – despite being based in a small country light years from anywhere – has forged a genuine reputation on the world stage. I try to keep this notion of a vivid, vibrant Wellington in my head as I cut through the New York bustle, on my way to the Metropolitan Opera House to meet Ethan Stiefel, the newly appointed director of RNZB.Stiefel is US ballet royalty: aged 38, though still blond and boyish, he joined New York City Ballet at 16 and has been principal dancer at American Ballet Theatre since 1997. As we walk through the Met, it's hard to imagine a man more happily at home in his work: we are constantly pausing for people to shake his hand, exchange greetings, or offer a high five.So why move to the other side of the world? Does he even know how far Wellington is from New York? "Nope. I only know it takes about two days to get there, and that the jet lag is something else. Of course, I had a lot of questions about going, and so did Gillian [Murphy, his ballerina fiancee]. But we're seeing it as an adventure. New Zealand looks great, and the company is full of possibilities."Certainly when RNZB visited Britain in 2004, audiences were impressed by its spirited, expressive dancers and unusually eclectic repertory. The company returns to Britain this week, touring work by an extremely snappy trio: De Frutos, New Zealand-born Andrew Simmons and Boston Ballet choreographer Jorma Elo, one of the world's hottest dance-makers, though still little known here.Stiefel is far from being the first foreigner to make a full-time home with RNZB. It was founded by Poul Gnatt, a dancer from the Royal Danish Ballet, who came to New Zealand on holiday in 1953 and liked it so much he never went back. There was very little ballet in the country then, so Gnatt imported dancers and pieces from Denmark. This international tradition has stuck."It's always a pleasure to be there, despite the jet lag," says De Frutos, who has staged three works for RNZB. "I love that the company embraces talent from all over the world." He's found it gratifyingly receptive. That's no small praise from a man whose work tends to attract controversy: his 2009 religious satire, Eternal Damnation to Sancho and Sanchez, was dropped by the BBC, which took fright at its perverted pope, pregnant nuns and priapic priests. Yet New Zealand takes De Frutos on board. Milagros, the sensuous, humid version of Rite of Spring he created for RNZB in 2003, has been a long-term success. "After ruffling a few feathers first time round, it is still in the rep. I feel very close to the dancers every time they perform it."There are many, however, who feel the company needs to counter its internationalism with a stronger, more indigenous identity. Baldwin, who danced with RNZB before emigrating to Britain in 1983, feels it suffers from a lack of confidence that's typical of the country as a whole. "It's a lingering colonial hangover, a feeling that New Zealand still has to look to Europe or America for inspiration." He'd like to see the company "generating work more organically, using its own choreographers, even appointing a New Zealand director".Stiefel is acutely aware that his position, as yet another foreigner, is a delicate one. "I have to ask how I can make dance in New Zealand better, how I can develop a signature style for the company – one that works for the audience here as well as for the dancers, and that's sustainable over the long term. It can't just be about my own ideas."As we chat, it becomes clear that most of the issues Stiefel will be grappling with are those that vex companies the world over. First up is the company's classics. They're always in demand, yet RNZB is too small (32 dancers) to mount world-class productions of, say, Swan Lake. The company is also constrained by the fact that it has to tour to towns and cities in New Zealand that are far from Wellington, playing to audiences who may have little knowledge of ballet. Stiefel believes it's important to adjust to both factors. "I'm a stickler for form, but I believe it's possible to stay true to the essence of these 19th-century ballets while giving them a different life, a renewed point of view that will work for here."That belief will be roadtested with a new production of Giselle that Stiefel will mount with Johan Kobborg, a dancer and choreographer with our own Royal Ballet. "We've already talked about it a lot, and we think there are ways of making the narrative of Giselle much stronger. The mime, for example. Ordinary people don't speak the way they did 100 years ago, and ballet mime should reflect that." But he doesn't just want to update all that coded classical sign language: "We want to strengthen the storytelling, too, perhaps elaborating on the tension between Albrecht and Hilarion." Those are the two men in love with Giselle; Stiefel plans to put some more thought into Myrtha, Queen of the Wilis, too.Second on Stiefel's list is the more contemporary repertory. He knows the company are very interested in his New York background: RNZB is barely known in the US, and it wants to change that. But, while his first mixed bill will be an all-American affair, including Balanchine and Benjamin Millepied, what interests him is making new work, in-house. Some will be choreographed by him, some by Kobborg; both men, as well as being good friends, have recently embarked on second careers as choreographers. In fact, it was Kobborg who persuaded Stiefel to apply for the New Zealand job. "When I got it," Stiefel jokes, "I rang him up and said, 'Look what you got me into, man! You got to help me out.'" He adds: "It's a nice connection, too – because Johan was originally a dancer with Royal Danish Ballet, just like Poul Gnatt."But, as Stiefel points out, he and Kobborg are still "outsiders", and his ultimate concern must be to nurture local talent. "I want to be able to find choreographers and designers of a level that can be developed, so a long-term ballet culture can be created here."One problem he may face is that New Zealand, while able to produce lively talent, has a bad track record in keeping it. Simmons, the young choreographer whose ballet A Song in the Dark will be performed in Britain, has already left to work abroad. This doesn't surprise Baldwin, who – despite his own early success in New Zealand, including the launch of Limbs, its first modern dance group – couldn't wait to leave. "New Zealand can feel very lonely. It's marvellous if you like sheep. There are over 70 million of them. But with a population of only about 4 million, there just isn't the concentration of people and activity to satisfy most artists."All Stiefel can hope to do is increase the level of creativity in his own company, making it more fun, more glamorous, more sustaining for home talent. His own reputation will help, as will that of his fiancée Murphy, who will be dancing with RNZB for much of the year. So will the possibility that Kobborg, while working in New Zealand, will bring his own, even starrier fiancee, Alina Cojocaru, to guest.Stiefel, Murphy, Kobborg, Cojocaru: that would be quite a package. It could turn RNZB into quite a powerhouse, encouraging native dancers and choreographers to stay down under and be a part of it. Despite Stiefel's modest manner, he can't resist breaking a grin. "It would," he says, "be pretty amazing."• At Wales Millennium Centre, Cardiff (029-2063 6464), tonight; Barbican, London (0845 120 7500), Thursday to Saturday; then touring.