New Zealand bellbird, Anthornis melanura, Sparrman, 1786 (protonym, Certhia melanura), also known as the bellbird and by its Māori names, korimako or makomako, photographed at Tiritiri Matangi Island, the restored island in the Hauraki Gulf close to Auckland, New Zealand. Image: Richard Thomas/TRAFFIC, October 2007 (with permission) [velociraptorize].Handheld digiscoped using Nikon Coolpix and 20x Swarovski telescope  Question: This small New Zealand mystery bird is known for its stunning duets. Can you identify this bird's taxonomic family and species? Can you identify this bird's gender? Can you tell me more about this bird's song?Response: This is an adult male New Zealand bellbird, Anthornis melanura, an endemic of New Zealand that is a member of the Meliphagidae family of honeyeaters and Australian chats. This family is large and diverse, comprising a number of passerines that are most common in Australia and New Guinea. Their range also includes New Zealand, Wallacea and the Pacific islands, extending as far east as Samoa and Tonga. On the other hand, the island of Bali, just on the other side of Wallace's Line, has only one species.When not provided with location data, it is easy to confuse the honeyeaters with the sunbirds (family: Nectariniidae), which are found in Africa and southern Asia. The unrelated meliphagids and nectarinids look and behave similarly, thanks to convergent evolution -- the result of their similar diets, habitats and habits. The meliphagids feed on nectar, fruit and insects, and they feed their rapidly growing chicks primarily on insects. On many south Pacific islands, the meliphagids are important pollinators of native plant species. This bird is named for its gorgeous song, which consists of three distinct sounds that resemble the chiming of distant bells. Bellbirds from different areas in New Zealand have identifiable regional dialects. Their songs may vary enormously even over short distances and over time. Further, some people report that males and females of this duetting species sing different songs, at least during some parts of the year. And of course, juvenile song is identifiable too, because they are still practicing their song.Embedded below are two recordings of singing bellbirds, thanks to the talented recordists who freely share their work at Xeno-Canto. I think the first recording is simply stunning. It is 1:59 long:Recorded on 15 December 2004 by Patrik Åberg on Te Anaua Downs, New Zealand [audio link]. Here's another recording, this one is 1:28 long, of a bellbird singing and chattering whilst foraging on flowering trees, courtesy of Xeno-Canto: Recorded on 6 March 2010 by Daniel Lane at Heywood Terrace, Christchurch, South Island, New Zealand [audio link].Here's a video of singing male bellbird, recorded on Tiritiri Matangi Island (uploaded 21 August 2007):Visit HenryFalkner's YouTube channel [video link]. You are invited to review all of the daily mystery birds by going to their dedicated graphic index page. If you have bird images, video or mp3 files that you'd like to share with a large and (mostly) appreciative international audience here at The Guardian, feel free to contact me to learn more. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. twitter: @GrrlScientist facebook: grrlscientistemail: grrlscientist@gmail.com