New Zealand's non-political, highly personalised local government culture has many advantages , but the considerable diversity in council operations also means things can go badly wrong.First some background. New Zealand councils are responsible for delivering fewer services than their UK counterparts, and they are largely financially self-sufficient from central government. But they are, nevertheless, delivering services based on more than 50 different pieces of central government legislation.The country's 78 councils also vary in size: the largest, Auckland city council, serves 1.5 million people and is the largest in the southern hemisphere; our smallest serves only 640 people. How these councils manage service delivery clearly differs dramatically.Those differences are only likely to increase as, although New Zealand has a very stable population, we are experiencing significant population movement from areas with low or no economic growth into high growth areas such as Auckland. That means some councils are stagnating or shrinking and the populations who remain are ageing, while others are growing significantly.Unlike the UK, rates here are not capped. A council sets rates based on their budget for delivering the services in their long term and annual plans. Rates have consistently risen, but areas with declining and ageing populations face significant problems finding the money to meet rising demand.The New Zealand system is free from party political affiliation. Chief executives need to actively seek, rather than assume, policy consensus. The lack of peer learning from within a political party also means that there can be a knowledge gap around the rules of governance for new mayors and councillors.But here the legal relationship between the chief executive and elected representatives is set by the 2002 Local Government Act: the role of the mayor is to provide leadership to the elected members and the people in the district, while responsibility for management of council operations lies with the chief executive, the only council employee, who usually works on a five year contract.The need for clarity on the governance and management roles, and transparent decision making, has been brought into sharp focus by an Office of the Auditor General inquiry into the Mangawhai wastewater scheme operated by Kaipara district council, 100 miles (163km) north of Auckland. The report identified significant failings in processes by councillors and managers and eventually led to government intervention. The need for clear lines of accountability and clarity of roles and responsibilities was stressed.Achieving this clarity and securing mentoring support is only complicated by an increasing demand from central government for higher levels of efficiency and effectiveness, which has seen some councils turn to outsourcing. This has, paradoxically, increased the complexity of the accountability arrangements.A successful and effective management-governance relationship is not easy to achieve in these difficult circumstances. Senior leaders, both executive and political, need to invest time coaching and mentoring their peers and colleagues, and this can be difficult for small councils with limited resources. No doubt that is not unique to New Zealand.Karen Thomas is chief executive of the New Zealand Society of Local Government Managers Join the Public Leaders Network for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on twitter via @Guardianpublic.