Vela Manusaute is getting misty-eyed as he talks of his pride in being in Scotland, the country of one of his heroes, "the greatest of story-tellers" Robert Louis Stevenson. "My other hero is Gavin Hastings ... but I don't know that many Scottish people."Manusaute is at the Edinburgh Fringe with his musical The Factory – described as "the Pacific Les Mis"– which explores the difficult lives of Samoan immigrants to New Zealand.The Factory is just one part of New Zealand's biggest ever cultural charge to Edinburgh, with around 240 of the country's performers appearing across the entire festival.The country is a regular presence at Edinburgh in August, just not on this scale. Dick Grant, the chairman of Creative New Zealand, said the project to bring the performers, NZ Edinburgh 2014, had been two years in the planning. "It is the largest group of leading New Zealand actors, dancers, musicians, visual artists, writers, Maori performing artists, producers and helpers that we have ever taken abroad – ever."The Factory comes to Edinburgh fresh from a tour in Australia and it came about, said Manusaute, because of his mother. "She told me I should stop doing meaningless comedy work ... which offended me. It was like 'what do you mean, meaningless!'"His company, Kila Kokonut Krew, had been going 10 years and it was time, he said, to do something big, something which felt important.First performed on a shoestring in a tiny theatre in south Auckland, one of New Zealand's roughest suburbs, The Factory tells the stories of Samoan immigrants to New Zealand who ended up in textile factories and on society's bottom rung.It is still a work in progress but the show's producers have high hopes of bringing it back to the UK on tour as well as taking it to the US.Producer William McKegg said while it was fun and entertaining, it was a show with purpose. "It is a story about the difficulties and the disappointments and ultimately the redemption of being an immigrant to a new country."It was a universal story, he said. "Either you're an immigrant yourself or you're a host to an immigrant."Other New Zealand performances include around 25 Haka performers, a production called Black Faggot which explores what it is like to be young, Samoan and gay and an immersive show titled The Generation of Z where audience members can expect to be chased by zombies.