I have been the Managing Director of Bupa Care Services in New Zealand since 2006. We're one of the country's leading providers of care services, offering personal medical alarms, hospitals, rest homes and retirement villages - from Whangarei to Invercargill in the South.Supporting over 15,000 customers and residents, we employ more than 3,400 employees. We are driven by a passion to help our older citizens live the richest, most satisfying lives possible.For us, Bupa's commitment to a Well World not only recognises the care and support we already provide, but helps us to think how we can extend this care to people and communities beyond our care homes. Well World has also reminded us of the importance of taking care of our own health and wellbeing, and inspired us to consider how we can minimise the impact of our operations on the environment. Improving the health and wellbeing of millions of peopleBupa's Get Walking, Keep Walking research revealed that in New Zealand, 22 percent of men and 21 percent of women say they frequently drive short journeys they can walk. Walking is a simple lifestyle change that we can all adopt, to reduce the chance of long term health problems like diabetes and climate change. Not only is it good for your health, it's good for the environment too.In September 2012, we took part in the Bupa Global Challenge to inspire our residents, staff and our broader community to get walking and keep walking. The results were amazing and helped us connect people, in both a practical and emotional way, to the goals we are collectively trying to achieve. Care Homes across the country participated in history and community walks, bringing staff, residents, families and communities together in settings as varied as lakesides and parks and all the way to the foothills of the Southern Alps by our care home in Queenstown.Gordon Brown, a 96 year old resident in our Glenburn Retirement Village, led a walk with staff, residents and families to raise money for Oxfam. Staff in our David Lange Care Home in Mangere East worked with Keep New Zealand Beautiful to combine a walk with a clean-up of local streets. And in Auckland, we partnered with Auckland City Council and Auckland Transport to create the "Walk to Support" Walking School Bus week. Hundreds of students walked with their grandparents or older family members during this week, not only gaining health benefits but enjoying quality time with one another.Workplace HealthThe B-fit programme is one of the ways we fulfil our commitment to keep our own people well. B-Fit includes a health check and then activities to maintain a healthy body, mind and habits. Staff at all of our sites have a B-fit Champion to support the programme and to encourage everyone to get involved. The response so far has been outstanding with around half of all staff participating in some way, and including anything from attending "weigh-ins" to tending "worm farms". Carbon footprintIn New Zealand, we have been working very hard to reduce the carbon footprint of our operations. From investing in solar and geothermal power, energy efficient laundry services serving multiple homes, to rain water harvesting and changing all our shower heads and mixers to conserve water.– we take our environmental responsibilities seriously and encourage all of our people to play their part. In 2011, we were proud to have reduced our carbon footprint rate by 12.7% as compared to 2009. PartnershipsWe are particularly proud of our partnerships with many organisations such as Alzheimers New Zealand and Carers NZ. Carers NZ represent the over 200,000 informal carers that do such a wonderful job of caring for their loved ones at home. Bupa has supported Carers NZ for over 7 years by helping them develop resources, information and support for carers as well as encourage them to look after their own health. A recent new initiative will be the launch of "Cares Air" where we are beginning to make a lot more of this information available by web and streaming video. Whilst there's more to do, Bupa in New Zealand is proud to embrace Bupa's Well World commitments. For more information on these commitments, please visit our Bupa Well World website.Dwayne Crombie, is managing director of Bupa care services in New ZealandCopy on this page is provided by Bupa, supporter of the health and wellbeing hub.