New Zealand has confirmed its preferred alternative flag after the first referendum resulted in a tight race between two ferns.Silver Fern (Black, White and Blue) was confirmed as the official preferred alternative on Tuesday following the counting of late votes, with a margin of 1.16% over the runner-up Silver Fern (Red, White and Blue). New Zealanders will choose between the winner and the current flag in a second postal referendum next March.Melbourne-based New Zealander Kyle Lockwood’s black, white and blue design came out on top in the preliminary results of the first referendum announced on Friday, beating the red version, also designed by him, by a margin of less than 1%.Professor John Burrowes, the chairman of the government panel overseeing the flag referendum process, said at the time it was “too close to call” between the two designs. The winning flag received fewer first-preference votes than Red, White and Blue, but ended up with a higher share of the total through preferential voting.The turnout in the first referendum was 48.78% of the total number of voters enrolled.Four shortlisted designs were announced by the Flag Consideration Panel in September. A fifth design, Red Peak by Aaron Dustin, was added to the shortlist following public pressure, but finished third with only 122,152 first-preference votes.Each of the two Lockwood ferns got more votes than the three other finalists – Red Peak, Koru by Andrew Fyfe and Alofi Kanter’s Silver Fern (Black and White) – put together. Related: New Zealand's new flag: final four designs announced Rowan Simpson, who led the campaign to have Red Peak included among the finalists, said he was “disappointed but not surprised” by the result.“It would have been great to see Red Peak be the contender, but I’m still proud that we managed to get New Zealanders a real choice in this first vote. “It’s been inspiring to see a national conversation about identity and how we represent ourselves to each other and on the world stage.”Back from a week overseas to see #RedPeak lost the first #NZFlag referendum. Oh well. It's still flying in my heart. pic.twitter.com/rgrSnoEHGZThe prime minister, John Key, who spearheaded the flag debate as a priority for his third term and threw his support behind Lockwood’s blue design, told reporters on Saturday he was “delighted” with the preliminary result of the referendum.“It was my number one choice but I also think we’ll have a real contest now. You’ve got a flag which in a lot of ways is similar to our current flag but also embodies the silver fern.“I’ll be definitely voting for the new flag and I hope people will sit back and consider it.”Chris Bishop, an MP with the governing National party, tweeted that the overwhelming preference for Lockwood’s options was a win for “people” over the “vexillologists and assorted self-proclaimed experts” that campaigned for Red Peak.So this is the choice. Incumbent vs challenger. Whether you like it or not, the people have spoken #NZflag pic.twitter.com/5rOAWQHou9With the preferred alternative confirmed, the question now is whether to replace the current flag.The result of the final referendum, to be held from 3 to 24 March, will be binding.Those in favour of a change have begun campaigning for Lockwood’s design in earnest. Conservative radio personality Sean Plunket, pictured here with the prime minister, has had a shirt made to show support for Lockwood’s design.Flying the flag with jk at the gallery party pic.twitter.com/kHVe8R3EVW“We need to aspire to be postcolonial,” he told Fairfax media. “We need to get that rid of that colonial tramp stamp that is the Union flag.”But overwhelming support for Lockwood’s designs in the first referendum does not necessarily equate to support for a change in flag, with polling both before and after the results of the first vote suggesting that most New Zealanders are in favour of maintaining the status quo.An unscientific online poll carried out by the New Zealand Herald on Sunday found that 56% of the 7,500 respondents would vote to retain the current flag.A small University of Auckland study, carried out before the results of the first referendum, suggested that wealthy male university graduates and Wellington residents were the only groups in favour of change.The Returned and Services’ Association has been campaigning since June to “fight for our flag”, even encouraging voters to write “I support the current flag” on their ballot papers for the first referendum. (These informal or invalid votes would not have been counted towards the chosen flag.)Had hoped for a new #nzflag, now I'm desperate to save the old one. Ye gods New ZealandFinding out #NZFlag results is like finding out which bridesmaid dress you'll be wearing. There are no good options, only shades of awful.pic.twitter.com/tf2t05DFjTBut Key has warned voters the ballot is likely to be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.“If we don’t change by the middle of March next year, we’re not changing for 50 or 100 years. Those who say we’ll come back and revisit the process are dreaming.”