In their brave pursuit of creativity, fashion magazines aren't strangers to causing offence - Italian Vogue's feature on "slave" earrings, for example, rightly caused outrage a couple of years ago. Now American Elle has come under fire after running a trend report on military style with the headline North Korea chic and the image of a North Korean soldier next to a stiletto from the Prabal Gurung runway collection.Although the magazine has since apologised and removed the image, the reduction of the world's most mysterious military dictatorship to simple aesthetics is clumsy and offensive. But it also fits into fashion's longstanding fascination with the military. The Elle story picked up on Gurung's collection, but this season the theme was visible at Rag & Bone, Christopher Kane and Whistles in the form of camouflage print. The military look comes up every season, moving from a more urban take such as Kane's, to specific historical moments. Both Burberry and McQ have recently referenced the greatcoats and laced-up boots of the first world war trenches, and Margaret Howell's autumn collection had a second world war home front utilitarian look.The trend dates back even further. Ever since the 60s when army jackets were adopted by the counter-culture movement, a beret-wearing Che Guevara its poster boy, military clothing has been fetishised by US civilians. Khaki jackets, combat trousers, camo and army boots are now as much part of the fashion lexicon as they are part of an actual soldier's uniform. We don't blink an eye when they're recycled on the catwalk or on Kate Moss. There may even be added cachet that comes with a link to the more glamorous elements of the military – hence our adoption of the aviator shades favoured by fighter pilots or the current trend for bomber jackets.The US army appears to be aware of the sticking power of this trend; it has licensed the Authentic Apparel Group to produce a range of civilian clothes inspired by army uniforms, with sales benefiting the families of the military. Released for autumn – and with real-life action man The Rock starring in the campaign – each piece in the menswear range is individually approved by the Pentagon, a detail that will no doubt appeal to those still playing GI Joe through their clothes. With womenswear on the cards, Janes will soon be able to join them. And so the military trend marches on.