The BBC has long been bipolar when it comes to its buildings. The balance of power has long swung between its visionaries and bean-counters, at least since the rising architect Norman Foster designed a dazzling new building for BBC Radio in 1982, only for it to be scrapped in favour of some dim sheds in White City. Early in the last decade the Beeb tried to play Medici again, lining up an array of distinguished and up-and-coming practices: Sir David Chipperfield, Sir Richard MacCormac, Foreign Office Architects. There was much talk of creating buildings equal to the majesty and history of the organisation.This time the visionaries got further before the bean-counters chopped their legs off. MacCormac's extension of Broadcasting House and Chipperfield's BBC Scotland in Glasgow were both built, but only after both architects had been dumped, in order that their designs could be dumbed down.The creation of BBC North in Salford is the Naseby of the corporation's Roundheads, the decisive triumph of a managerial New Model Army who trounced the Prince Ruperts and their fancy architects, and dispatched them to oblivion. This group of three glass buildings, which now houses 13% of the BBC's public service staff, is so scrupulously practical and self-effacing, so determined to avoid any suggestion of wasting licence fees, that it is hard to know it is there at all. "Nation shall speak peace unto nation" is not carved here in stone, as it is in Broadcasting House, not least because there is little stone in which to carve it, apart from some cheap paving from China.BBC North is the result of a deal signed with the property developers Peel Holdings, following a bidding process in which other sites, including the centre of Manchester, were considered. The Peel Holdings offer was to make something with the web-friendly brand name of MediaCityUK, which would include huge production studios laid on by the management, the media studies department of Salford University, and other media companies. ITV would later take a building on the site, and the new Coronation Street is being built nearby, in full view of the BBC's offices. Faced with fierce competition from new media and the forces of Murdoch, former rivals now like to huddle together for comfort.MediaCityUK's avowed inspirations are places like Internet City and Media City in Dubai, enclaves with special rules that allow businesses to prosper. "The driver was to create a cluster with facilities and infrastructure," say Peel, clunkily, by which they mean that the different media companies and institutions would benefit from each other's presence: "students can bump into executive producers". By taking care of the production studios, they would relieve the BBC of the burden of managing them. Located on a brownfield site by the Manchester Ship Canal, at the end of a 20-minute tram ride from the centre of Manchester, it helps that space here is cheap. And with staff now moving in, less than four years after the deal was signed, delivery was fast and efficient.MediaCityUK stands amid the vast wilderness formed by the devastation of industry under Margaret Thatcher, since filled by chunks of regeneration. It is a land of lumps, of Manchester United's stadium red and angry as Sir Alex Ferguson's face; of the green dome of Peel Holdings' vast Trafford shopping centre; of the convulsed forms, intended to express anguish, of Daniel Libeskind's Imperial War Museum, of blocks of contemporary-lifestyle apartments. There are the shiny shapes of the Lowry Centre, and of the Lowry Outlet Mall, with the name of the grumpy old artist standing for everything that is not here. There is nothing less Lowryesque than this landscape of gloss, in which everything – culture, shopping, the pain of war – achieves a kind of equivalence.Salford contains some of the most repulsive buildings in Britain, gesticulating monsters designed to lure buy-to-let investors to their doom. It is some relief that MediaCity, apart from a jazzy diamond pattern on ITV's future premises, has gone for plain glass buildings arranged around a piazza. It offers rather what is best called CostaSpace, as in Costa coffee, the by-now standard form of "public" space in Britain. Like the half-competent cappuccinos and soft furnishings of the coffee chain, CostaSpace offers things that are desirable and reasonable, such as good maintenance, open space, trees and access to waterfronts, yet fail absolutely to capture the essence of the continental coffee bar/public piazza which are the supposed models.What is lacking is a sense of spontaneity, individual enterprise or, ultimately, freedom. Everything is laid on, planned, managed in advance, plotted in powerpoints and business plans. Desire is programmed: a spiritless tower of flats is called the Heart, so that you might know in the absence of other evidence that is where the home is. The Dubai models for MediaCity are gated and controlled, and help sustain an illiberal and divided society, and while the Salford version is less extreme, private security still prevents behaviour thought inappropriate. When I ask BBC people if they won't miss the liveliness of a city centre, they give the same answer: there is a Costa here, and will be a Booths food store, and a Prezzo, and a WHSmith. Really? Is that all there is to life? Do they truly want to spend their days somewhere like the concourse of a medium-sized railway station?The BBC's departments, including sport, children's, Radio 5 Live and breakfast news, are spread around three buildings whose design was started by Wilkinson Eyre Architects and finished by Chapman Taylor. Inside they are fitted out to designs by ID:SR, with open plan everywhere, and cheerful dabs of colour and patterned wallpaper, and a domestic, sometimes childlike feel that tries to bring some of the vivacity elsewhere lacking. It looks well-organised and sensible. Extravagance is avoided: images of the 1958 classic Artichoke light are printed on the wallpaper, presumably because the real thing was beyond the budget.I meet the BBC people who have organised the installation of the BBC in their new buildings, and I have every reason to think they have done a good job. You can't blame the BBC for wanting to be efficient and economical. It's also good that they use their economic might to bring employment to deprived places, even if the supposed beneficiaries, the people of the ordinary streets of Salford, are nearly invisible. But is there really no third way between the pomp of expensive architecture and this place, stripped of ceremony and liveliness and surprise? And should a public body in pursuit of a good idea surrender itself so completely to the priorities of a private development company? Should the Beeb be in a wannabe Dubai?