It is ironic that Bill Clinton should be the envoy chosen to seek the release of two American journalists imprisoned in North Korea. At one point in his presidency, he had seriously considered bombing North Korea's nuclear reactor, until another former president Jimmy Carter flew into Pyongyang and produced the face-saver – an agreement to freeze nuclear development and allow inspectors back in.At the time, administration officials called Mr Carter's private visit unhelpful and accused him of undermining their position. Although Barack Obama hardly had time to put his feet under table before North Korea test-fired a long-range rocket and conducted a second nuclear test in the latest sudden plunge of this rollercoaster ride, history is repeating itself.Then, as now, the White House was at pains to stress the private nature of the former president's visit. Robert Gibbs, the White House spokesman, denied that Mr Clinton was carrying a message from Mr Obama for the ailing North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, although South Korea's Yonhap news agency reported that he had. But whether it is private or not, it is clear that this visit is not just about the release of two San Francisco-based journalists who walked across a shallow river dividing China and North Korea while researching a story about trafficking women. Contrition has been expressed at the highest levels for their actions. The administration has stopped pressing for their humanitarian release and called instead for an amnesty, a word that implies recognition that North Korean law was broken. Their release should be relatively straightforward to negotiate.Of greater significance is the opportunity afforded by these talks to break the diplomatic logjam. If North Korea uses Mr Clinton's visit to stop snarling and start talking, Mr Obama should be prepared to react in kind, releasing the noose of sanctions in return for a resumption of denuclearisation. The US should learn from the mistakes of the past, when it asked for too much too quickly, such as intrusive verification. The exchange of concession for reward should be more carefully planned and sequenced. The nuclear card is the only one North Korea has, and with enough fissile material for a number of bombs, the country should be expected to play a long game.The US, China and other members of the six-party talks should be prepared to play an equally long game, in the knowledge that negotiation, however frustrating, is better than its alternative. Above all, Mr Obama should be wary of drawing too many parallels between North Korea and Iran. They have different motives for pursuing the same end.