For almost a year, a group of 125 North Korean refugees living in the South have been working on a project that will enable them to support their families back home with aid. They want to be allowed to visit their hometown and to deliver food personally. The action is premised on humanitarian grounds and can, I believe, do more to help those suffering from acute food shortages than any other initiative to date.If successful, similar activities could follow drawing participants drawn from an estimated 26,000 North Korean refugees and family members separated by the Korean War. This does not require grandiose slogans such as “peace on the peninsula” or “Korean unification”. Conceptualising it in simple terms, for example “let me help my family, let me see them again”, would be sufficient.The positive humanitarian impact could be huge. If we assume each of the estimated 26,000 North Korean refugees has left behind a four-member household, 104,000 people could benefit. The refugee participants are already able to raise the necessary funds through local humanitarian groups. All that is needed is for the international community, including NGOs and civil societies, to advocate for both Korean governments to authorise this project.The North Korean government may not want to include any refugees in these projects, which will lead some in South Korea to argue that they should not be pursued. But we should persist. The refugees are integral. There is no group of people more saddened by the situation in North Korea, and no group more willing to take part.Obstacles are to be expected, but this project represents the kinds of exchanges that should be actively promoted.Dr Kim Kwang-cheol is a former researcher at the Institute for National Security Strategy, a South Korean government institute which studies/creates policy for inter-Korean affairsDuring my first trip to Pyongyang in 2005, there was insignificant incident that taught me volumes about North Korea’s attitudes to the outside world.My travelling companion stopped to take a photograph of two young children walking along the side of the road. He then leaned over to show them the photos on the digital camera screen (this was pre-smartphones).The North Korean minders escorting us were furious, which perplexed me because the children were well-dressed and well-fed and obviously delighted to see their own images on screen for what was probably the first time.I realised later that the North Korean guides didn’t mind us seeing the children as much as the children seeing us. Here we were two American journalists, unintimidating and in possession of what North Koreans at the time looked like magic – seeing us irreparably corrupted them.Among the many falsehoods in the North Korean firmament is that they are an advanced, prosperous nation. “We have nothing to envy in this world,” goes an old ditty sung in nurseries . Anything that belies the claim is corrosive to the regime.And anti-Americanism is the force that gives meaning to the North Korea’s very existence. Americans are supposed to be the great enemy Meeguk nom , “American bastards,” as they say in the state media.But whenever North Koreans meet real live Americans (or other foreigners, as American applies broadly to Europeans), a good impression can chip away at a lifetime of brainwashing.I get frequent emails from western tourists wondering if it is unethical to support a repressive regime by visiting North Korea.I give them always an unequivocal answer. By all means, yes, go. If you are sympathetic to North Korea, visiting the place is the best way to engage. If you hate the regime and wish to hasten its demise, the advice is the same. Go to North Korea. Either way, it is a no-lose proposition.Barbara Demick is the author of the critcally acclaimed novel Nothing to Envy, which charts the lives of six North Korean citizens living in the north-eastern city of ChongjinEuropean states, including the UK, have had a policy of “critical engagement” with North Korea for the last decade, actively engaging the country but criticising its behaviour at the same time.But what difference has it made? The nuclear issue remains unresolved and the human rights crisis continues to deteriorate. Nor did it engage with North Korea’s informal market economy, which has fed the people since the ruling party’s economy collapsed in the 90s. This developed, in spite of any diplomatic policy, as North Koreans acted spontaneously in an attempt to survive.The problem with “critical engagement” is that it engaged with a totalitarian regime, and chose not to engage with the people and nation underneath it. North Korea was approached as if it was a single entity, and the political administration was prioritised over the individual. By doing so, it sided with the oppressor.Even the threat of sanctions and other forms of “pressure” have not induced change. To be effective, they need to target the regime’s internal raison d’etre and source of power. This is the deliberate prioritisation of resources, and manpower, to maintain the cult of the Supreme Leader – in other words, it’s the political elite who manage this cult.The frenzied response from North Korean diplomats to the suggestion that the Supreme Leader be referred to the international criminal court for crimes against humanity confirmed that this regime’s institutional sensitivity – and vulnerability – is to protecting the cult of Kim at all costs. As such, future North Korean policy must rest on the premise of “separative engagement”, recognising that the state and people have not been of one interest, and that those maintaining the current political administration are not the only North Koreans with a stake in North Korea. Jang Jin-sung was one of Kim Jong-il’s favourite propaganda poets until his high profile defection from North Korea in 2004Michael P Spavor: ‘Dennis Rodman’s basketball trips help’Basketball player Dennis Rodman’s 2013 and 2014 visits to the DPRK, in which I played a coordinating role, some might consider, are the best-known recent examples of cultural engagement with the country. Like most things involving the DPRK they were certainly not free from controversy.  Critics said the presence of Rodman was an exercise designed to burnish the reputation of the leadership and raised questions over the wider impact of such visits. But if one understands how the country operates, you’ll see that even high-level contact can have positive effects. As a regular traveller to many parts of the DPRK, through my work arranging cultural, academic and business exchanges, I have been able to assess how the Rodman visits went down amongst the wider population. It went far beyond the larger-than-life personalities covered by the media. The fact that their leader Kim Jong-un was widely seen in national media spending time with an American caught young people’s imagination. “Our leader wants peace and made friends with Mr Rodman, an American, I also would like to be friends with Americans some day,” one 13-year-old said to me in rural North Korea, not far from the Chinese border. This statement – and I have heard similar opinions voiced across the country in the past two years – is instructive in two regards, one specific and one general. Firstly, it is important to recognise that young people in the DPRK are raised with, to put it mildly, a negative view of the US and it western allies, making an expression friendship with an American is far more significant than if it came from elsewhere. Related: Dennis Rodman to go back to North Korea – again  The second broader point is about the impact of meetings between the country’s leadership and representatives from western countries, be it in sport or business – and I attest that the former can serve as a springboard for the latter. The DPRK is a country where the symbolic activities of the leadership serve a vital role in public life. This is not to say that Koreans are robots who can simply be told what to think (another common misconception) but if they see positive events, such as a friendly symbolic basketball game between the DRPK and an American team, then these conclusions are very likely to be mostly positive. At present we are limited in the ways we can engage. But an understanding of how the DPRK operates should encourage us to provide the country, and most importantly its young people, with clear signs of our positive intentions.Michael Spavor runs cultural exchanges and business tours to North Korea and is known to be close with Kim Jong-unPeople either think that nothing is happening in North Korea, or there is a single monolith of activity that controls everything. The reality is, of course, more complicated.I would love it if people could start thinking about North Korea less as a single system and more as a country with 24 million individuals, many of whom are pragmatic people, keen to run things more efficiently – either at a micro or macro level. It isn’t really up to us how the country develops – it’s up to the North Koreans. But if we are able to support the right people, their voices become more prominent and can help improve the range of options in the mix.The non-profit I work for, Choson Exchange, has trained more than 1,000 North Koreans since 2010, who have an insatiable thirst for business and economics knowledge. We’ve taught participants how to improve communications and marketing; we’ve worked with women interested in developing business skills and advised the country’s economists on the special economic zone policy – a good idea, but missing key elements to make it attractive investment destination.If these exchanges didn’t exist the North Koreans we work with would lack the context to evaluate their own situation and internal discussions would be narrower.It’s still a very challenging environment to operate in, but the other option – ignoring or actively trying to isolate them, leads to worse outcomes. It is, after all, already a country very good at turning inward.Andray Abrahamian is director of Choson Exchange, a Singaporean non-profit that trains North Koreans in entrepreneurship, economic policy and law.Gareth Johnson: ‘Tourism can change perceptions and prejudices’We get a lot of flak for taking tourists into North Korea, criticism we’ve received online ranges from reasonable debate to name calling and threats. The question of whether there should be tourism in the DPRK is something we regularly think about and a question we’re often required to answer.The most common charge against tourism is that it “props up the regime”. This is wrong. Tourism accounts for a minuscule portion of the national economy. If tourism stops, as it did during last year’s Ebola scare, the country still functions as normal. Other critics argue that all the money from tourism goes to the government, but the DPRK is a socialist country and almost all its inhabitants are employed by the state. The money from tourism doesn’t employ soldiers, it supports tour guides, waiters and hotel staff – normal people with everyday aspirations. Personally, I believe that social, personal and cultural interaction between people of different countries – particularly when their governments don’t get along – is always a positive. Since its division from the South, the DPRK has been on a war footing, with all the government-led propaganda that comes with such a situation. When I bring tourists into the DPRK, I feel proud to see them interacting with local people, breaking down barriers and learning about each others’ cultures. This is the real deal, changing deeply ingrained perceptions and prejudices at the grassroots. In addition, while people are happy to use phrases such as “hermit kingdom” and the “most isolated place on earth” when the country tries to slightly open up, for things like the recent Laibach concert, it’s criticised for it not being enough. If we want North Korea to join the global community, we have to embrace any steps the country takes, and accept that tourism is part of that process. You can’t have it both ways.Gareth Johnson is the director of Young Pioneer tours, specialists in budget travel to North Korea