The US will not immediately remove North Korea from its list of state sponsors of terrorism, the secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice, said today.Rice's comments came in a telephone conversation with the Japanese foreign minister, Masahiko Komura, a Japanese foreign ministry official said.Today was the earliest that the US could have delisted North Korea in exchange for the communist nation's June disclosure of its nuclear programmes. Pyongyang's long-delayed accounting of its weapons programme kicked off the process of removing it from the terrorism blacklist, but US officials had said any such move today was unlikely.In his conversation with Rice, the official said, Komura pointed out that North Korea had yet to specify how Pyongyang's dismantling of its nuclear weapons programme would be verified. "I didn't think it [the delisting] would happen because North Korea has yet to agree on concrete verification."The official quoted Komura as asking Rice: "Can I understand there will be no delisting on today, the 11th?""To that question, Rice said, 'That's right,'" the official said.Last month, Rice held talks with her North Korean counterpart, the first such meeting in four years. The US is seeking extensive inspections of nuclear facilities, soil sampling and access to key scientists. The goal was to reach a deal on the document by mid-August, the US nuclear negotiator, Christopher Hill, said before last month's talks.Removal from the terrorism blacklist would end US sanctions that have seen Pyongyang mostly cut off from international banking. It would also clear the way for multilateral aid packages.The delay is likely to be welcomed in Japan, where there are grave concerns that an easing of US sanctions would lessen Tokyo's chances of settling a feud over citizens abducted by North Korean agents decades ago. Japanese and North Korean officials today began two days of talks in the north-east China city of Shenyang on the abductions by North Korea. They remain an emotive issue in Japan and a major obstacle to the establishment of diplomatic ties between the two countries.North Korea in 2002 admitted kidnapping 13 Japanese in the 1970s and 1980s. It allowed five of the victims to return home, claiming that the other eight were dead. Japan, however, has demanded proof of the deaths, as well as an investigation into other alleged kidnappings.