The new year came early for North Korea on Saturday. For a peninsula that invests such meaning in auspicious numbers, 2012 marks the 100-year anniversary of the birth of Kim Il-sung, the nation's founder and Kim Jong-il's father. It was the year in which North Korea would declare itself a "full nuclear weapons state". It was the year in which all the powers that concern it have leadership elections – the US, China and South Korea. And it was also the year in which the "dear leader" was to have morphed into "the great successor", his third son Kim Jong-un. Having had almost two decades himself to step into his father's shoes, Kim Jong-il realised after his first stroke that his third and favoured son would not have the same time. He surrounded him with protectors like his aunt Kim Kyong-hui and his uncle Jang Song-taek. But in the end he ran out of time. Just 15 months after he returned home, the son is on his own.Being the only communist monarchy in the world, the official KCNA news agency yesterday emphasised the dynastic qualities of the succession. The 28-year-old's claim on his nation's loyalty lay, it seemed to suggest, on the fact that he was an identikit version of his father, Kim Jong-il – not just a chip off the old block, but almost his reincarnation. If he is shrewd, Kim Jong-un will use his physical resemblance to his father to establish himself. After the death of Kim Il-sung in 1994, Kim Jong-il spent three years consolidating his power, ostensibly in mourning, before formally taking over. But he came from a generation that was tough. He saw one brother die in a pond and his mother die when he was seven. He spent much of his youth in terror of his siblings. Whether the cosseted Swiss educated youngest son has got his dad's instincts for survival remains to be seen.There are opportunities for him to reap. Six million people, one fourth of the population, are, according to a WFP and FAO study earlier this year, in dire need of food. Last week in Beijing, the US special envoy for human rights Robert King had talks with a senior North Korean official. The meeting produced unconfirmed reports in Seoul that a deal could be in the offing: Pyongyang might allow inspectors from the IAEA back in, suspend its uranium-enrichment programme and impose a moratorium on nuclear and missile tests, in exchange for 240,000 tonnes of food aid. If true, this would go a long way to meeting Washington's conditions for restarting the stalled six-party talks. After so many setbacks, they are not unnaturally looking for deeds rather than words. They had been here many times before only to watch North Korea let off a missile in Japan's direction, torpedo a South Korean boat, bombard the coastline, or rattle the seismometers with an underground test.Of all the elections coming up, the one in South Korea matters most. Contrary to the accepted wisdom that a hard line on North Korea produces results, President Lee Myung-bak has had little to show for being tough with the north. Quite the opposite. The shelling of Yeonpyeong island in November last year and the sinking of the Cheonan, for which Seoul is formally demanding an apology before allowing talks to go ahead, has shifted the tide of opinion in the south. Once again, public opinion in the south is divided over how tough it should be with the North. Only two months after the North Korean artillery attack, 43% believed the government should shift to a policy of dialogue and compromise, a high figure in the circumstances. There could once again be mileage in ideas like creating a maritime peace zone, renewing the commitments of the armistice and establishing a no-fire zone.With North Korea, nothing is certain. The irony is that moving towards peace could require a stronger and more ruthless leader in Kim Jong-un, than stumbling towards the next hairy incident with the nuclear state.