North Korea uses a nuclear bomb in the same way the rest of the world uses an alarm clock. And its nuclear test yesterday may well have been intended as a wake-up call for Barack Obama's ears. This is the second time in three years that Pyongyang has sent tremors not just through north-east Asia but the White House itself. In 2006 a blast one-tenth as big as yesterday's underground explosion caused George Bush to throw his lumbering pantechnicon of sanctions into reverse, and spark an intensive round of diplomacy. So the working assumption today is that the firing of rockets and the detonation of an ever more powerful nuclear device are precursors to fresh hard negotiations.The other possibility is even worse: that North Korea is not detonating bombs to frighten Mr Obama into action, but to achieve a working nuclear capability. There could be strong internal reasons for seeking to improve its nuclear deterrent. Kim Jong-il suffered a stroke last year, which may have forced him to quicken the pace of a transfer of power to one of his three sons, the youngest, Kim Jong-un, being the favourite. A successful test might just give the physically ailing Mr Kim renewed political vigour at home.But the diplomatic gains that North Korea will reap from going credibly nuclear are less clear. The blast will seriously annoy North Korea's strongest neighbour, China – whatever it says in public. Beijing will not like this challenge to its authority, whether or not it was secretly forewarned. Unlike three years ago, America is engaged and seeking to restart the stalled six-party talks. True, there have been hiccups, such as the candid comments by the secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, who said recently that the idea of North Korea taking part in fresh negotiations was "implausible, if not impossible".But the only way forward is a return to the negotiating table. It must be remembered that the last round of talks did achieve some results. North Korea began decommissioning its reactor at Yongbyon and produced a 60-page declaration of its nuclear assets. This did not include its weapons or weapons facilities. But North Korea did declare it held 30.8 kilograms of weapons-grade plutonium – a conservative but still plausible estimate. The talks stalled over the US insistence on intrusive verification.Yesterday's launch will not resolve North Korea's inability either to feed or heat itself, so the regime still has powerful incentives to talk. The US this time round may have to show more flexibility in tying rewards to concessions and stay in closer step with China, which pulls the real levers. No one should now forget that Pyongyang has at least five more bombs to let off.