North Korea is probably one of the hardest places on the planet to tweet from. The web is severely restricted, with access to computers and mobiles phone available to an elite few. Most North Koreans only have access to a state controlled intranet, called Kwangmyong, or bright. The country does have its own twitter account @uriminzok (english translation available @uriminzok_engl), launched in 2010 declaring "The Web site 'Our Nation' is on Twitter". At the time of writing the account follows three others: Vietnam, a Pyongyang propaganda site and Jimmy Dushku, a 25-year-old web developer and tycoon from Texas who is as confused as the rest of us as to why. In 2013 they opened up a 3G network, but only for foreign tourists. Associated Press journalist Jean H Lee (@newsjean) was the first person to Tweet and Instagram from it, closely followed by Dennis Rodman. Lee described the experience as liberating, moving on from the days where she had to leave her phone at the airport. My first tweet using #Koryolink's new mobile #Internet service. Hello world from comms center in #Pyongyang.Journalists are still incredibly restricted as to what they can depict. David Guttenfelder, a photographer for Associated Press who, like Lee, enjoys more access than most, has to ask permission in writing everywhere he goes: "There are some very difficult discussions after the pictures are published - we often lock horns because they have a very different idea of how North Korea should be covered," he says.Guttenfelder, who won a Time award for his Instagram coverage, believes the secret to covering North Korea is in the mundane detail, "the piece off the puzzle that when you put them all together reveal something about the place". Despite the challenge from inside the country, there is a network of expert North Korea watchers tweeting about everything from culture to politics. Start by following @GuardianNK for the latest from our network, as well as our North Korea partners on Twitter. And here's our pick of the rest to get you started, also available as a Twitter list.Recently appointed Pyongyang bureau chief for Associated Press, based between Tokyo and Pyongyang. On Instagram: erictalmadge. Also follow his predecessor Jean H Lee @newsjean, and photographer David Guttenfelder @duttenfelder. North Korean elections coming soon. Here's my take. http://t.co/3JbePc7GQ9Has 45-years experience as a North Korea watcher, honorary research fellow in sociology and modern Korea at the University of Leeds, writes regularly about North Korea.Disability in the DPRK. New report by THE expert, Kathi Zellweger, sheds fascinating light - and finds some progress. http://t.co/nQMG0I9CkhBeijing bureau chief for the Los Angeles Times, with 15 years of experience covering North Korea. Author of Nothing to Envy, depicting the lives of six ordinary citizens as Kim Il-sung dies to be replaced by his son Kim Jong-il.No! Dennis Rodman North Korea Mission to Become Fox Movie (Exclusive), comedy of course. http://t.co/WGYsaLoBtHA Korean historian and translator of Korean novels. Professor at the University of Leiden, the Netherlands, focused on Korean culture. Tweets on everything from drones to poetry. North Korean love poetry http://t.co/VWcZKVwFiKThe world’s first independent publication with direct reports from the people of North Korea, hosted by Asia Press. Also follow Rimjin-gang’s editor Jiro Ishimaru @ishimarujiro for occasional tweets in English. Rimjin-gang's Editor, Ishimaru Jiro, speech at the Korea Society "Inside North Korea" Watch on YouTube video(32min) https://t.co/0ssHXXOKFhKorea bureau chief for the Wall Street Journal, curates Korea Real Time, a blog providing insight and analysis on the Korean peninsula. Also follow @JChengWSJ Wall Street Journal staff reporter, based in Seoul, tweeting on North Korea. Stand by for North Korea rocket launches to celebrate birth of Kim Il Sung; S. Korean media says launcher in place: http://t.co/WGd73QF96LDirector of research and strategy for Liberty in North Korea, a non profit, non-governmental movement campaigning on the humanitarian rights. Also follow @LibertyinNK, @hannahsongGreat work, v worthwhile @nknewsorg: Eleven defector perspectives on "How long until #NKorea collapses?" http://t.co/QdWzutCrriRuns a leading blog on the control of nuclear weapons, and an expert in nonproliferation. Tweets on a broad range of topics but with a particular interest in North Korea. That crashed DPRK drone photographed South Korea's Blue House. Another round of assasination threats coming? http://t.co/bFJZFrZq9SCorrespondent for Voice of America Bureau, focused on Asia, based in Bangkok. He spent some time reporting from the country in 2013. Follow for breaking news updates. .@38NorthNK: Sat imagery indicates possible problems ensuring adequate water supply for Yongbyon #nuclear reactor cooling. #DPRKReuters correspondent based in Seoul covering the two Koreas. Founder of @koreaBANG and former contributor to @nknewsorgI can see my house from here! South Korean newspapers have photos taken from North Korean drone: pic.twitter.com/8WDbfhUoyRA Chinese historian and North Korean academic based in Seoul. Contributor to news sites including 38 north. Follow for history, opinion and news reaction. How about a media moratorium on NK coverage in future tense? @Joshua_Pollack @APklug @AlastairGale pic.twitter.com/txjcwrgxXBSenior analyst and north east Asia director for the International Crisis Group, a non-porofit, non-governmental organisation committed to preventing deadly conflict. Also follow @CrisisGroupKim hyo-jin on Ukrainian Lessons for the Pyongyang Elite http://t.co/ErsnaurzGLHistorian at the University of Leeds, specialising in China and its relations with North Korea. Founder and editor of @Sino_NK.North Korean baby surfs through a crowd of soldiers on a small island. Deemed sufficiently moving for a music video. pic.twitter.com/0K5gyZevARIs there anyone we’ve missed? Tell us who you’d like to nominate and why and we’ll add the best suggestions to the list. If you have any problems posting or you’d rather do so anonymously, email maeve.shearlaw@theguardian.com. 