The Israel-Palestine conflict is not the only one to be locked in a cyclical grip from which escape seems impossible. Efforts to defuse the nuclear crisis with North Korea have swung wildly in the last two decades from periods of sunshine diplomacy and nuclear decommissioning to nuclear tests, the firing of long-range missiles, and the torpedoing of South Korean warships. The theory that Pyongyang does this to get noticed is starting to pall. So hints yesterday that North Korea wanted to talk again after a prolonged period of belligerence, which culminated in the sinking of a South Korean corvette, the Cheonan, come as little surprise.The hints came in many forms. Jimmy Carter, writing in the New York Times, said there were clear signs that Pyongyang wanted to resume negotiations on abandoning its nuclear weapons programme. The former US president has just returned from North Korea after negotiating the release of an American who had entered the country illegally. The North has also proposed holding military talks with the South on the disputed sea border off their west coast; it released the crew of a South Korean fishing boat which it claimed had strayed into its waters and suggested a resumption of reunions of families separated at the end of the Korean war – a gesture calculated to appeal to the south.There is, as ever, little clarity as to why these signals are being sent. Problems of succession continue to plague the leadership, and a meeting of the ruling party which was supposed to have taken place this month may have been postponed by a power struggle. The North's leader, Kim Jong-il, is finding it harder than he thought to anoint his youngest son, Kim Jong-un, and may have to settle for a prince regent. Another factor may be purely economic. After a botched currency reform last year which triggered a further round of inflation, and after a period when trade with the South through the Kaesong special economic zone has been reduced, the North is finding it more difficult than ever to get hard currency. Executing the officials in charge of economic planning and railroad transportation will not solve the basic problem. Nor will selling fishing rights to China put much of a dent in the trade deficit with Beijing. The only way out for Pyongyang is to trade with Seoul – hence the apparent thaw.The real question is whether the opportunity can be seized to make a deal stick. One was agreed in 2005 to end the nuclear weapons programme in return for economic and energy assistance. Washington refuses to return to talks unless the North vows to abide by that agreement and apologises for the attack on the Cheonan, which claimed 46 lives. This will not happen, but talks, in the end, must.