There is little doubt about what sank a South Korean military ship with the loss of 46 lives in March, and still less about who did it. Yesterday's report by a team of international investigators said the evidence pointed overwhelmingly to the conclusion that a torpedo was fired by a North Korean submarine. But the question of why Seoul's corvette was sunk is harder to answer. Shooting a tourist or loosing off a few rounds counts as one order of incident on the world's most trigger-happy border. But sinking a warship is an act of war in anyone's book, and South Korea is no different.Why do it? North Korea had achieved its immediate objectives last year by conducting a second nuclear test and firing off a round of missiles. No less a figure than Bill Clinton arrived in Pyongyang to collect two detained US journalists, who were duly pardoned and released. What the White House styled as a private humanitarian mission soon opened the door to more official contacts. A US special envoy, Stephen Bosworth, was next to arrive with a private letter from Barack Obama to Kim Jong-il. The US has insisted that North Korea return to the six-nation talks and has refused to lift sanctions (the most punitive available) merely as a reward for coming back to the negotiating table. Nonetheless, the regime's mouthpiece, the Korean Central News Agency, had rare warm words for the Washington envoy's visit, a sign that it values letters from US presidents, whatever their contents. The two sides deepened the mutual understanding, the KCNA said, and found "not a few" common points.Pyongyang had got its nemesis to talk directly to it. This is quite some achievement for a poor and struggling country. America is seen in Pyongyang not just as the root of all evil but as the raison d'etre for everything the reclusive regime does – from its ideology of self-reliance to its strategy of militarisation. What advantage lay in torpedoing what were bilateral talks in all but name, just as they had got underway? There are no obvious answers to that. Of the two possibilities – that the ship was sunk on the direct orders of Kim Jong-il, or that it was an act of insubordination by a rogue or rival commander – the second is a more worrying possibility.Initial reaction has been muted. On the eve of the departure of one of the largest groups of cabinet officials the US state department has ever taken to China, the last thing Hillary Clinton wants is an open split with Beijing over North Korea. The White House, in its statement, failed to address the issue of what further actions would be taken. Seoul talked of diplomatic rather than military action. North Korea's neighbours are playing a long game, which is the right response.