North Korea generates reams of comment, but few hard facts. We learn from the propaganda machine, which has begun extolling his qualities in poetry and song, that Kim Jong-un, the ailing leader's youngest son, is being groomed as successor. Five others were promoted to the rank of general, according to the Korean Central News Agency, including Kim Jong-il's elder sister Kim Kyong-hui.So the latest theory is that she and her husband, the vice-chairman of the national defence commission Jang Song-thaek, could mentor her nephew in the event of her brother's sudden death. Kim Jong-il had 14 years to prepare for power after being rolled out at the last party congress in 1980, and he is mindful that his son has only had two years to complete the same transformation from obscurity to Dear Leader. A succession is clearly under way. What no one yet knows is how much further it has to go.What can be said is that for a famine-prone country, dwarfed by the economies of its neighbours, China, Japan and South Korea, the regime is remarkably resilient. It has an ideology – xenophobic nationalism. It has enemies that give it legitimacy. And it is ruthless in its use of force as a lever of power. It executes officials scapegoated for policies that don't work and it is prepared to punish three generations of one family. It has extracted at least $6bn of aid since it first promised to denuclearise, and there is every hope that there are billions to come if it treads the same path.Analysts are hard put to come up with policies that work. The only effective sanction that targets the leadership rather than its brutalised people is to cut off its supplies of hard currency and luxury goods, but as some experts have pointed out, neither Washington nor Seoul are interested in an outcome that is too successful too quickly. The collapse of the regime could trigger millions of refugees pouring across the borders of China and South Korea. The economic gap between the two parts of the peninsula was already 100 times larger than that which existed between East and West Germany at the time the Berlin Wall fell.North Korea could gradually liberalise under its Swiss-educated ruler-in-waiting, in the knowledge that this is the only path that ensures the stability of the regime and of the country. But there is as little evidence for a North Korean perestroika as there is for any other benign outcome. Everything points to a continuation of the tyranny. A stroke has forced Kim Jong-il to confront his own mortality, but despite famines and floods that dispatched millions, the same has yet to happen to the world's most reclusive regime.