Pakistan's warring government and opposition are moving towards to a reconciliation deal partly brokered by the UK that could pull the country away from political collapse.Sources in Asif Zardari's presidential administration and the biggest opposition party, led by Nawaz Sharif, said detailed discussions were under way. A deal would address the issue of the judges that Sharif and a movement of lawyers want restored to office, and a way of reinstating the provincial government in Punjab, which had been run by Sharif's party until Islamabad dismissed it last month. Lifting a legal bar to Sharif and his brother Shahbaz standing for parliament would be part of the package.The British foreign secretary, David Miliband, called Sharif today to discuss the terms of an agreement, urging him to reach a compromise. US diplomats are also deeply involved, and Pakistan's powerful military looks to be pressing for a political settlement, with the army chief, General Ashfaq Kayani, today meeting Zardari and the prime minister, Yousaf Raza Gilani, in Islamabad."Conversations are going on internally [within the country] and externally," said a close aide to Zardari. "Now it depends if PML-N [Sharif's party] accepts".Sharif has so far been determined to push forward with his showdown with the government. But the last-ditch intervention of the UK and US appears to have persuaded him to consider cutting a deal."Things are still a bit raw but there is definitely some activity," said an insider in Sharif's party. "The army is also showing some concern. They [the government] have to do something."Zardari has finally outsmarted himself."Sharif's party has joined the lawyers to take part in a "long march" this week to the capital, where a mass protest is planned for 16 March, raising fears of serious civil unrest that could force the army to step in. They are calling for an independent judiciary, especially the reinstatement of the chief justice removed by the former military ruler Pervez Musharraf in 2007. The government has cracked down hard on the demonstrators, arresting hundreds and blocking roads across the country.Whether or not Sharif and Zardari reach a compromise, the march is likely to continue, although the potential for conflict could be lessened."These people [the government] are opening the doors to dialogue again," said Zulfikhar Khosa, a senior member of Sharif's party.Zardari's Pakistan People's party accuses Sharif of using the issue of the judges to try and bring down the government, which was elected in February 2008, after more than eight years of military rule.Given the harsh clampdown, it is unclear how many protesters will be able to make it to Islamabad for Monday.Pakistan is a key anti-terrorism ally of the west but is struggling against the twin challenges of extremist violence and an economy in tailspin.London and Washington fear that a political clash could paralyse the government and push the nuclear-armed country towards implosion.