A year ago, the Musharraf regime demonstrated its actions were divorced of any moral or political consistency.Its prime directive that year was to delay democratic elections by arresting judicial and human rights activists and jailing lawyers. When the press labelled him a dictator, Musharraf censored Pakistan's television channels and sent three Daily Telegraph reporters back to England, when he misconstrued editorial's endorsement of his presidency. His record of blunders is likely to continue even now that he has stepped down from his presidential seat, but he'll never live down his brutal suppression of lawyers. Today, lawyers rallied outside the Lahore High Court on the anniversary of what stickers plastered on poles called "the blackest day in the history of the judiciary". It's been one year since emergency was declared, and a lawyer on the street told me about the progress: "We're certainly not getting baton-charged or arrested anymore," he said. "The whole community was taken by surprise, held hostage in their own homes based on Musharraf's whims. Today we're a little safer."Outside the courthouse stood a mammoth stage for Nawaz Sharif's Muslim League assembly members to give speeches. Around the stage hung huge yellow-and-white banners, with pictures of brothers Nawaz and Shabaz Sharif outnumbering those of deposed Iftikhar Chaudhry two to one. And while I was happy Nawaz Sharif was out of the country, his party's presence ensured that there would be no more public beatings of lawyers. PML-N members Tehmina Doltana, Captain Safdar, Shabaz Sharif's son Saad Sharif, and Zulfiqar Khosa all gave speeches to thousands of party workers, who clogged the roads leading up to the governor's house. I've doubtedNawaz Sharif in the past, but it's clear he's not willing to give up this support, which he campaigned on to win across Punjab. Other political parties like Imran Khan's Tehreek-e-Insaaf, and the Awami National Party were present, alongside the Students Action Committee and civil activists, the Concerned Citizens of PakistanSitting cross-legged on the street were elementary-aged schoolchildren demonstrating safely next to red-faced lawyers, chanting "Zardari killed BB" in Urdu outside the governor's house, where PPP member Salmaan Taseer presides. Slipping out from under a dictatorship has allowed Pakistan to provide a peaceful atmosphere for such heated ralliesBut the judiciary is still not restored, and no convincing gestures were made on the part of Nawaz Sharif between his election and today's demonstration to push the issue along. His interest in the judiciary also smacks of party bias, as the current stand-in supreme court chief, Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar, is an open Pakistan People's Party member. Recent developments show steps towards judicial independence can be achieved without needing to be tainted by partisan politicsLast week, the lawyers' judiciary movement scored a victory when one of its most-recognisable activists, Ali Ahmed Kurd, was elected as president of the Supreme Court Bar Association. Judicial activists who were under house arrest last year, like barrister Aitizaz Ahsan, were available for comment. In his words, the anniversary marks the "start of [the] miseries of the oppressed Pakistanis". Let's hope that burden's being lifted off our shoulders