

1.54pm GMT
13:54

We’re going to bring this blog to close for now. Here’s a summary of the latest developments: 

1.38pm GMT
13:38

The Pakistani authorities have stated that the death toll from the attack now stands at 148 people. The number of students killed remains at 132. Another 121 students and three staff members were wounded in the assault.Lanterns have been lit for all 148 victims at a vigil in Karachi.Pakistan Youth Alliance and @khudipk lighting 148 flying lanterns to pay tribute to the martyrs of #PeshawarAttack pic.twitter.com/i5GUyz5K7D

1.27pm GMT
13:27

Pakistan has shared “vital intelligence” with Afghanistan during the visit of army chief General Raheel Sharif to Kabul, according to military spokesman Asim Bajwal.Army #Chief lands back at Psr.Essential intelligence shared with Afgn.Common resolve;Terrorists will be eliminated from wherever they goA retired Afghan general claim edthe trip is a sham, according to AFP.General Atiqullah Amarkhail dismissed the trip as an attempt to distract attention from the failure to prevent the attack in the northwestern city of Peshawar. “The trip is no more than a manoeuvre by the Pakistanis to pressure the Afghan government and pretend those responsible for the deadly Peshawar attack are based in Afghan soil,” said Amarkhail. 

1.10pm GMT
13:10

Pakistan political rivals have agreed to come up with a national plan on tackling terrorism, in the wake of the Peshawar attack, Radio Pakistan reports.The leaders decided to form a Committee under the chairmanship of Interior Minister Nisar Ali Khan to prepare a National Plan of Action against terrorism within a week.The Committee will have one representative each from parliamentary and other political parties. Representatives of the Armed Forces and intelligence agencies will also be part of the Committee.The National Plan of Action would be presented before the national political leadership in seven days for approval. It will then be placed before the nation by national political and military leadership..The resolution announced that there will be no discrimination between good and bad Talibans and the war against terror will continue with the national spirit.#APC: #NawazSharif thanked all political leaders including Imran Khan for attending Conference http://t.co/MFMRJHOa4Q pic.twitter.com/IMgJT5RJ2hUpdated
at 1.15pm GMT


1.04pm GMT
13:04

The Pakistani Taliban has posted photographs of six Islamic fighters they said took part in the Peshawar assault, AP confirms.In one photo, the militants are seen wearing army fatigues, standing with a local Taliban leader in what the statement claimed one of the Pakistani tribal regions.The Independent has more...Revealed: These are the men who massacred 132 innocent children #PeshawarAttack http://t.co/5RitHATVta pic.twitter.com/NQu1z9JEMX

12.34pm GMT
12:34

At his press conference in Peshawar, the prime minister announced there will no more distinction etween “good” and “bad” Taliban.“We have resolved to continue the war against terrorism till the last terrorist is eliminated,” he said according to the Express Tribune. Chatham House’s Gareth Price has background on the distinction:The longer-standing complaint against Pakistan is that it picks and chooses between “good” and “bad” Taliban. The TTP—or factions thereof—are defined as bad because it targets the Pakistani state. Those who hold similar ideologies but operate outside Pakistan, in Afghanistan and India, or even target Shias within Pakistan are tolerated.This partly reflects a hangover from the past, when Islamist groups in Kashmir and the Afghan Taliban were seen as useful instruments for Pakistan’s foreign policy; the use of proxy forces by Pakistan goes back to its independence in 1947. It also reflects the weakness of civilian governments; many radical groups also undertake popular social functions such as health care, education and flood relief, which help to cover up the poor capabilities of the Pakistani state. In addition, there is a logic in Pakistan politicians’ preferring that violence be displaced from Pakistan into Afghanistan, the path recently taken by the “Punjabi Taliban” in September this year.Pakistan’s ambivalence toward the Afghan Taliban has also stemmed from a lack of belief in the solidity of the Afghan state.

12.27pm GMT
12:27

Images of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif next to opposition leader Imran Khan at the all-party meeting in Peshawar have been broadcast on Pakistani TV. A Sight We Have Wished To See Since Past Four Months. I Appreciate Both. #PeshawarAttack #UnitedAgainstTTP pic.twitter.com/05c5wiNUaPNawaz announced that “dialogue can resolve all sorts of issues,” after inviting Imran for tea, the Express Tribune reported. Imran interupted to say: “Our differences are not about our egos, it is about rigging.”

12.16pm GMT
12:16

Here’s a summary of the latest developments:

11.52am GMT
11:52

A suspected Taliban attack on a bank in Afghanistan’s Helmand province, killed at least 10 people, AP reports citing policemen and officials.In the attack, in the provincial capital, Lashgar Gah, five suicide bombers raided the city’s branch of the New Kabul Bank. One of the attackers blew himself up at the front entrance to allow the other three in, said Omer Zawaj, the spokesman for the provincial governor.Once inside, the other attackers fired at security forces, which arrived at the scene and surrounded the building, Zawaj said.Helmand police spokesman, Fareed Obaid, said three police officers were among those killed.“There are also 15 people wounded, including six members of the Afghan security forces,” he said, adding that the rest of the insurgents were killed in the gunbattle.Afghanistan’s war with the insurgents, whose leadership is based in Pakistan, has escalated in recent months, and angered President Ashraf Ghani who has vowed to bring peace to the country.The election of Ghani as president has led Afghanistan to shift course on the Taliban, according to Gareth Price senior research fellow at the foreign affairs thinktank Chatham House.In an article for Newsweek he writes: While his predecessor, Hamid Karzai, was quick to blame Pakistan for incidents in Afghanistan, Ghani has taken the view that stability in Afghanistan requires cooperation rather than confrontation with Pakistan, and he recently accepted Pakistan’s long-standing offer to help train Afghanistan’s military.But for Pakistan, meaningful cooperation would require Afghanistan to take action against Pakistan Taliban groups in Afghanistan. And earlier this month Afghan and US troops did exactly that: In one drone, attack nine members of the TTP were killed in Kunar province.In another sign of changing attitudes, in late November Pakistan took credit for targeting members of the Haqqani Network, a group linked to the Afghan Taliban. While the extent of its attack on the group cannot be verified, in the past the Haqqani Network appeared to have been spared the treatment meted out to the TTP and remained, in the words of U.S. Admiral Mike Mullen, “a veritable arm of Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence agency.” The attack in Peshawar is tragic and unlikely to be the last. But the region stands on the cusp of a potentially game-changing transformation in which the Afghan and Pakistan governments understand that their interests are best served working together rather than undermining each other.That the TTP felt the need to launch its most deadly attack at this juncture is likely to reflect its concern about what this could mean.

11.29am GMT
11:29

AFP has more on the visit by Pakistan’s military command to Kabul. Pakistan’s powerful army chief General Raheel Sharif who was accompanied by the head of the Pakistan’s main intelligence agency, the ISI, is set to meet Afghan President Ashraf Ghani and ISAF commander General John Campbell, according to a brief statement by the military. Some of the militants who attacked the army-run school in Peshawar Tuesday spoke in Arabic, a senior security official told AFP, which he said suggested that they had links over the border in Afghanistan.“The army chief is likely to take Afghan leadership on board on this issue,” the security official said, adding that the handing over of Pakistani Taliban chief Mullah Fazlullah, who is believed to be hiding in northeastern Afghanistan, may also figure at the talks in Kabul.Afghanistan routinely accuses Pakistan of providing shelter within its borders to the Afghan Taliban, while Pakistan accuses Afghanistan of protecting members of the Pakistani Taliban.Analysts said the visit was intended to further cooperation against militants group along the countries’ shared border. “The army chief is obviously interested that Tehrik-e-Taliban chief Maulana Fazlullah and his group is arrested and handed over to Pakistan or eliminated so that they do not use Afghan territory for launching attacks against Pakistan as happened in Peshawar on Tuesday,” retired general and security analyst Talat Masood told AFP. “General Sharif wants to strengthen military-to-military and intelligence-to-intelligence level cooperation between the two countries otherwise sanctuaries in Afghanistan will be used against Pakistan,” he added. Pakistan’s powerful army and intelligence services are widely seen as being the driving force behind the country’s defence and foreign policies. Updated
at 11.30am GMT


11.18am GMT
11:18

The Pakistan Cricket Board has called off a cup final match in Muridke as a mark of respect, but a limited overs international between Pakistan and New Zealand in Abu Dhabi is due to go ahead despite calls for it to be postponed. There are plans to hold a two-minute silence at the match, and the proceeds will be donated to families of the victims. Updated
at 11.24am GMT


11.04am GMT
11:04

More grim images from inside the school have emerged, showing classrooms riddled with bullets and carpets soaked in blood. 

10.52am GMT
10:52

Prime minister Nawas Sharif has vowed to push ahead with an army offensive against the Taliban in Pakitan or Tehrik-e-Taliban. The group claimed responsibility for the attack on Tuesday, claiming it was revenge for an offensive launched against it in the summer named Zarb-e-Azb.Speaking at an all party meeting in Peshawar today Sharif said Zarb-e-Azb “is successfully moving forward and Pakistan was making efforts for peace in the region”, according to the Pakistan Radio. It added:The prime minister stressed that the nation is waging jihad against terrorism and this mission will not be left unaccomplished.He recalled that the government started dialogue with militants after evolving consensus of all political parties. But the government was left with no other option but to launch military operation against terrorists due to their intransigence.

10.41am GMT
10:41

Overnight, the body of the school principal, Tahira Qazi, was found among the debris, AP reports. Qazi was inside her office when the militants made their way into the administration building 20 meters from the auditorium. She had ran and locked herself into the bathroom but the attackers threw a grenade inside, through a vent, and killed her, according to army spokesman Major General Asim Bajwa. There have been widespread tributes to Qazi.my 2 heroes ! martyred miss tahira qazi (my teacher/principal) n my nephew abdullah ,brave survivor #PeshawarAttack pic.twitter.com/OqJiG65vJoMrs.Tahira Qazi, Principal Army Public School with her son & our uni friend Ahmad Qazi on his graduation. RIP Mam :'( pic.twitter.com/Tb0JlZNk81Tribute to this Brave Lady Principal APS Tahira Qazi who was Burnt Alive by TTP Rascals. Pray for Her #PeshawarAttack pic.twitter.com/ih4xSBGh46

10.21am GMT
10:21

Images of some of the victims of the attack have been published, notes Omar Quraishi, an editor at the Express Tribune. Our future murdered -- some of the Peshawar school victims pic.twitter.com/bpFCT8KuEJ

10.15am GMT
10:15

The Pakistan Taliban has identified the militants who carried out the attack on the school, according to reporter Harald Doornbos.#break In statement, Pakistani taliban (TTP) claims these 6 men are behind #PeshawarAttack,7th man is commander: pic.twitter.com/PQrk2xXEks