Last summer in Lahore, I had a little party at my house for the final of the football World Cup. It was a pretty relaxed affair, maybe 20 people, cushions on the TV room floor, pizza on the dining room table. Some of my friends brought friends of their own.One was an American man. He was wearing a light jacket. After he left, my wife told me he was also wearing a gun. Now, I'm open to my friends bringing their friends to my house. But I'm not very accepting of a friend bringing a gun – or, worse, bringing a complete stranger with a gun. Yet that's what happened, and it left me angry and disturbed.Like everyone else I knew, I'd heard the stories about large numbers of armed Americans in Lahore, staying at such-and-such hotels or working out at such-and-such gyms. Maybe I became more sensitive to their presence after the incident at my house, but suddenly I began to see them all around town. To be precise, I didn't know if the men I was seeing were armed. But they looked like Americans, and they didn't look like rock guitarists or maths teachers or irrigation specialists or heart surgeons. They looked, to my unschooled eye, like what I'd expect trained killers to look like. (Of course it was possible that groups of nonviolent, hard-faced, physically fit, all-male tourist groups with a niche interest not in ancient outdoor monuments but in the interiors of tacky hotels had descended on Lahore, but I thought this unlikely.)Then, last month, in broad daylight on a main Lahore road, one such man, Raymond Davis, shot dead two Pakistani citizens with his Glock, and a US consular car sent to retrieve him killed another Pakistani citizen while speeding the wrong way down a street. Davis is being held by the Pakistani police, the US government is demanding that he be released and threatening to withhold aid to Pakistan if he is not, and the wife of one of the Pakistani men killed has committed suicide saying lucidly from her deathbed that her reason for doing so is that she does not expect Davis will be punished.Meanwhile, the Pakistan government has tied itself up in knots over what should be the straightforward issue of whether Davis has diplomatic immunity, and therefore whether he can be tried in Pakistan. On Sunday, the Guardian revealed that Davis is in fact a CIA agent.What are foreigners with guns doing in Pakistan? I've read articles likening them to Rambo and RoboCop. But I believe another Hollywood film franchise metaphor is more apt. Predator.The affair has brought home what should have been obvious to us Pakistanis for a long time. Pakistan has become a game preserve, a place where deadly creatures are nurtured, and where hunters pay for the chance to kill them.Here in the game preserve, money flows to the hunt. Pakistani extremists are funded, armed and trained. And American hunters, whether far away at the remote controls of Predator drones or on the ground in the form of men with the shooting skills of a Raymond Davis, operate under paid immunity. Want a blanket tribal area hellfire missile licence? That might set you back the price of 18 new F-16s. An all-Lahore Glock licence to kill? Perhaps double-oh-seven billion in development aid.But while the Pakistani population has grudgingly tolerated the notion of a game preserve limited to the Pakistani-Afghan border, the outcry over Davis has demonstrated that a game preserve encompassing the whole country strikes people as a different matter entirely. Which puts both governments in a bind. What are the warden-owners and hunter-consumers of a game preserve to do when the frogs and butterflies and trees and worms that make up the traumatised and hungry population object to its current business model?Because when I speak to my Pakistani friends the message I hear, though far from uniform, is nonetheless becoming increasingly clear. No more Pakistani extremists. No more American killers. And, if it comes to it, no more American aid either. We don't want to live in a game preserve. We want to get on with our lives and build a future in peace for ourselves and our children.The multibillion dollar question is this: do the Pakistani and American states have the capacity to listen?If they do not, then the continued passivity of the long-neglected, inflation-gouged, and violence-subjected people of Pakistan is far from guaranteed. In the meantime, however, widespread reports that our country has produced a more-than-previously-estimated 100 nuclear warheads will surely increase the price of hunting permits. A version of this article first appeared in Dawn