With three million people affected by the floods in Pakistan during the first week of August, it was hard to imagine what pundits and experts meant when they said the disaster was only in its initial stages. Over the next month, as the flood waters moved down the length (and to some extent, along the breadth) of the country, the unimaginable unfolded. Twenty-one million people were made homeless, one-fifth of the nation was submerged, an estimated 17 million acres of the most fertile arable land was destroyed – this in a poor country with an agrarian-based economy. Homelessness, poverty, food shortages, unemployment, water-borne diseases, debt – the list of consequences, both long-term and short-term, began to become more terrifyingly clear even as the swollen waters of the Indus river finally spilled out into the ocean in mid-September, having obliterated thousands of villages and towns.The scale of the disaster was – even in comparison with the tsunamis and earthquakes and hurricanes of the last few years – unprecedented. What was needed in response was an unprecedented humanitarian effort by the world community. Various theories were thrown around about why this response was not forthcoming – in addition to the now familiar "donor fatigue", there was the added element, particular to Pakistan, of "image deficit" (a phrase that encompassed both a lack of sympathy for the Pakistanis who were suffering, and lack of trust that anyone in Pakistan's government would correctly allocate humanitarian donations – never mind that those donations could go directly to the world's most reputed aid agencies).Despite pleas and promises, to date the UN flood appeal is only 50% funded. In the late summer there was a flurry of donations, but those have slowed dramatically now that the story has left the news headlines (the flood waters have not, of course, evaporated from the submerged lands with the same speed). Relief agencies are struggling to deal with the shortfall, which is adding further stress to a situation already made unmanageable by its sheer scale. With winter settling in, the situation of the millions who are still homeless is becoming even more desperate. In a video for Oxfam a few weeks ago a woman who had lost her home to the floods stated it simply: "We are under the sky in this cold and our children are in a miserable condition."