The next president of the United States will face real and serious national security challenges on a multitude of fronts, with al-Qaida at the top of the list. Nearly seven years after 9/11, its media outreach programme broadcasts messages on the airwaves and the internet, attempting to radicalise unaffiliated sympathisers into violent action. Regional groups in Iraq, Algeria and elsewhere place themselves under its brand in an effort to magnify their importance and gain funding as terrorist franchises. The threat from al-Qaida is diffuse, but US and foreign intelligence agencies have reached a strikingly unanimous conclusion that the core organisational leadership has re-formed itself.Its location? Pakistan.Al-Qaida has, in the words of the US director for national intelligence's February 2008 Annual Threat Assessment, "retained or regenerated key elements of its capability, including top leadership, operational mid-level lieutenants and de facto safe haven in Pakistan's border area with Afghanistan". Top officials at the CIA, state department and Joint Chiefs of Staff have all echoed this assessment in recent months. And under questioning from the Senate armed services committee at his confirmation hearing for the position of Centcom commander, which carries responsibility for Afghanistan and Pakistan as well as Iraq, General David Petraeus finally added his voice to this warning chorus as well.Unfortunately, the current political debate has yet to fully catch up to this reality. In part this derives from the administration's own history of neglect of this strategically central region. President Bush decided to leave the mission unaccomplished in Afghanistan, throw US support behind Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf despite his anti-democratic tendencies, and take our country into an unnecessary war of choice in Iraq, which continues to dominate policymakers' attention. Conservatives in Congress have never seriously questioned any of this. From 2005 to 2006, the 109th Congress managed to hold just one single hearing on Pakistan in all the armed services, foreign affairs, intelligence and oversight committees of both the House and Senate combined. Under Democratic leadership, the 110th Congress has to date held at least 16 congressional hearings on Pakistan alone.This is an important start, but arguments over negotiations with the regime of Iran and plans to withdraw or maintain US forces in Iraq have so far overshadowed the leading presidential candidates' plans for dealing with the situation in Pakistan, which have still not been articulated in full.Conservatives' lack of any new plans to close the safe havens that exist there now suggests that they will remain wedded to the status quo policies that have allowed al-Qaida to rebuild itself since 2002. The administration and its allies have previously used fears of Pakistan's "Talibanisation" to justify their over-reliance on the Pakistani army, which is happy to encourage the notion in order to assure a continued influx of American military aid.In fact, militancy in Pakistan is largely concentrated along the border between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Popular opposition to the use of suicide bombings and other terror tactics has increased as Pakistanis have suffered attacks at the hands of domestic terrorists targeting the institutions of the state. Islamist political parties lost in large numbers in the most recent parliamentary elections, and both US and Pakistani military officials have dismissed any possibility that the country's nuclear arsenal could fall into the hands of terrorists. Prior to those elections, conservatives credited President Musharraf with saving Pakistan from itself, underplaying the role of the Pakistani military in suppressing democratic forces, and its historic support for militant groups operating under an Islamist banner as a means of checking domestic opposition and destabilising its neighbours.Conservatives are always ready to display their toughness and experience on national security, but a look beneath the surface finds they actually have no clear plan to make us more secure from the al-Qaida movement that killed 3,000 Americans on 9/11. Progressive candidates for office should not shy away from a national security debate they can win by offering serious strategies for the real threats facing America centred in Pakistan and Afghanistan. So long as conservatives cling to President Bush's policies of inertia in Iraq and passivity in Pakistan, their posturing on national security will continue to ring hollow.