A five-year-old British boy kidnapped in Pakistan is being held to ransom for £100,000. Sahil Saeed from Oldham, Greater Manchester, was taken from the Punjab region this morning after the family was held captive and robbed by four men armed with guns and hand grenades.Sahil had been staying with his grandmother in the city of Jhelum and was due to return home today, the British high commission in Islamabad said.Sahil's father, Raja Naqqash Saeed, said his family were beaten and kicked during a six-hour ordeal that began when men broke into the house last night."They took me into the separate room and they tortured me," he told Sky News. "They said: 'We will take your son and you will have to pay £100,000.'"They took my son. They were fully loaded with guns and hand grenades. All Pakistan police know about this, and the British Council."Saeed said the kidnappers had demanded the money be paid by noon today.A senior officer, Aslam Tareen, said police had arrested and were questioning the "prime suspect" – the driver of a taxi that came to pick up the family from a house in Jhelum and take them to the airport in Rawalpindi about 75 miles away."The moment he [the taxi driver] arrived at the residence he knocked on the door and five persons entered the house. They searched and took away some cash," Tareen said."While going they picked up this boy, Sahil, and asked the parents to arrange 1 crore rupees and your son will be released."He said they received a telephone call "from somewhere and we are working on it. And God willing, most probably we will get hold of them."A spokesman for the British High Commission in Islamabad said the men entered the property at 11pm local time, eventually fleeing with Sahil and some household items."The kidnappers held the family at gunpoint overnight," he said."We cannot confirm details of the ransom amount but the father has said it is £100,000. All I can say is that we are in touch with the family and the local authorities are currently investigating."Speaking from her home in Oldham, Sahil's mother, Akila, described her son as "just a sweet little boy"."We can't do anything from here – all we can do is pray that they will bring my son back," she said.She made an appeal to the kidnappers on Sky News. "What has he done? He's just a five-year-old boy. Bring him back please."Akila said the family had "no chance" of paying the ransom.