For the past year the public in Pakistan has been incensed by daily power cuts. The past month saw unprecedented black-outs of 12 hours. Then, like a back-hand in the dark, business owners and working class alike have been slapped with a bill charging them three times the usual monthly charge for electricity. The official explanation for the price hike is that energy supply companies have began charging higher tariffs earlier than planned. Lahore Electric Supply Company officials anonymously told a reporter from Urdu daily paper Jang that they were given revenue targets to reach."If this is the cost, then I don't want any" has been the general sentiments of those protesting across the country, setting fire to tyres and bills alike. But are the flaming tyres enough to up the heat on Pakistan's half-baked government, who for once will have to come up with a working solution for all four provinces. Statements from the people already demonstrate a great deal of mistrust."If a collections officer comes here, this area's men will not have to raise a finger, we'll tie them up and twist their necks", one woman told me at a protest made up of one side-street's female residents. One elderly resident died of a heart attack upon receiving the bill. His neighborhood, Rasul Park Colony, held a procession and a protest in his honor.Demonstrations against over-billing occurred in both the major as well as median sized cities like Sargodha, Faislabad, Chakwal, and Nankana. Offices of Lahore Electric Supply Company have been assaulted by mobs, and an engineer was attacked in Sheikhapura. And there are likely to be more violent protests: to cope with escalating costs some industries have closed factories, with textiles losing over 100,000 jobs.So as discontent increases, a discouraging trend occurs with how the public justifies mob violence. The first protest of this sort happened last week, when a Lahore Electric Supply Company office was torched by a mob in Gujurpura, Lahore. The following day demonstrators told me they would not be afraid to attack more offices if the billing continued. They placed the onus of the blame on President Zardari.The official response from the ruling party was defensive, encouraging the public "to have faith in the government they helped form". Now that the government has pushed to reduce a proposed tariff hike of 60%, a reduction some credit the violence as being instrumental in achieving.One reason for this rise in Pakistani protesting culture is the involvement of opposition parties in patronising civil unrest. Under Musharraf, protests by Sindhis against the construction of the Kalabagh Dam were sponsored by the People's Party. The lawyers' movement has by and large been sponsored by money and statements by Nawaz Sharif's Muslim League. Danish Cartoon and Salman Rushdie protests are held by scattered religious parties.This intersection of political campaign and patronising protest has led to an easily agitated, violent public. When the mob burned down the LESCO office, they destroyed the records required to prove their case of over-billing. Wrecked government property is replaced with tax money. In this recent development, the Pakistani government has proven to be ineffective in educating the public to push petitions through consumer and standard courts. Other facilities, such as the Monopoly Control Authority, have been contacted in the past to resolve cement and sugar cartels. There are other avenues as well, to which the people could have appealed instead of rioting. As more jobs get cut, which is inevitable in this crisis, an effective outreach to the isolated labour class will also be necessary to curb violence. While there is a set minimum wage, the secretary of labour in Lahore claims the number of labourers registered with them is neglible. Now, time is of the essence to breath life into these projects. As it stands, the National Electric Power Regulatory Authority has stated it opposes relief in the form of lower tarrifs on electricity. Since the attacks on their assets, no officials in either NEPRA or the electric supply companies will allow themselves to appear to be giving concessions to rioters.Foreign involvement in Pakistan's development has changed as well, recent American rhetoric on Pakistan is to "take money off the table". Old time partner, China has made plans for nuclear power projects to be built in the country over the next 10 years. But those are some time away.Besides cleaner hydro and wind energy generation, one priority project for Pakistan could be to take advantage of its coal deposits, which are the fifth biggest in the world. There have been plans for coal factories in the past, most famously one by Hong Kong tycoon Gordon Wu. Wu's plans for a coal power plant in Tharparkar, Sindh raised $1.8bn in foreign investment. The plans were realised after the project was cleared by a joint chiefs of staff committee in 1997. The plan was canned inexplicably three months into Sharif's second term. One popular explanation for the canning has been what many call the singular development of the Punjab province, at the expense of Sindh, Balochistan, and the North West Frontier Province. Ironically, there have been demonstrations against government energy projects with the same reasoning as well. Many saw the construction of the Kalabagh Dam as a measure by the Punjab government to assert its hegemony in Sindh.The government can't afford to lose out on such projects, and at the same time can't afford to dole out the same top-down relief in the form of tariff cuts anymore. But when described as having "No money, no energy, no government", it's hard to think of what the government can afford to do at all. Pakistan will have to clear up the mistrust that divides it along its provinces, and the government must rethink its current rapport with the public to deal with the countrywide crises to come.