Last Friday the global "war on terror" took on a new twist as the US military embarked on a series of fire fights with nuclear-armed ally Pakistan.The strategic backdrop to these events highlights how Washington is failing to both identify and formulate effective policy prescriptions to the evolving security questions posed by al-Qaida's brand of non-state terrorism. Crucially both the recent series of UN meetings and the presidential debate on foreign policy failed to agree upon the limits of hard power in dealing with such entities in the 21st century. Indeed the BBC's latest report suggested that 22 out of 23 countries surveyed believed that the "war on terror" had not actually weakened al-Qaida. This is a huge indictment of the failings of post-9/11 US foreign policy. The attacks were widely seen to be the foreign policy "game changer" of a generation. It gave the Bush administration an almost blank cheque to pursue military adventures abroad which only lost traction as they declined so spectacularly. As Senator Obama outlined on Friday "We hadn't caught bin Laden. We hadn't put al-Qaida to rest … We took our eye off the ball".Although al-Qaida's infrastructure in Afghanistan was widely seen to have been significantly degraded by the 2001 invasion, the global al-Qaida franchise has blossomed as US troops engaged in massive wars in Muslim countries. Nowhere is this truer than in Iraq. John McCain is right when he quotes bin Laden who called Iraq "the most important site" for al-Qaida – but the al-Qaida of Iraq is and never was the same as its Afghan-based version.What remained of the Afghan al-Qaida – including their talismanic senior leadership duo of bin Laden and Zawahiri – most likely fled to the "tribal badlands" of northern Pakistan. They moved from one semi-sovereign space to another – as it is where an absence of traditional government authority exists, that sub-state groups subscribing to supra-state ideologies are able to operate.An effective US policy towards Pakistan and the governance of its borderlands was far too long-sighted for a naive administration that was focused on the immediate objective of overthrowing the Taliban, whilst continuingly obsessing with invading Iraq. That bin Laden was able to escape from the conventional "showdown" in Tora Bora and flee to the tribal north of Pakistan only highlighted the flaws in US policy. How to remove the strategic depth of the Taliban and al-Qaida elements without endangering the strategic, but not democratically legitimate, rule of President Musharraf over a nuclear armed country of over 172 million people?The Federally Administrated Tribal Areas (FATA) have become a kind of Mordor for western policy makers. It is a wild west of harsh conservative tribes who live by the Deobandi interpretation of strict Islamic law, and do not take kindly to government control. Some 3.5 million people live in this sovereign "no mans land", 70% are unemployed and two-thirds live in poverty. Yet instead of trying to improve conditions, the US-Musharraf policy has shown total inconsistency by oscillating between ceding tribal leaders more power and sending in large troop numbers to attack the area.The most recent government offensive against their own people saw 260,000 residents forced to flee in response to heavy air strikes. As security analysts frequently articulate, the Pakistani army is one that is prepared to wage a conventional war against India but struggles when fighting an internal conflict with itself. The undefined links between the Pakistani intelligence service and the Taliban is evidence again of the blurring of relationships across this dangerous geographical area.Pakistan was one of only two countries surveyed by the BBC that did not hold a majority negative perception of al-Qaida. The issue of Pakistan is one of clear divergence between the presidential candidates concerning their policy towards the tribal areas. Where Obama has stated that he would favour hot pursuit into northern Pakistan, McCain is more reticent, recognising that "this area on the border has not been governed since the days of Alexander the Great". With the shift in foreign policy priorities from Iraq to Afghanistan likely to continue after November 4, Obama supporters should look to challenge whether their man's policy will increase or decrease support for bin Laden's ideology.