Jino still struggles to accept that an unsafe abortion killed her daughter, Shamin, last year. "My daughter didn't have to die," the 62-year-old mother of ten from Pakistan says quietly. "I don't know if I can forgive Shamin for her sins, but I also wish she'd given me the chance to help her survive."Under Pakistan's law, abortion is only legal to preserve a mother's health. It is a highly taboo subject in the 97% Muslim country, where sex outside of wedlock has been punished by stoning. Shamin was not married when she got pregnant. Rather than face the shame of being a single mother in Pakistan, she secretly sought out an untrained birth attendant who gave Shamin anti-malaria pills to induce an abortion. "But part of the baby stayed inside – and my Shimi got an infection," says Jino, who works as a maid in the province Punjab. "That's when she came to me and told me everything. I took her to a clinic but it was too late. She died that same day."Shamin's story is common in Pakistan, where, according to estimates by the Guttmacher Institute, 890,000 women have unsafe abortions annually. Eight hundred of these women will die and a further 197,000 will be hospitalised due to complications. "However even these figures are a gross underestimation, as so many cases go unreported," says Nighat Khan from the Guttmacher's research team in Pakistan. "The problem is that there is no legal cover for these procedures," Fauzia Viqar, Head of Advocacy at the Shirkat Gah women's resource centre, condemns the current legal situation. "Women are told upfront: this is your risk, so if you don't make it, that's your problem." Women may take on this risk alone, but the physical price they pay has significant consequences for developing countries as a whole – where the majority of unsafe abortions are carried out. "If a woman is in poor health after having an unsafe abortion, she can no longer effectively contribute to a household, and her family has to bear that extra financial burden," Khan explains. "This lack of active participation is a barrier to achieving national development goals and creates an economic burden for the family and, ultimately, the state."These profound consequences are why Millennium Development Goal 5 calls for a 75% reduction in maternal mortality and universal access to reproductive health by 2015. Yet this goal is proving hard to achieve. A study published in the Lancet in January 2012 showed that while abortion rates were stable, the proportion of total abortions carried out without trained clinical help rose from 44% to 49% between 1995 and 2008. This paradoxical link between illegalisation and an increase in pregnancy terminations is explained by the fact that countries with restrictive abortion laws tend to invest little in family planning and reproductive health measures – resulting in higher unwanted pregnancy rates and therefore more surreptitious abortions.Such is the story of Shahnaz. Shahnaz got pregnant after having an affair with a married man. When her mother found out, she beat Shahnaz violently, but agreed to take her then 17-year-old daughter to a birth attendant. Shahnaz recounts the painful experience: "She inserted a wooden stick into me and told me to keep pushing it back in over the next two days should it come back out." The procedure left Shahnaz with permanent uterine scarring, unable to ever have children. To repair the damage to her reputation, Shahnaz was forced to marry a mentally unstable man."This is why we feel it is absolutely necessary that safe abortions become recognised as a human right," says, Dr Tabinda Sorush, Manager of Reproductive Health and Rights at Shirkat Gah. "Too often young girls' lives are ruined because of the stigma attached to abortion and premarital sex." In 2010, Sorush's team conducted a study to monitor MDG 5 themes in Pakistan. "Our research showed that even doctors frequently turn away women seeking abortions, because they see these procedures as sinful," Sorush says. "But it is not a question of morality. It is a question of health –and everyone has a right to health."Special Rappporteur to the United Nations, Anand Grover, released a statement in 2011 calling for the worldwide legalisation of abortion. He argued that the continued criminalisation of this medical practice has led to a systematic abuse of women's human rights – including the rights to life, health and equality.Gulalai Ismail, Founder of the Pakistani women's group Aware Girls, thinks this is a step in the right direction, but one that does not go far enough. Together with the Dutch NGO, Women on Waves, Ismail's group launched an abortion hotline in June 2010. The anonymous service was met with violent opposition. "We received a lot of threats," Ismail says. "Religious extremism is at its peak in this country and abortion is a very sensitive issue. Now we are very careful not to use mainstream media to advertise the hotline, and only use social media instead." Every week around 200 women phone the hotline for information about safer abortion methods.Shamin and Shahnaz had also sought a way to help themselves. Yet their efforts to escape stigmatising pregnancies ended up costing Shamin her life and left Shahnaz with irreparable health damage. Theirs are stories that epitomise the dead-end options facing so many women when their only choices are unsafe abortions. "But realistically speaking it would be a security threat for us to have an open campaign about abortions now," Sorush says. Two of her field agents were recently killed researching abortion and family planning in Baluchistan. "International bodies do not have to worry about their staff's safety like we do," Gulalai Ismail agrees. "But they can put pressure on our government by finally recognising the right to abortion as a human right. Only when that pressure comes from above, by bodies like the UN, as well as from below, by groups like us, can change really happen."