One by one, those who stick their head above the parapet to demand changes in Pakistan's infamous blasphemy law are being gunned down. First Salmaan Taseer, the governor of Punjab, and now Shahbaz Bhatti, Islamabad's minister for minorities, himself a Christian. To say these men were liberals is to posit a false dichotomy. The people gunning them down are not conservatives. They are people who impose their authority by suicide bombings and murder. Their form of argument is terror, and the battle which should be fought against them by anyone who upholds freedom of belief should be as clear on the streets of Islamabad as it is in the foothills of Waziristan.But everyone recoils. The government backs off through a misguided sense of self-preservation. Weak and fragile, it believes it is being goaded into a conflict it cannot win. So it retreats, backing up against a precipice over which it will eventually fall. Instead of mobilising mass demonstrations against the killings, the Pakistan Peoples party appeases the very forces responsible for the murder of its former leader Benazir Bhutto. The next woman on the death list is Sherry Rehman. Rather than support her bid to reform the blasphemy law and hold the debate where it truly resides, with elected representatives in a parliament (what else was the struggle to end military rule all about?), the PPP prime minister, Yousaf Raza Gilani, hung his former information minister out to dry. Under pressure from religious clerics, he claimed that she had voluntarily withdrawn a bill proposing changes to the law. She had done no such thing. After ruling out reforms, Mr Gilani invited religious leaders to tell him how to prevent misuse of a law. The bulk of the law's victims are Muslim rather than Christian, the latest being a 17-year-old student being held in a juvenile prison after having written allegedly blasphemous remarks on an exam paper. If Mr Gilani becomes the last liberal left standing, he will not be standing for long.The state, too, recoils. The army cultivated and supported the militants as proxy weapons for their own strategic purposes in Kashmir and Afghanistan. Soldiers are the Taliban's principal targets, but links with the militants are still maintained by some of their officers. The judiciary is also party to these suicidal games. Estranged from her party, Ms Rehman is exposed to prosecution in Lahore and Multan on petitions to get her disqualified as an MP and have her tried for blasphemy. This is not justice. It is legal persecution and any court should have thrown these petitions out. The government, the army, the courts are all playing with fire. Appeasement never works and, in the end, that flame will consume them all.