How our ancestors must be turning in their graves. By invoking a draconian British Raj-era criminal code that essentially outlaws public protests, the Pakistani government controlled by Asif Ali Zardari has stirred the subcontinent's long legacy of civil disobedience against draconian authorities.People have been quick to note that, in invoking section 144 of the criminal procedure code to crack down on dissent in this troubled South Asian nation, Zardari has quickly followed in the footprints of his predecessor, the military dictator Pervez Musharraf.But the provision, sadly, has a much older history than that. Section 144 traces its origins to a British criminal code enacted in India as far back as 1860, just three years after the subcontinent's first modern independence movement rocked British rule throughout north and central India. The provision was subsequently used routinely by British authorities well up to Partition in 1947. Many of the most celebrated leaders of the great civil disobedience project that eventually unseated the British were imprisoned using this most colonial of enforcement mechanisms.The 1860 criminal code was adopted by Indian and Pakistani authorities after independence, and section 144 has been used to prevent civil disobedience in both countries for successive decades.Pakistan's latest string of protests is no different.Nor, some would say, is the fundamental power dynamic between the west and Pakistan. There are reports that Zardari has been given an ultimatum by Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani and army chief Ashfaq Pervez Kayani, backed by Washington and London. This follows a week when western diplomats have been contacting all three men and opposition leader Nawaz Sharif on a daily basis.The ultimatum is that Zardari will be removed from office unless he welcomes his political rivals back to parliament, helps finalise constitutional amendments that would strip the president of his current sweeping powers, reinstate sacked chief justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, and return political control of the Punjab to elected members of parliament (it is currently under the stewardship of the Zardari loyalist Salman Taseer).This afternoon Zardari decided in principle to lift Taseer's rule in Punjab. Whether he will agree to the other elements remains to be seen. Meanwhile, the crackdown on protesters continues in earnest. Hundreds of mostly rank-and-file human rights lawyers and political activists have been arrested over the past few days.The Long March, as the lawyers' protest for Chaudhry's reinstatement has been dubbed, is expected to continue on towards Islamabad despite the arrests. Many participants have decided to make the journey to the nation's capital discreetly rather than risk detention by entering as a throng.The lawyers' movement has been relatively dormant ever since Musharraf was forced to resign last August by the two men who are now at war with one another. It has been invigorated by Zardari's attempts to consign Nawaz Sharif to the political dustbin. The fracas has transformed the Long March into a street-level vote of no-confidence in the Zardari administration.Herein lies the great paradox of Pakistani politics. For while very little has changed in the political life of this desperately poor country, there remains a vibrant and expressive civil society and a relatively free media which, apart from the state-run broadcasters, has given up-to-the-minute coverage of Pakistan's latest drama.In the most backhanded of ways, that is something to celebrate, as is the sight of ordinary citizens joined by lawyers in their signature black suits marching towards baton-wielding riot police in processions they must know place them at risk of arrest and physical assault. Indeed, many of them were imprisoned by Musharraf for demanding the reinstatement of Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry as chief justice."I have no fear of going to prison again," says Abid Feroze, a young corporate lawyer I met in Karachi yesterday as the legal community commenced its march from the Sindh high court to Islamabad."Today, we will violate section 144," shouted former president of the Sindh high court bar association Munir Malik to loud cheers as the lawyers commenced their march. "It is your inviolable duty to obey the [Pakistani] constitution," added retired Sindh high court justice Fakhruddin Ebrahim. He argued that the lawyers' movement was a lawful attempt to reinstate the primacy of the constitution and the rule of law.The lawyers have had an unlikely ally in their cause – Zardari's haphazard clampdown on dissent, the day-to-day management of which has been outsourced to key lieutenant Rehman Malik.There was no more dramatic example of this than the image, broadcast live on private television networks, of the botched attempt to arrest the deposed chief justice's spokesperson on Wednesday. Spotted by police while driving on a busy street in the nation's capital, Athar Minallah resisted arrest by locking his car. He promptly called the media, who rushed to his car and interviewed him through a window as Rehman Malik, whose own car had been bogged down in the ensuing traffic jam, was forced to personally intervene and order the police to stand down.There were other odd reversals of tactics. Earlier this week the government reprimanded Nawaz Sharif and other protestors for instigating "sedition". It now described its clampdown as a precautionary measure to protect protesters from attacks by "terrorists and enemies of the country".The country was not convinced by this volte-face. "We are not against the Long March," a stern-faced Malik, now engaged in damage control, later told the National Assembly. Malik now denies that he ordered the arrest of opposition figures, including members of parliament, even though arrests continue as you read this.It would be churlish to write Asif Ali Zardari off, given that he is one of the great survivors of Pakistani politics. But if his administration is this haphazard in merely seeking to consolidate power, one wonders how it will handle Pakistan's existential threats – poverty, weak institutions and a Taliban insurgency.For most Pakistanis, it is all a case of history repeating itself.