It is fascinating to read in today's Guardian that David Cameron is to dispatch the Tories' most senior gay frontbencher Nick Herbert to Poland to encourage the Conservatives' new rightwing allies in the EU to moderate their homophobia.Fascinating, first of all, because the announcement comes hours before tonight's TV debate on international affairs, in which the Tories' new alliance will be a major point of discussion.But fascinating also because last autumn, when journalists first began to point out that the likes of the Polish Law and Justice party (PiS) were homophobic (anti-gay views are central to its Catholic fundamentalist view of life) they were attacked by the Tory media machine for being part of a Labour-led smear operation. The stories were nonsense, they said, and Labour-inspired lies.I remember once being told to stop writing that "ghastly stuff" about the views of the Poles as it was all wrong and not helpful and I was just being urged on by Labour. It was a shameful defensive spin operation led by William Hague and the shadow Europe minister, Mark Francois, who had allowed their Eurosceptic zeal to cloud their judgment and any sense of what journalism is.Their reaction to the fact that independent journalists had unhelpfully revealed the truth about their new best friends in Europe was to attack the messengers in the free press.Also at that time, the Tories also tried to maintain that they had checked out the likes of Michał Kamiński, the Polish leader of the new group in the European parliament. Kamiński, although on record as having called gay people "poofs", was a true moderniser, they said. He and his colleagues in Poland, and members of other parties in Latvia and the Czech Republic with which the Tories had linked up, were part of the European mainstream, was the Tory line.They were being honest about the fact they had checked them out – but dishonest about the findings of their investigations. As the Observer revealed earlier this month, in 2007 the Conservatives compiled their own internal and lengthy report on Law and Justice and the other parties they were to join up with two years later. It was never published, though. It revealed that Law and Justice and other parties now in the new grouping did have extremist tendencies and would be unsuitable partners.Józef Pinior, a respected Polish Socialist and an ex-MEP, saw the report (he was shown it by Tory friends in the parliament) and remembers what it said. Its conclusion was clear – that the Tories should be very wary of forming an alliance with such people because they had homophobic tendencies and, in the case of the Polish, many had links with Radio Maryja, the Catholic fundamentalist outlet that gives airtime to those with hardline antisemitic views.Despite all this, and under pressure from their own Eurosceptic wing to get out of the pro-federal European People's party, the Tories decided to embrace them anyway. Last year, the new Tory group was formed. A very senior Conservative MEP who complained about the alliance, and about Kamiński, Edward McMillan-Scott, was duly expelled from the Tory party after 40 years of service.Furthermore, a new book by a Polish academic, Rafal Pankowski, now shows that anyone with any knowledge of Polish politics would have been aware by 2005 that PiS was peddling views massively out of kilter with the socially liberal Conservatism that Cameron was promoting in the UK.The book also shows in detail the close links between the PiS and Radio Maryja.There was no doubt about the facts then. And, as Cameron now admits, there is none now. But in the interim there was a shocking Tory determination to hide them.Will the Tories now withdraw their assertion that those who highlighted the facts last autumn were part of a Labour-led smear operation? As Cameron now tacitly admits by sending his envoy Herbert to Poland, they were nothing of the sort. Rather journalists were doing their job. And for doing it they became the object of a Tory smear operation aimed at killing off an important story.The truth has caught up with the Conservatives on this one. So belatedly, and knowing it has, Cameron is sending Herbert off to Poland to try to persuade the PiS to change its views. The Poles are "on a journey", Cameron now says.