Thousands of people lined the streets of Warsaw today to pay their last respects as the body of the Polish president, Lech Kaczynski, was flown back to the country.The flag-draped coffin was met by Kaczynski's twin brother, Jaroslaw, and his daughter Marta at Warsaw airport. Thousands lined the streets in silence along the route to the presidential palace where the body was taken.Poland held a two-minute silence earlier to mark the death of the president, his wife and dozens of officials in a plane crash in western Russia yesterday.Russian officials said 97 people died, including eight crew members, after the president's Tupolev plane clipped trees on its approach to Smolensk airport in thick fog. There were no survivors. Russian TV showed pictures of the upended wing and smouldering fuselage. Small fires burned in woods shrouded in fog.Rescuers found several unidentified bodies and the plane's black box.This morning, the bodies of the victims arrived in Moscow by helicopter for identification. Relatives were expected to fly to the Russian capital later today.Jaroslaw Kaczynski visited the crash site last night, with TV pictures showing him kneeling and praying. The Polish prime minister, Donald Tusk, also flew to Smolensk from Warsaw where he met his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, and placed a wreath.Across Poland bells were rung at a slow and mournful pace. People sought solace in churches and laid candles at national monuments and government buildings. Mourners queued in their hundreds to sign books of condolences. "I can't fathom this, it reminds me of when the pope died, five years ago this month," said Zofia, recalling the death of Pope John Paul II on 5 April 2005.Kaczynski had been flying to Smolensk to attend the 70th anniversary of the Katyn massacre, when Soviet secret police killed 15,000 Polish officers in one of the most notorious atrocities of the second world war. In a tragic twist, family members of the Katyn victims were on board the president's plane. Others were waiting at the airport.There was no suspicion of foul play, but the extraordinary timing and location of the disaster, together with Kaczynski's known antipathy towards the Kremlin, are likely to fuel conspiracy theories on both sides.The Kremlin failed to invite Kaczynski to a ceremony in Katyn last Wednesday attended by Tusk and Putin. Kaczynski organised his own separate event. Newspapers bearing headlines such as "Katyn – a double tragedy" lay next to portraits of some of the crash victims.The subject of Katyn has for decades been a source of unresolved friction between Moscow and Warsaw, with successive Soviet governments falsely blaming the Nazis for the massacre. Recently, there have been signs that the tensions were easing. Last week, Putin became the first Russian or Soviet leader to join Polish officials in commemorating the massacre's anniversary when he met Tusk in Katyn."We still cannot fully understand the scope of this tragedy and what it means for us in the future. Nothing like this has ever happened in Poland," said a foreign ministry spokesman, Piotr Paszkowski. "We can assume with great certainty that all persons on board have been killed."Russian officials said that the airport, 270 miles west of Moscow, had been closed because of thick fog. They advised the pilot to land instead in Moscow or Minsk, but he continued with the original flight plan, making three abortive attempts to land at Smolensk's Severny military airport. On the fourth attempt, the Russian-built airliner crashed. According to witnesses, Kaczynski's plane was between 500 and 700 metres from the runway, and about 20 metres from the ground when it ploughed into the trees."The Polish presidential plane did not make it to the runway while landing. Tentative findings indicate that it hit the treetops and fell apart," said Smolensk's governor, Sergei Anufriev.World leaders yesterday paid tribute to Kaczynski, who was elected in 2005 after defeating Tusk in a presidential vote. He and his twin brother, Jaroslaw, a former prime minister now in opposition, emerged from Poland's anti-communist Solidarity movement. They have dominated Polish politics for the last decade, espousing a national conservative – and often anti-Russian – ideology. Kaczynski leaves a daughter, Marta, and two granddaughters.Gordon Brown said: "The whole world will be saddened and in sorrow as a result of this tragic death in a plane crash of President Kaczynski and his wife, Maria, and the party that were with him. I think we know the difficulties that Poland has gone through and the sacrifices that he himself made as part of the Solidarity movement, and we know the contribution he made to the independence and the freedom of Poland."Kaczynski had said he would seek a second term in presidential elections this autumn. He was expected to face an uphill struggle against the speaker, Bronislaw Komorowski, the candidate of Tusk's governing Civic Platform party. Komorowski has taken over Kaczynski's job as head of state, a largely symbolic role. The election will be brought forward, with Poles set to go to the polls to choose a new president by the end of June.Polish officials have long discussed replacing the planes that carry the country's leaders but said they lacked the funds. The presidential Tu-154 that crashed was 26 years old. It was overhauled in December in Russia, with Russian experts insisting that it was airworthy and blaming pilot error and bad weather.Among the victims was Anna Walentynowicz, whose dismissal in August 1980 from the Lenin shipyards in the Polish port of Gdansk ignited the strike that led to the creation of the Solidarity movement and, ultimately, the collapse of communist rule. She became a prominent Solidarity member.