Festival name: MFF T-Mobile New Horizons international film festivalLocation: Wrocław, Silesia, PolandWebsite: nowehoryzonty.plDates: Annually, 24 July to 3 August, 2014About: Poland’s best-known film festival, New Horizons started life in Sanok in 2001 before moving to Cieszyn on the Polish/Czech border the following year. With an emphasis on films challenging cinematic conventions, the festival soon gained cult status and growing audiences, and, in 2006, moved to the city of Wrocław. It proved a perfect match. Ensnared by the River Oder on one side and by the city moat on the other, Wrocław has a cool, continental feel and an impressive artistic heritage. What’s more, in 2016 the city will be the European Capital of Culture and the Unesco World Book Capital.  Taking place in the chic nine-screen New Horizons Cinema, this year’s 14th edition of the festival is screening 365 films, including 199 features, with 13 of those in the international competition: Sergio Caballero’s The Distance, Benjamín Naishtat’s History of Fear, and Lorenz Merz’s Cherry Pie among them. Of the three Polish films in competition, Anka and Wilhelm Sasnal’s Parasite was shown at this year’s Berlinale in Germany.  An intriguing Films on Art competition offers gems from Florian Habicht’s Pulp: a Film about Life, Death & Supermarkets to Jordi Morató’s delightful documentary, The Creator of the Jungle, about a man obsessed with making wooden tunnels and towers in scrubland near Barcelona. In the Panorama section of the programme, Jane Pollard and Iain Forsyth’s shrewdly photographed Nick Cave autobiopic, 20,000 Days on Earth, has proved a festival smash, as has Guillame Nicloux’s Kidnapping of Michel Houellebecq, a mockumentary in which the notoriously adversarial French writer has great fun (as does the audience) sending himself up. Among the Polish films, the dark brilliance of The Caged Swallow by Bartosz Warwas stands out. Add sections on European shorts, New Greek Cinema, a Ken Russell retrospective, a tribute to Cahiers du Cinema, and a nightly screening in the city’s attractive market square, then you begin to appreciate the eclecticism of New Horizons. And it doesn’t end there. Accompanying events provide further offbeat fun: marvel at the exhibition of Andrzej Klimowski’s film posters, then head for Café Cioran, a bar named after the tenebrous Romanian thinker, and open just one hour from midnight each night, before enjoying an aesthetic breakfast at the Glass and Ceramics gallery. On the final Saturday of the festival, Night of Nadodrze transforms the district’s cafes and ateliers into performance spaces, while the city’s medieval Arsenal hosts the festival club, nightly DJ sets with enough booze’n’food stations to supply the hipster picnics beneath the trees.  In between this dazzling roster of films and events, a free festival bike will help you cross the 100 or more bridges of Poland’s “Little Venice”. Wrocław has clearly established itself as a happening place to be ahead of its big year in 2016, thanks in no small part to this thrillingly diverse festival.