Sitting with her daughter and granddaughter in one of Warsaw's poshest coffee shops, Tereza Sawerska dwells on Poland's 20th century. In the 1940s as a child she trudged the country lanes with her father in search of a bit of bread, stealing carrots from the fields as the Nazi occupation and slaughter engulfed Poland. In the 60s, as a young mother, she tramped miles across Warsaw through teargas and barricades to fetch her daughter from kindergarten as the hated riot police dealt with rebel students. In the 80s, the retired tax administrator kept her head down to survive communist martial law."People left home and did not return. We didn't know what happened to them," the 76-year-old recalled. "If you said something random, you were in big trouble. Get beaten or sent to jail."Marta, her 24-year-old granddaughter, sighs impatiently. She's heard it all before. "I've never known a Poland like this. It's all just history. I'm just happy I don't need to live in a world like that."Then Tereza summons a long-suppressed memory from the early 50s. She had a boyfriend at school. He took part in a protest against the Russians, then imposing Stalinism in Warsaw. The teenage boy vanished. "They were arrested very quickly, taken to a terrible prison. He wrote me letters. But they were censored, bits blacked out."Monika and Marta, Tereza's daughter and granddaughter, turn damp-eyed at a little bit of family history they have never heard before.One country and one family. Three women, three generations, three Polands, exemplifying the change and social mobility wrought by the revolution symbolised by the fall of the wall.In recent years, Marta has been in Bangkok and Berlin, Cairo and Canada, London and Paris. She has her own firm teaching foreigners Polish and helping them set up some of the 1.7m businesses that have transformed Poland into one of the most dynamic and fastest-growing places in Europe, the only EU state not to dip into recession this year.Her grandmother's life spans Poland's authoritarian inter-war republic, 45 years of Soviet communism, and 20 years of independent democracy. Between the two of them, Monika, a 48-year-old divorced bank worker, says the communist years now seem like a distant bad dream. You couldn't buy toilet paper. There were ration cards, queues for bad sausage. If a delivery of new shoes appeared in a shop window, you just bought a pair whether they were the right size or not.She laughs: "Everything was grey and ugly. When I think about my youth, it was all about trying to make things a bit more pretty and colourful."It's incredible how people lived. They were bugging the phones, you couldn't talk to people, you never knew who was listening to you or would use something against you. But nowadays we've forgotten all that. It's like history, not part of your life any more."There is still, of course, plenty of greyness and ugliness in Poland. But 20 years after the fall of the wall, a revolution set in train in Warsaw 10 months earlier in 1989, Marta and her generation are too pushy, too busy, and too absorbed in their successful young lives and careers to sit around pondering politics or wondering how they got here."I know that Poland has changed incredibly. But for me it's been more to do with technology, mobile phones and the internet. Solidarity? I don't even know how the change in the political situation came."It came in February 1989, via the "round table", the historic compromise struck by dissidents and ruling communists that ushered in a bloodless revolution and set the template for the liberation of the rest of Soviet Europe, a unique and triumphant dismantling of dictatorship peacefully that climaxed at the wall on a cold and damp Thursday evening 20 years ago this week.The result two decades on, according to Adam Michnik, a giant of the revolution and one of the architects of the round table pact, is the most successful Poland in 300 years. The same might be said about the Baltic states, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary, all in Nato, all in the European Union, and all in the throes of a huge catch-up exercise in modernisation driven by the transfers of tens of billions of euros from western to eastern Europe."You have a curious combination of external security and internal democratic order with a modest but successful economic system," says Andrzej Rychard, director of Warsaw's centre for social sciences. "That hasn't happened that often in the history of this country."The change has been wrenching, its speed dizzying. Andrzej, who did not want his surname disclosed, is another whose life chances have been transformed. His father was a farmer from the rural east who came to Warsaw to work on the building sites. Andrzej is 41, a successful and wealthy tax consultant employing 20 people and advising "high-value clients". His 13-year-old son is privately educated and has all the latest gadgets and toys. Despite his success, Andrzej is less than satisfied."We're the lucky generation. From my perspective, things look good," he says. "But there's not too much positive in what has happened. The whole history of privatisation has been an exercise in robbery. The old system was a nightmare, but this is not a democracy."The grumbling is echoed in opinion polls across the region. A survey of Poles, Czechs, Slovaks, and Hungarians last week from Warsaw's Institute of Public Affairs found a solid majority, except among the eternally gloomy Hungarians, satisfied with the "transformation" of the past two decades, but a sizeable minority frustrated.While between 53% and 68% of Slovaks, Poles and Czechs believed life had improved, 65% of Hungarians thought things were no better or worse."It's surprising how many are not so enthusiastic about democracy," said Malgorzata Falkowska-Warska, a researcher at the institute.The social scientists also conducted a focus group of young people and were even more surprised to find a strong degree of cynicism about the drama of the past two decades. "We were shocked that the young were very ambivalent about the advantages of freedom and democracy. We expected them to be much more idealistic," says Falkowska-Warska.One of the big benefits of the relatively new-found liberties, repeatedly mentioned, has been the freedom to travel. But the wanderlust, paradoxically, is also one of the most disturbing factors. The freedom to travel has prompted the most extraordinary exodus of modern times.Since Poland joined the EU in 2004, some 2.3 million young Poles have left, not all at the same time, some coming and going, but with the vast majority staying away. They are overwhelmingly from the depressed small towns and villages of eastern and southern Poland. As soon as they could, they voted with their feet. Most have not returned and are putting down roots in Britain, Ireland, Sweden, Germany and elsewhere. Analysts have been shocked by its scale."No one expected the emigration to be so huge because there's no need to escape from this country any more. They weren't persecuted. They left a free country," says Krystyna Iglicka, one of Poland's leading demographers.Statistics show that around one in five of the post-1989 generation in the active and productive age group of 21-35 have moved abroad. "This might be a win-win situation for the UK and Ireland, filling the needs of the low-skilled labour market but it is not for us," Iglicka adds. "We thought the migration would be circular, people coming back … I call this a lost generation."Andrzej, the wealthy tax adviser, is angry at the exodus. "These young people feel that going to the UK is the biggest achievement they can imagine. But that's not success. Why don't they stay and do something in Poland?"He is also anxious that being part of a united Europe is not necessarily good. "The EU influences the style of life here, promoting certain values such as homosexuality that are not natural in Poland."Luke Pelletier shrugs at such prejudice. "I love Warsaw, it's a very, very easy place to live," says the Parisian gay man who has lived in Poland for 14 years and is happy with the decent living he makes as a drag queen. Pelletier is in a civil partnership with Trevor, a black South African who grew up in London. Despite Poland's occasional reputation for homophobia, neither have any big complaints.Marta, the young businesswoman, says she would not dream of living anywhere but Warsaw. When the wall came down and the world opened up, Marta, her mother, Monika, and her grandmother, Tereza, went to Canada to visit relatives. It was their first trip to the west. "It was amazing, so thrilling. They had everything in Canada we didn't have. If I could have stayed, I would have," says Monika.It is one fundamental measure of the changes that such notions now seem bizarre. She has been back and forth to Canada ever since and two months ago the 48-year-old remarried.Her new husband is a Canadian who is giving up his job to move to Warsaw. "Now I wouldn't like to live in Canada," says Monika. "Every time I go there, I don't even think about it."• This article was amended on Tuesday 10 November. An editing error conflated two different people as one person. Andrzej Rychard, a Polish social scientist, was named and correctly quoted in the article, but all further mentions of and quotes from Rychard referred to a different person, tax consultant Andrzej, who did not want his surname disclosed. This has been corrected.