Zofia Wozniak-Rutkiewicz teaches three to five-year-olds in the nursery school at Agar Children's Centre in Camden. She introduced the nursery to eTwinning in 2011 when she started an online partnership with a school in Olsztyn, Poland. The Once Upon A Time project involved the two schools sharing six stories and related activities using the British Council's TwinSpace technology. The project won an eTwinning National Award and was runner up at the European awards in 2012. Here, she explains how it was done.How did you hear about eTwinning?From my sister. She's a teacher in Poland with a class of four-year-old children and she called me and asked if we could do a project together. I agreed and suggested that we did something around story telling.How did the project work?We chose six stories. Three were classics – Little Red Riding Hood, Cinderella and Goldilocks – which both schools worked on, and each school chose three more (different) stories. So each story became our topic for the week. All activities that week were related to the story.So for Cinderella we talked about time, the children made clocks. We looked at shoes, different sizes of shoes, different kinds of shoes. For mark-making we made invitations for the ball and went to the post office to post the invitations. The children made biscuits for the ball, and got dressed up for a party. All areas of our early years curriculum were covered.And how did you connect with the Polish school?We used TwinSpace, which I didn't find easy to start with, but I got lots of help from the eTwinning National Support Service and so I learned how to upload presentations, pictures, and video clips. I also kept a blog to share what we had done that day, what was difficult and what was easy, what we could have done differently. At the end of the project we met using Skype. That was the biggest fun as the children were waving and shouting hello. We got the children to learn a few words of Polish – animal names – and the Polish children learned a few words of English.What skills did the project help the children to learn?When we assessed the children at the end of term we found that in the area of communication, language and literacy all pupils except one had achieved above the expected level.And what about the staff?We learned how important communication is at story time. We made it quality time and gave the children more space to process the information that we were giving them, and more time to be able to answer our questions.What about your own professional development?I've learned so much and am now passing it on to others. Because we were nominated for a European eTwinning Award I went to Berlin where I was offered the role of eTwinning ambassador. This means I share my experience and knowledge with other teachers. I know that teachers are a bit afraid of projects like eTwinning as they think it means extra work, but I found it helped me focus and made lesson planning much easier.Content on this page was provided by the British Council and eTwinning – supporters of the Guardian Teacher Network's Language learning – in focus week.