 2.37pm BST We're going to wrap up our live blog politics coverage for the day. Here's a summary of where things stand:• Mitt Romney toured memorials in Poland and met with leaders. Tomorrow he will deliver a speech in Warsaw. The Romney gaffe-o-meter set a record low of zero (0) over a single 24-hour period on foreign soil.• President Obama is in New York City raising $2.4m in about one (1) hour of dining. 60 lucky attendees are paying $40k a head. We hope it's tasty.• Bill Clinton will speak at the Democratic National Convention. His current favorability rating of 66% as measured by Gallup is an all-time high.• The Democratic Party is adding marriage equality to its official national platform.• John McCain replied to Dick Cheney's criticism of his selection of Sarah Palin as a vice presidential nominee by saying "At least I don't torture" (to paraphrase). 2.37pm BST Dick Cheney, the former vice president, said Sarah Palin wasn't qualified to be the 2008 vice presidential nominee and picking her was a "mistake." That's what he told Jonathan Karl of ABC News in an interview that aired over the weekend.So what does John McCain have to say about that? Usually when his visionary (as in seeing things others don't) selection of Palin is challenged, McCain shrugs off the criticism, says he stands by his choice, says Palin is doing a great job. This time he said: Oh yeah? At least I'm not a perpetrator of torture.McCain was asked about it on Fox and Friends."I'm always glad to get comments four years later. Look, I respect the vice president," McCain said on "Fox & Friends" Monday. "He and I had strong disagreements as to whether we should torture people or not. I don't think we should have." 2.37pm BST One good reason for the Democrats to invite former President Bill Clinton to their convention: his popularity is at record levels, according to a new Gallup poll.66% of poll respondents – both Democrats and Republicans – said they have a favorable opinion of the Man from Hope, his highest number since his inauguration in 1993.(h/t: @jesserodriguez) 2.37pm BST An actual ad in a Senate (that's national, not state) campaign. Not sure what this guy means but he really drank the Kool-Aid. The combination of blinking and nodding when he says "rekindled freedom's flame" tempts us to truly un-Christian calumny. We resist.(What a thoughtless Bubbler of cant. Ice cream trucks make sounds more meaningful. Wind-up toys are less unnatural.)We tried to resist.Oh wait we get it – he's picking up Rick Santorum's thing about now being the same fight that patriots of faith had on their hands during the American Revolution. He's a Santorum acolyte. 'Nuf said.(h/t: @FixAaron) 2.37pm BST Some reporters are with the president aboard Air Force One as he travels to his New York fundraiser this evening. Obama campaign spokeswoman Jen Psaki is chatting with them. And while Mitt Romney has promised not to criticize the president while on foreign soil, it's clear the Obama camp sees no need to return the favor:Obama camp spokeswoman Jen Psaki tells reporters on AF-1 that Romney has "been fumbling the foreign policy football from country to country"Pressed on whether that's right analogy, Psaki says cheerfully "i think fumbling the foreign policy football has a nice ring to it" 2.37pm BST The Democratic party is adding marriage equality to its platform for the national convention, the Washington Blade reports:The Democratic Party platform drafting committee approved on Sunday language endorsing same-sex marriage in addition to other pro-LGBT positions as part of the Democratic Party platform, according to two sources familiar with the drafting process.Retiring gay Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.), who sits on the committee, told the Washington Blade on Monday that the 15-member panel unanimously backed the inclusion of a marriage equality plank after a national hearing over the weekend in Minneapolis, in which several witnesses testified in favor of such language.“I was part of a unanimous decision to include it,” Frank said. “There was a unanimous decision in the drafting committee to include it in the platform, which I supported, but everybody was for it.”There will be a gay marriage platform plank at the DNC. In other news, parties still have platforms, apparently. 2.37pm BST If a bill just passed by the House makes it into law, US border agents will no longer pay for abortions for pregnant illegal immigrants.Wait, you may be saying. Abortions provided by Immigration and Customs Enforcement? For undocumented workers? You mean like in makeshift clinics in Laredo or something? I wasn't aware that that was happening!In fact Barbara Gonzalez, an ICE spokeswoman, tells the AP that that is not happening, and that it has never happened: the agency has not paid for any abortion services since its 2003 creation.But the House has passed a bill to make it illegal anyway. As a rider to the Homeland Security budget, no less. The AP reports:The measure, proposed by Rep. Robert Aderholt, R-Ala., would block ICE from using agency funding to provide abortion services for detainees except in the case of rape, incest or if there life of the mother would be endangered.The provision was attached to a $46 billion Homeland Security spending bill approved on a party-line 234-182 vote. It has little chance of surviving in the Democratic-controlled Senate.Barbara Gonzalez, an ICE spokeswoman, said the agency has not paid for abortion services since its 2003 creation.There should be a law that you can't outlaw something until it happens at least once. Because to do so is not legislating, it's politicking. 2.37pm BST Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders has had enough of Oklahoma Sen. James Inhofe's climate change denial – and now Sanders is doing something about it. Our environment correspondent Suzanne Goldenberg has the story:Vermont's Senator Bernie Sanders is preparing a takedown of the Republicans' biggest climate change contrarian on Monday afternoon, hoping this summer's extreme drought will break through the party's wall of denial.Sanders is due to makes his speech on the Senate floor from 3pm onwards, and will use the remarks to refute five of Inhofe's latest assertions about climate change.“The bottom line here is, when Senator Inhofe says global warming is a hoax, he is just dead-wrong according to the vast majority of climate scientists,” Sanders will say according to a draft of the speech.Inhofe has for years been the Republicans' leading opponent of climate science and environmental regulations. But Sanders will say it would be a mistake to dismiss his views, because of his leadership in the Republican party:"Many who take climate science seriously dismiss Senator Inhofe. I believe that is a huge mistake. Let me remind all of my colleagues and the American people that Senator Inhofe was once the Chairman of the Environment Committee, and if the Republicans take control of the Senate in 2013, he will regain that position. Senator Inhofe is the Republican leader on environmental issues and global warming. For better or worse, when Senator Inhofe speaks, the Republican Party follows his lead. Therefore, it is extremely important that we take his views seriously.”Democrats plan to take the fight to Republicans even further this week with Barbara Boxer calling a hearing on climate change at the Senate environmental and public works committee.The Republican-controlled House committee has refused 15 requests from Democrats for a hearing on climate change. 2.37pm BST Politico has a slide show of Mitt Romney's Poland trip.  2.37pm BST The Romneys visit a monument in Gdansk, Poland, dedicated to shipyard workers who died in a 1970 strike against the Communist government. Mitt, Ann and Josh Romney lay roses at the Solidarity monument in Gandskinstagr.am/p/Ntnn9UKiOE/ 2.37pm BST Guardian Europe editor Ian Traynor previews Mitt Romney's planned speech in Warsaw tomorrow. The speech will seek to recapture American hubris at its best from the good ol' days of the Cold War:Mitt Romney is to round off his campaign to boost his presidential foreign policy credentials by returning to a cold war symbol of anti-Soviet triumph and western-backed liberty in Poland....The speech on the "values of liberty" at Warsaw University on Tuesday is expected to seek to rekindle the flames of US cold war righteousness by featuring a strong attack on Russia and President Vladimir Putin's rollback of democratic gains, while also criticising the US president, Barack Obama, for allegedly sacrificing the interests and security of central European democracy in favour of realpolitik with the Kremlin.Romney has previously described Russia as America's "No 1 geopolitical foe", in contrast with Obama, who has sought to press "the reset button" in relations with Moscow. 2.37pm BST Not one gaffe out of Mitt Romney in Poland so far apparently. While we wait, let's look at President Obama's history of gaffes there, as rounded up by Charlie Spiering in the Washington Examiner. Here are two entries in a list of seven:May 2012: Obama refers to “Polish Death Camps”While awarding a prestigious Medal of Freedom to Jan Karski, a famous Polish resistance fighter from World War II, President Obama bungled his speech by referring to the Nazi death camps in occupied Poland as “Polish Death Camps.”April 2010: President Obama goes golfing during presidential funeralWhen Polish President Kaczynski was killed in a plane crash in April of 2010, President Obama made plans to attend the funeral for the Polish president, but trip was canceled due to a hazardous volcanic ash cloud over Europe.Many Polish-Americans were angered, however, as President Obama instead went golfing while the funeral took place without him in Poland. 2.37pm BST Management meets the union leader.The Gov with former President Lech Walesa. twitter.com/dgjackson/stat… 2.37pm BST In case you missed it over the weekend: Bill Clinton is to play a headliner role at this year's Democratic national convention:Obama personally asked Clinton to speak at the convention and place Obama's name in nomination, and Clinton enthusiastically accepted, officials said on Sunday. .In contrast, the Republican party can't afford to let either George W. Bush or Dick Cheney get anywhere near their convention. To do so would be to invite comparisons between Romney's policies – particularly his support for tax cuts for the wealthiest – and Bush's. At which point voters might remember what the Bush presidency did to the country.Whatever you think of Mitt Romney, you have to admit that he's fighting his way forward against considerable odds. He's a member of a party whose best hope for its legacy is that the padlock on the trap door holding that legacy in the basement doesn't come loose. 2.37pm BST The Romneys in Gdansk.Mitt, Ann and Josh Romney lay a wreath at the Westerplatte memorial in Gdansk. The first shots of WW2 were fired here. twitter.com/EmilyABC/statu…Next Romney is scheduled to visit the Solidarity Monument. Tomorrow he will give a speech in Warsaw. 2.37pm BST David Cameron takes the tube! Now there's a man of the people. Pic: PM travelling to Aquatics Centre to watch @TomDaley1994 & @PeterWaterfield in #Olympics #diving final twitter.com/Number10gov/st… 2.37pm BST Say what you will about Romney's ground team in Poland. They're lightning-quick with the umbrellas.Romney volunteers - or at least my press bus driver - try to hide Ron Paul sign as Romney walks past in Gdansk twitter.com/bkappCBS/statu… 2.37pm BST Mitt Romney was greeted in Poland by a banner supporting Ron Paul. Now the candidate runs into Obama fans.As I left first mitt meeting there was "o-bama-a" chant.One lady, Wabash prof, was holding "Polish-Americans for Obama" sign 2.37pm BST The Romney campaign is seeking to "clarify" the governor's remarks in Israel (give these people a raise!).The campaign has sent out the full text of Romney's remarks on the economic disparity between Israel and the Palestinians in an email to reporters titled "To consider in your reporting: Full context of Gov. Romney's remarks."The context appears to be that when Romney chalked the disparity up to "culture," he was more insistent about pressing the point than most media reports captured. His full remarks here. Partial:...culture makes all the difference. Culture makes all the difference. And as I come here and I look out over this city and consider the accomplishments of the people of this nation, I recognize the power of at least culture and a few other things. 2.37pm BST In characterizing Israel's economic superiority to the Palestinians, Romney said this:As you come here and you see the GDP per capita, for instance, in Israel which is about $21,000 dollars, and compare that with the GDP per capita just across the areas managed by the Palestinian Authority, which is more like $10,000 per capita, you notice such a dramatically stark difference in economic vitality.Romney seems to have no grasp of the situation in Gaza and the West Bank. He thinks they're failing economically because of some kind of culture gap.And he thinks Palestinians produce $10,000 per capita.The AP corrects:The economic disparity between the Israelis and the Palestinians is actually much greater than Romney stated. Israel had a per capita gross domestic product of about $31,000 in 2011, while the West Bank and Gaza had a per capita GDP of just over $1,500, according to the World Bank. 2.37pm BST Palestinian officials reacted in anger to Mitt Romney's assertion that the gap between Israeli and Palestinian economic prospects owed to superior Israeli culture and the hand of Providence.Romney's analysis failed to touch on other potential factors such as decades of war and siege and checkpoints that seal the territories from the outside world."It is a racist statement and this man doesn't realize that the Palestinian economy cannot reach its potential because there is an Israeli occupation," said Saeb Erekat, a senior aide to Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas."It seems to me this man lacks information, knowledge, vision and understanding of this region and its people," Erekat added. "He also lacks knowledge about the Israelis themselves. I have not heard any Israeli official speak about cultural superiority." 2.37pm BST President Obama is expected to leave the White House today at 3.30pm for an 8pm fundraiser at a hotel in NYC's Flatiron district and be back in the WH by 11pm.It's a quickie round trip. Why bother? "President Obama is expected to raise at least $2.4 million for his reelection effort during his Monday fundraiser in New York City," Politico's Byron Tau reports.For the record that's 60 people at $40k (forty thousand dollars) each. 2.37pm BST We knew the Ron Paul organization ran deep, but now they're taking it to Romney in Poland? The Polish choice here in Gdansk? Ron Paul twitter.com/EmilyABC/statu… 2.37pm BST Good morning and welcome to our Monday live blog politics coverage. Mitt Romney's merry world tour toddles on today with a visit to Poland. Here's a summary of where things stand:• At a weekend fundraiser in Israel, Romney observed that Israel is much healthier economically than "the areas managed by the Palestinian Authority." What accounts for the difference? "...the power of at least culture and a few other things," he said. He cited a climate of innovation, the Jewish history of thriving in adversity and the "hand of providence."• Romney said America's "highest national security priority" should be making sure that Iran does not develop a nuclear weapon. • President Obama is to make a quick trip this evening to New York City for a fundraiser. Vice President Biden is in Chicago on a similar errand.