With Britain tumbling into its deepest recession since the early 1980s, it is small wonder that so many Poles are heading home.The Polish economy – now the world's 20th largest – is proving a lot more resilient to the financial crisis than Britain's, mainly because its banking system is not riddled with the toxic material that has poisoned the UK's once-mighty banks. And it is attracting former emigres home in droves."We really welcome these people home who have been working in Britain and Ireland," Aleksander Grad, the country's treasury minister, told the Guardian. "In many cases these people who left were educated to degree level, often by the state at no cost, and it was a loss to the Polish economy."It has been estimated that of Poland's 38 million people, one million have made their way to Britain and Ireland in the past five years. About 6% of the workforce left in a very short space of time – and they were generally young, motivated and well educated."We have suffered labour shortages because of this," said Grad. "But now they are helping stabilise the labour market. We had seen wages rising very fast."It was no surprise that young people who left Poland for a few years would come back once they had made some money. But the decision to return has been helped by the downturn in the British economy and the relative robustness of the Polish economy.The fall in the pound this year was also an important factor. "The appreciation of the zloty certainly changed the calculation also," said Grad.He added that Dell's recent announcement that it would move 2,000 jobs from Limerick to Poland was a "very good sign" for the Polish economy, although it was ironic because plenty of Poles were already working at Dell in Ireland.Polish growth is slowing but it still managed about 5.5% expansion in 2008, much stronger than in Britain. The government is still forecasting growth of more than 3% in 2009. Britain's economy is set to contract by up to 3%."We don't want to be compared to other countries in our region who had to borrow from the International Monetary Fund," said Ludwik Sobolewski, head of the Warsaw stock exchange. "We are more integrated with countries such as Germany."Banking laws were written conservatively when Poland passed from communism into a market-based economy, meaning the banks were forbidden from investing in credit derivatives and sub-prime mortgages and so are in much better shape than rivals around the world."International investors make a mistake if they lump us all into one ­basket. For example, a few Polish people have mortgages in foreign currencies but the number is really very small," Sobolewski said, referring to recent ­crises in countries such as Hungary where big falls in their currencies have led to difficulties for citizens who took out mortgages in euros or Swiss francs.Poland has also not suffered a property boom so does not have the sort of problems Britain and the US face.The government has launched a 90bn-zloty (£19bn) stimulus package to support the economy and banking system, including the recapitalisation of one bank and pledges of credit to others as well as loan guarantees for small and medium-sized enterprises. Many of the measures look similar to Britain's but the Poles think theirs are precautionary rather than born out of crisis.Moreover, the main rate of income tax, which applies to over 90% of workers, was cut to 18% on 1 January, ­boosting incomes at a key time.The central bank has joined in by ­cutting interest rates sharply as inflation and growth have slowed. It is widely expected to deliver another hefty cut next week.The government is also hoping to join the euro in 2012, which it thinks will protect it from wild currency swings. "Politically the decision is taken," Sobolewski said. "It is just a matter of when, not if."Analysts think 2012 may be ambitious but the government is determined to press ahead, as it is with a swingeing programme of privatisation that would make Margaret Thatcher proud.The centre-right government of prime minister Donald Tusk, elected last year, has reversed the previous government's policy and is furiously selling off some 800 state-owned companies. The stock exchange – the second-busiest in Europe after London's – is one of the immediate priorities to sell off.Grad rejected criticisms that the government will not manage to sell off 12bn zlotys of assets this year, although he acknowledges that the programme is ambitious.About a third of the revenues raised go straight into the government's coffers to pay for current spending but 40% will be hived off into a special fund to benefit future generations by stabilising state pension funds.Included in the sale will be two of the country's famous but loss-making shipyards – Gdynia and Szczecin – following the Gdansk yard into private hands.Grad acknowledges the importance of shipbuilding to the Polish national identity – the Solidarity union movement was born in Gdansk – but says restructuring and a sell-off are the only option."Each ship built makes us a loss. When you have state-owned companies it seems everyone makes money except the company," he said wrily. "But the tradition of Polish shipbuilding will survive."