All historic events seem to need a definition in terms of where they start and end. The collapse of communism in Poland was played out in full view of the world's media. The establishment of the Solidarity movement could well be treated as the starting point of this process. The alternative date could be that of the conclusion of the round table talks or even the first genuinely free elections. For Poland, 1989 was a time of change.I initiated a debate on this subject at this year's Hay festival. Timothy Garton Ash, well known to Guardian readers, and Slawomir Sierakowski, a young editor of a challenging leftwing publication in Poland, were asked to tell the audience when they thought the history of communist Poland had come to an end and the transformation in accordance with the liberal democratic model and free market principles began. Both speakers grappled with the problem created by the power of symbols, which tend to trap us in a timewarp and prevent us moving on to understanding the complexities of present day politics in Poland. The belief that the Polish pope destroyed the evil communist regime is a cliche beloved by the Conservatives as much as it is by the left, which was profoundly critical of the communists' lack of respect for human rights. It was my aim to lead the speakers away from such stereotypes.To an audience only too well aware of the way politics distort principles, as has been the case in British politics, any thoughts on Poland will be interesting. The present-day Polish political landscape looks unimpressive; parties defined by personalities rather than political programmes, an embarrassing president who seem to pride himself in not wanting to understand international politics, controversial intervention in the European parliament, all suggesting political immaturity and lack of a way forward. For Poland the last 20 years have not been easy. The process of party formation – dealing with the post-communist realities and finding a way of communicating with a constituency that demanded that solutions should be very different from those that the fallen communist regimes had followed – created problems and, by implications, new solutions.Garton Ash, a witness of the great defining moment in the birth of Solidarity, has suggested that Poles have been seeking and should continue to seek a Polish neo-liberal way forward, not neccessarily based on what happens in other developed European states. Sierakowski, who was too young to participate in the events that shaped Poland's present political institutions, presents a new road: that of Poland reclaiming the right to consider the full spectrum of political ideas, including leftwing ideas, unburdened by its communist one, which he calls the Third Way. His view is that Poles should get over their anxieties about the left and should once more look at social democracy as a way forward.The debate taking place in Poland and so interestingly reflected in the discussion at the Hay festival dispenses with the burden of symbols and history. Sierakowski reflected the young people's call to be allowed to speak about Poland as a modern state without the burden of nationalism and accompanying xenophobia. Their distrust of the clericalist and backward-looking agenda would be as much a challenge to west European admirers of recent Polish history as it would be to the older generation. This generational gap creates an antidote to the consensus that had dominated Polish political life since the round table talks, in which both the post-Solidarity and the post-communist parties agreed on a number of policies. This allowed for a relatively stress-free transition both in economic and political terms. As Sierakowski pointed out, the answer to why a progressive agenda was not introduced by the left wing was always that the time was not right. Thus time, rather than nationalism, was a convenient way of avoiding debates on principles that form the basis of western democratic social interaction: women's rights, respect for sexual diversity, removal of the church from the public sphere.While the older generation still subscribe to these principles, confining the debate to a few unclear solutions, younger people in Poland might break with the past to widen the choices as well as the alternatives from which answers to Poland's stagnant political landscape might be found. This certainly would be a refreshing development. And it could be the way forward. It would mean jettisoning the cherished symbols of the great days, namely Walesa, the Catholic church and the confrontations of the cold war period, which surely should fade into the past.