Mariano Rajoy has spent half his life in politics, but it has been external events rather than any actions of his own that have decided the key moments in his career.Predictable, reasonable, even boring, Rajoy inspires few emotions in his electorate, unlike his immediate predecessors."Maybe I have a bad image but I think the gods favour me. You can win an election with a good image but an image does not solve problems. For that you need ideas and propositions," he said in a recent interview.When José María Aznar was prime minister of Spain (1997-2004), Rajoy was the workhorse of the government and the ruling People's Party. He was not only hardworking but also very loyal to Aznar, serving as a minister in his cabinet four times.So when the prime minister decided he would not seek re-election after serving two terms in office, Rajoy was his appointed successor. He looked a shoo-in to become prime minister. Then the 2004 Madrid train bombings changed all that. Rajoy was left with the role of attacking the new prime minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, from the opposition bench.He criticised Zapatero's withdrawal from Iraq, his friendly relations with Venezuela's leader, Hugo Chávez, and the Castro brothers, the legalisation of same-sex marriage and the liberalisation of abortion as well as the PM's peace talks with the Basque separatist group ETA.But Zapatero retained power for a second term and politicians from Rajoy's party started viewing him as a loser, under whom they would never return to power. There were an increasing number of voices calling for the rightwing party to look for a more exciting leader.But Rajoy didn't give up, waiting patiently for Zapatero to falter. And he did, when the real-estate bubble burst, unemployment soared and the economy started to contract. The ineffective manner with which Zapatero tackled the crisis was a political present for the right and the Spanish people turned to Rajoy to clean up after him. The biggest challenge of his career lies ahead.