This year's EU DevDays event, organised by the European Commission and Poland, current holder of the revolving EU presidency, reflects both the recent history and aspirations of the host nation and the way the Arab spring has coloured 2011.Andris Piebalgs, European commissioner for development, said in his opening speech at the Copernicus Science Centre in Warsaw: "Not so long ago, Poland and the other Soviet bloc countries emerged from the totalitarian shadows onto the road to democratic transition and EU membership. Today, the Arab spring continues to remind us that others still yearn for freedom and a better future. And as we look to the future, governance, democracy and human rights will form a central part of our vision for EU development policy."José Manuel Durão Barroso, president of the European Commission, continued this theme. Speaking at the close of day one, he argued that the world needs "joint, global solutions"."One year on from the start of the democratic uprisings in north Africa and the Middle East, the theme of this year's event is even more crucial," said Barroso. "It is essential to address the links between political change and socio-economic progress, which I believe are mutually dependent and reinforcing."The excitement surrounding events in north Africa and the Middle East was evident from the list of speakers. Beji Caid-Essebsi, Tunisia's interim prime minister, gave a special address on day one, and was followed on Friday by Mustafa Abdul Jalil, chairman of Libya's national transitional council. Other panellists included Kamel Jendoubi, president of Tunisia's electoral commision; women's rights activist and senior adviser for international development in Libya, Farida Allaghi; and, perhaps most pertinently, Rami Abdurrahman, founder of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.In January, Radoslaw Sikorski, Poland's foreign affairs minister, launched the European Endowment for Democracy. The scheme, which has gained support from the European Commission, operates outside the normal EU budget, with member states contributing voluntarily. The fund will support democracy, building civil society and capacity among grassroots organisations, especially those undergoing transformation as a result of elections. It will be interesting to see who contributes, and how the fund works in practice over the next year.Poland is proud of its journey from aid recipient to donor since joining the EU in 2004. Its development co-operation policy concentrates on humanitarian aid and support for democracy. It also supports global development education.The focus on democratic governance has been part of Poland's development story from the outset. Krzysztof Stanowski, the outgoing state under-secretary for development co-operation within the foreign affairs ministry, links domestic support for development aid directly to Poland's own path to democracy, saying: "79% of Polish [people] support provision of foreign aid. Everybody understands what solidarity means."Civil society representatives are more cautious, however, pointing out that foreign aid is not an established branch of Poland's foreign policy, and inisting that the country's transformation mustn't be turned into a decontextualised fairytale. As Monika Matus – one of the authors of the Polish AidWatch report and a policy officer for the Zagranica group, consisting of more than 60 Polish NGOs – points out: "Many people and politicians here would struggle to explain what 'development co-operation' or 'development education' are."Support for aid comes from a sense of moral obligation, adds Matus. "We received aid, and the fact that we weren't colonisers but occupied ourselves makes it even more important that we should give." She also points out that Poland's foreign ministry is not oblivious to the trade benefits other member states get for every euro they put into the European Development Fund.The Zagranica group welcomes the progress of the past year but highlights room for improvement in delivery. Poland's new legal act on development co-operation, which comes into force in January 2012 following an eight-year fight by civil society organisations (CSOs), finally makes explicit who is accountable to whom in development, and enshrines the right of CSOs to be consulted on policy and be part of the programme council. Crucially, it also gives the green light for funding beyond a year, a limitation which had previously placed development projects on an uncertain footing, risking their sustainability.However, Matus regrets the bill's failure to mention policy coherence, which NGOs fear could reduce the effectiveness of Polish aid if good intentions in one area of government hamper progress in other areas of implementation (for instance, if trade policy conflicts with manufacturing workers' conditions). CSOs also argue poverty eradication, rather than the promotion of democratic transformation, should have been the bill's first principle.Wrapping up day one, Stanowski celebrated the "inspiring words about democratic support" he'd heard, which he said had extra resonance in Warsaw, "especially on the 30th anniversary of the imposition of martial law [13 December, 1981], which happened here but which we succeeded in … overcoming."