A single mother detained under a European arrest warrant (EAW) fears she will have to hand her young child to local authority care if she loses her battle against extradition to Poland.The case of Natalia Gorczowska, 23, wanted in her native country for failing to complete a suspended sentence for a minor drugs offence, is being cited as an example of the conveyor belt-style of justice enforced by the EAW system.British courts, which do not assess the substance or seriousness of allegations, have agreed to her removal. But the order has been stayed temporarily by a last-minute appeal to the European court of human rights (ECHR).Her case has emerged at a time of mounting political criticism of the UK's extradition arrangements with the EU and US. The government is due to respond shortly to a review of procedures produced last year by Sir Scott Baker.Gorczowska, who now lives in Norfolk, was originally convicted in December 2006 for possession of 4g of amphetamine, for which she was given a 10-month suspended sentence.The conditions of her sentence were that she abstain from drugs and find employment. She left Poland to find work before her suspended sentence had expired because her father bought her a flight ticket to Britain. She is no longer taking drugs, the courts have been told, and is employed in the UK.Her case has been taken up by Fair Trials International, which is campaigning to reform the use of EAWs, warning that they are often served disproportionately for minor offences.Poland, where prosecutors exercise no discretion over whether to pursue individuals, issues more than any other EU state. In 2009/10 it sent the UK 2,403 EAWs; the next largest was Germany, which issued the UK with 235 arrest warrants.Extradition requests have been sent out from Warsaw for minor offenders such as individuals going overdrawn on bank accounts, piglet thieves and cake snatchers. The Home Office has asked Poland to change its procedures."Extradition should be reserved for the most serious cases," said Jago Russell, chief executive of Fair Trials International, "but under the EU's fast-track system, thousands of people are now being extradited every year often for the most petty crimes."This can have disastrous human costs for people like Natalia and places a massive and unjustified strain on the courts and police. We hope the European court of human rights takes a stand against extradition for minor crimes when it finally hears this shocking case."Gorczowska, who works at a food processing factory in Norfolk, said: "My son, Nathan, is only one year old. It's important he stays with me. My father works a nightshift, so he won't be able to look after him."There's no one else to care for him so I will have to give him to the local authority if I go. But I don't want that. When I left Poland I told my probation officer and he didn't say anything. Now I have been told the Polish authorities want to send me to prison."I had a horrible life in Poland and was around bad people. I don't want to go back. I will lose my job, my child, my house – everything. The police came to arrest me at work before Christmas. I was driven to London and spent a night in a police cell."Now I have to wear a tag and can't go out between 6pm and 5am. I don't know why they are doing this to me. I haven't killed anyone. I haven't killed anyone. It was a small offence. In this country the punishment would have been much less."Gorczowska has been in trouble with the law in Britain once, following a case in 2010 involving her ex-boyfriend, in which she says she was forced to hand over an address. She pleaded guilty to a joint enterprise offence of affray and intimidating a witness and was given a nine-month suspended sentence.Michael Evans, head of the extradition department at solicitors Kaim Todner, which represents her, said Natalia had been granted a temporary stay by the ECHR on the grounds that deportation would undermine her rights to a family life under Article 8 of the European convention on human rights."[The ECHR] has said that she should not be removed on the basis of her circumstances and her right to family life," Evans said. "She has led a drug-free life. The amphetamine possession charge was when she was a teenager; it was for personal use."If she was removed the child would have to be given up to local authority care. The case is an example of the disproportionate use of extradition."A Home Office spokesman said: "We have pressed other countries in the EU to use the European arrest warrants proportionately. We are looking at the working of the EAW and will shortly give our response to the review by Sir Scott Baker about extradition arrangements."• This article was corrected on 26 March 2012 because he referred to Lord Justice Scott Baker, who has now retired