Poland's presidential election was fought in the shadow cast by a plane crash that not only killed Lech Kaczynski but cut a swathe through the nationalist party he and his twin brother Jaroslaw had created. If before the plane crash Jaroslaw regarded himself as Lech's protector, after it, he assumed in his grief some of his lost twin's softer characteristics.To the surprise of many, Jaroslaw praised Edward Gierek, the communist leader from the 1970s as a patriot. He had softer words for traditional enemies like Russia and Germany. He no longer talked of the Democratic Left Alliance as being "post-communist", but about the need for Polish unity. Few had forgotten his short and divisive period of office as prime minister, when he argued that the transition to democracy after 1989 was only partial, and it was his government's task to winkle out those reds who had remained under the bed. That was only four years ago, so had the leopard changed his spots?The answer from the polls yesterday was no, although the result was close and reflected how polarised Poland had become between liberal urban elites and the conservative rural heartlands. While Kaczynski had undoubtedly reaped a sympathy vote and began closing the gap on his more centrist opponent, the tactic did not work. The leftwing vote, which held up in the first round, went to the moderate conservative Bronislaw Komorowski, a man of no great charisma, but an important member of the prime minister Donald Tusk's civic platform party. The result gives Tusk the best mandate he is likely to have to carry out reforms to the health and pension system.Why did Kaczynski fail? Partly because the ideological project he and his brother engaged on had lost its relevance to modern Poland. In their haste to make their country's long and bitter history their exclusive property, they lost sight of the generation of first-time voters who had grown up since communism – people who could travel freely and find work in other countries, like Britain and Ireland. Theirs has been a mixed experience, but it has given them a different outlook from the traditionalist, xenophobic one presented by the Law and Justice party. For them, the legitimacy with which politicians derive from their struggle with communism matters less than the lack of jobs, low wages or a functioning heath service.The government will be instinctively more europhile but is far from being left wing . Both the finance minister Jacek Rostowski and central bank governor Marek Belka are unabashed deficit hawks. But this makes the Polish debate similar to the one raging in Germany, France or Britain and in this sense, it is progress.