Voting in the Ukrainian presidential election began last month, and although it is far from certain whether Victor Yanukovich (35.32%) or Yulia Tymoshenko (25.05%) will emerge victorious in the run-off on Sunday, President Viktor Yushchenko, the hero of Ukraine's 2004 Orange Revolution, is definitely out. He came fifth with only 5.45% of the vote.Most Europeans can be forgiven for not paying too much attention to the five years of unfinished reforms in Ukraine, the slow progress on economic ties with the EU, and the stalled bid for Nato membership that may never move beyond the very tentative statement issued at the Bucharest summit in 2008.What is surprising is that Europe's foreign policy elite seems just as ambivalent about Ukraine's fate as other citizens. Sure, policymakers were nudged awake by the 2009 Russia-Ukraine gas crisis and there is considerable concern about what shape Ukraine's relationship with Russia will take after the elections, but there is no consensus on how to approach its future relations with the EU or how to utilise available policy levers to pursue favourable outcomes. Worse still, a front-line state such as Poland, which should reasonably be expected to drive the European debate on Ukraine towards a workable consensus, seems utterly unprepared to do so at the moment.It is easy to forget that having 27 separate foreign ministries in the EU does have occasional benefits. Although it can often lead to gridlock and confusion, each state can also bring its own resources, expertise and relationships, which sometimes prove rather useful, especially in regional matters. The skilful and bloodless resolution of the electoral crisis that precipitated the Orange Revolution is a good example of such expertise at play. There, only six months after Poland's entry into the EU, then-president Alexander Kwaśniewski used his knowledge of Ukraine's political scene and his personal relationship with the outgoing president Leonid Kuchma to help the EU broker an agreement that led to a replay of the fraudulent ballot. Both Kwaśniewski and Valdas Adamkus (then president of Lithuania) played key roles in mediating the dispute, showing just how valuable regional diplomatic expertise can be.Sadly, it is doubtful that any Polish leader could play such a role today should another crisis arise. This is because the only Ukrainian politician with deep and significant ties to Poland, Yushchenko, is all but gone. Poland's apparent inability to conceptualise its future relations with Ukraine in his absence should be especially worrying considering the geopolitical and economic choices that will face the winner of this Sunday's election.To understand Poland's present attitude towards its eastern neighbour, it is necessary to understand just how deeply Polish political elites fell for Yushchenko. After the Orange Revolution, Poland aligned itself with the pro-EU, pro-Nato president and never looked back, choosing not to deal with Ukraine as it was, but as they wanted it to be. Rather than deepening ties and building relationships with Yanukovich or Tymoshenko (there was ample opportunity, since both have held the post of prime minister since 2005) Poland's elites looked exclusively to the president, with their common goals slowly losing their relevance as he lost his popularity.Rafał Ziemkiewicz, an influential columnist for the right-of-centre daily, Rzeczpospolita, said it best when he scolded both the ruling Civic Platform government and the opposition Law and Justice Party (which ruled between 2005 and 2007, and which includes President Lech Kaczynski), for seeing the Ukraine that they wanted to see instead of the one that truly existed:Not long ago, Poland's 2011 European presidency was seen within the country as a perfect opportunity to cement Ukraine's turn towards the EU, either by pushing for outright accession talks or by strengthening the nascent Eastern Partnership (and, by some, as an opportunity to nudge Ukraine's stalled Nato membership bid back into the spotlight). But now, no one seems to know. "We respect the wishes of the Ukrainian people, whatever they may be," said Poland's foreign minister, Radek Sikorski, who could only muster a standard diplomatic comment about the first round of Ukraine's election: "Should the Ukrainian side wish that we continue to support its European or Atlantic aspirations, we will be glad to support them." And if not, what then? What can Poland and the EU do, what common ground can they find, if the Ukrainian side wishes for something else?