As part of its EU presidency, Poland played host to last week's EU DevDays. Next month the country's new development co-operation act comes into force. What is Polish aid worth? Where does it go? And what makes Poland's approach different from its neighbours?Currently, none of the four central European Visegrád states (Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovak Republic and Poland) are on track to reach their EU commitment to donate 0.33% of gross national income (GNI) by 2015. The EU's 2011 accountability report (pdf) shows that to reach the 2015 target, Poland and the Slovak Republic would need to spend five times as much on aid over the next five years as they currently do, Hungary would have to give four times as much, and the Czech Republic would have to triple its aid.Poland's foreign aid spend in 2010 was $377m. That's 0.08% of GNI, considerably less than its international commitment to increase aid to 0.17% by 2010.Despite these figures, last month's Eurobarometer opinion poll on attitudes to development aid (pdf) showed Poles are some of the most supportive of development aid (92%). According to the EU-wide survey, 85% of Europeans find development aid very important or fairly important. This has decreased by four percentage points, from 89%, since the last survey in 2010. In the UK it's 81%. In Hungary support is weaker, at 75%.Since joining the EU in 2004, Poland has rapidly increased its foreign aid. In the run-up to the EU presidency in early 2010, the OECD carried out a review (pdf) that recommended moving to multi-year funding, stronger independent monitoring and evaluation, more professional development opportunities for staff, dialogue with civil society, and a clearer focus on poverty reduction.Several of the OECD recommendations have already been met. For example, Poland's first development co-operation act will come into force next year to strengthen the legal basis for its development aid. Previously, foreign aid was administered across several different agencies, which made it hard to assess its effectiveness.The ministry of foreign affairs' plan for 2012 will focus on three thematic areas: democracy and human rights, global education and volunteer work, and humanitarian aid. Geographically, funding will concentrate on Eastern Partnership countries and on Afghanistan, east Africa, the Palestinian Authority, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.The Zagranica group, a platform for Polish NGOs, produces an annual Aid Watch report (pdf) that rates the government on the quantity and quality of its development aid. Its 2010 review (there is no data yet available for 2011) notes room for improvement on gender, environmental sustainability, international co-operation for development, and a more clearly defined strategy on democracy building.Not surprisingly, Polish development assistance aligns with its foreign policy (it still has troops in Afghanistan) and international obligations (as part of the EU). It also reflects its historical experience (Poland was occupied rather than colonised), its transformation to a market economy and EU member state, as well as geographical proximity (a section of Poland's eastern border now makes up the external EU border with Belarus, Russia and Ukraine).More than 71% of Poland's development budget was spent on its contribution to the EU development budget, and a further 3% on other multilateral aid contributions (via international institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, for example). This leaves a little more than a quarter of the budget for bilateral (country to country) aid.Perhaps most surprisingly, nearly half of Polish bilateral aid in 2010 (47%) went to China, largely due to a loan agreement between the two countries.In 2010 Polish aid went to around 80 countries. Following an established trend. A significant part was given to European countries, mainly Belarus and Ukraine. Funds to Africa, however, are decreasing. In 2010 the value of aid to Africa was three times lower than in 2009 and four times lower than in 2008.From 2011 Poland will also contribute to the European Development Fund (primarily for African, Caribbean and Pacific countries), so far it has contributed only to the EU's overall aid budget. Poland's contribution to the EU budget represents 3% of the aid the European commission grants.How does Poland's development co-operation policy compare with its immediate neighbours? The Czech Republic has the most consistent aid flow record over the past five years. Poland is now donating the smallest percentage of its gross national income: Czech Republic 0.12%, Hungary 0.09% (down from 0.13% in 2006), Slovak Republic 0.09% (down from 0.12% in 2005) and Poland 0.08% (down from 0.1% in 2007).Table shows gap between 2010 ODA levels and member state aid targets