As the Guardian's series about our European neighbours comes to a close, we take our leave of Spain, where cosmodemon hailed Don Quixote as the "blueprint for the modern 'novel'," and TomPalmerAuthor remembered reading Juan Goytisolo "aged 22, and being blown away. The way he writes sentences shifts something in your head". Booksonspain – no prizes for guessing who that is – nominated Benito Perez Galdos as "*the* novelist of 19th-century Spain", mapping "Spanish society's difficult transition to modernity", while Shorty confessed to loving "I Love You When I'm Drunk" – appropriately enough a "short" story collection from "Catalonia's smartest and most compelling contemporary author", Empar Moliner.Over here the discussion was much enlivened by smallpox throwing down the gauntlet, observing "typically" – ouch – "you're a bit light on women writers here". The responses came thick and fast: goldgathers replied with Carmen Conde's Mujer sin Edén, Haarlson with Mercé Rodoreda and Joan Margarit. But unless I've missed it somewhere, the explanation smallpox demanded didn't seem to materialise. I'm no Spanish specialist, but the barriers to publication with which women have struggled in the UK since Miguel de Cervantes set out his blueprint for fiction are surely equally fearsome in the land of Sancho Panza. All the more reason to join with goldgathers in saluting Ediciones Torremozas, "who publish poetry and short stories by women writers".This week, though, the World literature tour comes into its own, as it heads into territory which is – at least to me – basically unknown. I'll mutter Witold Gombrowicz, hum and haw at Ryszard Kapuściński, and tentatively suggest Michal Witkowski's recently-translated Lovetown, but the only thing I can really recommend about Polish literature is a marvellous short story by Michal Olszewski, wonderfully translated by Antonia Lloyd Jones, which we ran as part of a series of short stories to commemorate the fall of the Berlin wall a couple of years back.So it's over to you. As before, we're looking for the books which shed light on the Polish experience – fiction, non-fiction, poems and plays – whether written by those who'd call themselves Poles, or not. Just make your way down the page to the boxes of magic, fill in a country – that's Poland – an author, a title, maybe a translator and some indication of why it's a book you'd recommend. Then the elves will fly, the cogs will turn and hey presto, there'll be a list of knowledge, just like the one we made for Spain. After that the only issue will be where to head next.So tell us: where would you like to go next? Tell us in the comments, and we'll head wherever you fancy. How about somewhere outside Europe next time? We'll drop down to once a month, too, now the Europe season is over, so expect the next stop on the tour at the beginning of May.