A bitter row about the timetable for forging a global agreement on climate change is threatening to derail the already fragile United Nations climate change talks, now entering their final stage in Warsaw.The furious disagreement has pitted the EU against member state Poland, the host of the conference, which has the power to determine much of the pace of the talks. China, India, Venezuela and others are also accused of reneging on commitments made over the past two years to set out a plan for a new global deal that would be signed at a conference in Paris in late 2015.The row threatens to derail the long-running process towards a new global deal. At stake is whether the Warsaw talks end with a clear timetable for countries to set out their emissions reduction targets before the crunch meeting in Paris. Those targets need to be defined by each country in time for them to be assessed by the other participants, and to ensure they are ambitious enough.At the back of delegates' minds is the lesson of disastrous Copenhagen talks in 2009, when many of the crucial negotiations over targets, financing for poor countries and other crucial points were settled late, leaving too little negotiating time to forge a treaty. If the national targets are not set in good time, Paris could be yet another failure in the 20-year process, and the future of the UN talks would be in doubt."Without a timetable set out, we have no leverage to make sure that countries have to come together to work on this before Paris," said one high-level EU official.Ed Davey, the energy secretary, likened it to revising for an exam. "When I was a student preparing for my GCSEs, I started well before the exams - you need to do the homework. And we need a process where that homework can be marked."Ruth Davis, political director at Greenpeace, said the point was critical: "'Many governments have signalled their willingness to table new targets in 2014, as well as make contributions to the Green Climate Fund. If this ambition isn't captured in a decision the hosts and the negotiators will have let down not just those affected by climate change, but every country that is already investing in the green economy."Civil society groups left the talks today in part because the Polish government is too busy promoting the coal industry to fulfil its obligations to the international community."Poland has been accused of delaying and watering down the draft text of one crucial strand of the talks, which currently does not include a timetable or work programme. The EU official said Poland was projecting its own interests on to the negotiations. Poland has long been resistant to tough emissions targets within the EU.China is also resisting a timetable, along with allies in the "like-minded group" – countries ranging from Saudi Arabia to Venezuela that have a history of obstructing the talks. China has often in the past resisted any suggestion that its targets should be monitored at an international level.Most other countries accept a timetable should be part of the outcome, aligning both the poorest nations and many rich governments. The US has said it will set out its future emissions target early in 2015, and it is understood would accept a timetable as long as both developed and developing countries are required to follow it. Brazil also said it wanted a timetable, as well as ambitious targets, and South Africa, Mexico and other rapidly emerging economies are also understood to be aligned.Neither the Polish presidency nor the Chinese delegation responded to requests for comment.But the UN seemed to be preparing for damage limitation, in case the timetable cannot be agreed. The UN secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, gave a much weaker endorsement of a timetable than many wanted, telling Reuters: "I understand that many countries still may not be ready, for their political or economic considerations … We may not need to wait until everybody declares their positions. So whoever can do, they should do by September next year."Christiana Figueres, the UN's top official on climate, said: "The text is disappointing. But it is not the last and not the2015 agreement. It is a call to action."