It seems that gloomy days could be coming for Poland's Kaczynski brothers and their Law and Justice party (PiS), the UK Conservatives' ally from their European Conservatives and Reformists group. The looming marginalisation of the Kaczynskis on the Polish political scene could have grave consequences for the Tories' alliance of Eurosceptics as well.In 2007, after two years of governing shoulder to shoulder with far-right and populist parties,PiS was ousted from power by the centre-right Civic Platform (PO), ending Jaroslaw Kaczynski's premiership. All the same, his brother Lech has remained Poland's president, emerging as a rock-solid opposition to the new government. Now it appears that the president's days in office could be over quite soon.Last Saturday, the ruling centre-right chose its presidential candidate, parliament speaker Bronislaw Komorowski, who will run against Kaczynski this autumn. The latest polls indicate that in the first round voters would favour Komorowski over Kaczynski by 38-21%. Third-party candidates garner no more than 5% of the vote, therefore their endorsement of any of the candidates is of little importance. In the runoff, the result would be even more devastating for the current president, as over 60% of Poles would vote for Komorowski, while only 27% would back Kaczynski. The parallel 24% support for the president's Law and Justice party is enough in order to remain a muscular opposition, but it is no match to the Civic Platform's 50%.Lech Kaczynski's approaching presidential election defeat is crucial for the future of his and his brothers' party, and it might equally start a major reshuffle of Poland's political landscape. What exactly poses the danger to the Kaczynskis?First of all, an electoral slap would seriously undermine their leadership in the party. While voices of discontent have been rumbling since the lost parliamentary elections of 2007, positions within the president's chancellery have provided "shelter" for numerous party officials, silencing the frustrated. However, a second grim defeat is likely to deprive the increasingly impatient party ranks of illusions about a rapid return to power. And Law and Justice's younger politicians appear to be ready for virtually everything that could help overcome this hardly splendid isolation, including allying with former enemies on the left."We need to talk with the left. I'd like us to first get rid of a problem called the Civic Platform together, and then we can compete", Law and Justice MP Adam Hoffman said in a recent interview. "When I look at prime minister Donald Tusk, I see him wearing a sombrero, with a Mexican moustache and a donkey, heading an institutional revolutionary party which is both right and left-wing, red and blue."Not a long time ago, a similar remark would get any Polish right-wing politician kicked out of his party. This time, even though the Law and Justice leader immediately criticised his party subordinate, none of such happened. The Democratic Left Alliance, which has been in opposition since 2005 despite its meagre 12.5% result in last year's European parliament elections, does not seem eager to ally with the Kaczynski brothers, as it would discredit it in the eyes of many voters. However, given how devastating the polarised competition between PiS and prime minister Tusk's Civic Platform has been for the left, a scenario in which the latter would eventually ally with the Kaczynski brothers is not unthinkable.Certainly, such a barrier-breaking event would be hard to swallow for a number of rightwing politicians. Still, even if it does not happen, the bitterness of a second lost election could be enough to lead to a split within the Kaczynskis' party. And, in the long term, even to the fall of the Law and Justice party.This, in addition to the likely defeat of the Czech Republic's ruling Civic Democratic Party, another European ally of David Cameron's Conservatives, in the forthcoming May parliamentary elections, could be a serious challenge to the Tory-led group. From an alliance of Conservatives and Reformists, it may turn into simply an alliance of the marginalised.