It is 2018, and, somehow, Russia’s liberal opposition has pulled off a shock victory in presidential elections. The new president’s team arrives in the deserted offices of the Kremlin to take up the posts they have dreamed of for years, and get down to running the world’s biggest country.Unfortunately, running a nuclear superpower is not that easy, it turns out. Russia’s new president is soon faced with problems varying from a power blackout affecting the whole of Moscow to the hacking of his Twitter account.This is the premise of the pilot episode of Tomorrow, described as modern Russia’s first ever televisual political satire, with shades of House of Cards and The Thick of It. The pilot was actually shot two years ago, but after a long and fruitless search for financial backers, the team behind it have decided to turn to crowdfunding in an attempt to raise the 18m roubles (£200,000) required to make the series. If made, it will be shown on TV Rain, an independent cable station.The writers said the idea first came about in early 2012, when Moscow was engulfed in street protests and there was a sense of optimism in the air among the urban middle class that changes were afoot.“Everyone was a bit naive still and thought everything was going to change, and it seemed like a good idea to make a comedy about it,” recalled Roman Volobuev, one of the co-writers. He said he was approached by Natalya Sindeyeva, the head of TV Rain, who had the idea to make a programme about a new government taking over the Kremlin.“We didn’t want to just make propaganda for the opposition, so the idea was to make it a comedy,” said Volobuev. In the first draft, there were real opposition figures as characters, including the radical leftist Sergei Udaltsov. But as the writing process went on, real politics in Russia overtook the plot. Udaltsov was one of many arrested at a rally on 6 May 2012 that turned violent, and is now serving a four-and-a-half year prison sentence.“We came back from writing it and people were getting arrested. We realised we had to change it, so we kept rewriting it and it kept becoming less and less funny. We were trying to insult everyone, which I think is a good idea for comedy, but while we were doing it people were being sent to prison.”They finally shot the pilot in early 2013, and since then have been seeking funds for it – unsuccessfully.Political comedy is a risky genre in Russia. On most television channels, political content is monopolised by news of Vladimir Putin’s exploits and highly charged talkshows. Satirical programmes such as the Spitting Image-style Kukly were taken off air soon after Putin entered the Kremlin in 2000. Now, laughing about politics is discouraged.Lena Vanina, the co-writer of Tomorrow, is also one of the scriptwriters on Londongrad, a series due out later this year on the STS television station about the life of Russians in London.“Londongrad is absolutely without politics. You can’t do anything with politics on the federal channels,” she said.On the big screen, there is a little more leeway. This week, a film described as Russia’s first political blockbuster hits the cinemas. Gently pushing the boundaries of what it is permissible to show in a mainstream film, Soulless 2 sees a reformed ex-banker dragged back to Moscow from a cosy exile in Bali. Before he knows it, he is involved in high-level intrigue.“We set out to write a corporate thriller à la The Firm, but quickly realised that in Russia, the role of the ‘evil corporation’ must inevitably be played by the state itself,” said Michael Idov, one of the scriptwriters for Soulless 2, as well as the creator of Londongrad. “How did we get away with this? Well, I think Russian censorship tends to look at a film’s ‘moral’ first and foremost. And one can argue (as I’m sure our brilliant producers have) that the ‘moral’ of this film is ‘don’t run away from Russia’s problems; stay here and fix them.’”At one point in Soulless 2, the presidential motorcade pulls up and Max is shoved into the limo, where an out-of-focus Putin makes him an offer we can’t hear. A few months later, Max is giving a speech in front of a crowd, with a deliberately ambiguous ending. Has he become Putin’s successor? Did he turn down the offer? Or is he now part of the “controlled opposition”, the liberal pseudo-challenger role played by the oligarch Mikhail Prokhorov during the last presidential elections.“He can be either the next Navalny or the next Putin. My sincere hope is that there’s a third movie to clear this up,” Idov said.For Tomorrow, the wait is on to see whether ordinary Russians will stump up the 18m roubles required. A few days ago, one donor agreed to pay 45,000 roubles, enough to have a character named after them if the show gets made. But more than 90% of the funds have yet to be pledged.The writers, both of whom took part in the wave of Moscow protests in 2011-12, say laughing about politics is a “defence mechanism” to deflect how depressing the situation has become, and once again, the reality of politics in Russia is shaping the changing concept of the series.“The last time I was sitting at home and thinking about it was a couple of weeks ago, and now Boris Nemtsov has been killed, and we have to rethink it again,” said Volobuev. He and Vanina said that after Nemtsov’s murder, outside the Kremlin last week, they decided they needed “a new language and a new tone”, and if the funds are raised they may take the basic premise and do something completely different.Over the past two years, the writers have shown the pilot to a number of people, and say the results have been surprising. Many executives from state television said they loved the plot and wished the political situation in the country would allow them to make it for their channels, while some opposition figures who saw it were offended.“We met with one opposition figure who was supposed to consult us on how to get money to make it, but instead he sat there and lectured us for 40 minutes, telling us what shit it was and how useless and vain our characters were, not like him and his friends,” recalled Volobuev.“He said that when they run Russia there will be none of the problems that we highlighted. I looked at him wearing his peach-coloured cashmere sweater and thought, ‘OK, good luck with that.’”