

1.04pm GMT
13:04

It is a quiet day on the bourses in continental Europe with markets barely moving. France’s main market dropped after the government revealed that unemployment had hit a record high.That is all from the business live blog. We will be back next week. Merry Christmas to all our readers.

12.59pm GMT
12:59

News flash from Reuters:Russia is holding talks with international ratings agencies about the situation in the Russian economy.

12.45pm GMT
12:45

The FTSE100 has closed. On a day of thin trading, when many traders were out the office, the UK index of leading shares finished up 0.18%.Updated
at 12.45pm GMT


12.40pm GMT
12:40

Christmas Day used to be the only time of year when no one could buy anything.Not any more.This year 8 million people are expected to be distracted from turkey and TV by bargain-hunting on their smartphones and tablets, writes Guardian retail reporter Sarah Butler.As an increasing number of retailers begin their end of year sales online on Christmas Eve, shoppers are expected to spend 25% more than last year on Christmas Day with most logging on at midday according to online retailing body imrg and research firm Experian.Christmas Day shopping has become increasingly popular over the past few years with more than half of consumers expected to log on to at least browse, according to card provider Barclaycard.Growth is being driven by a rise in the popularity of tablet computers, which make shopping from the sofa an attractive pastime, while the likes of Marks & Spencer, Boots and Currys all start their sales online on Christmas Eve and Amazon launches its post-Christmas discounts just after the Queen’s speech at 4pm.Here is the full story.

12.28pm GMT
12:28

Unemployment in France has hit a record high, according to the latest official data published today.The number of job seekers reached record levels in November, with 3.488m people claiming out-of-work benefits.The figures showed a rise of 27,400 people on the jobless queue compared to the previous month, up 0.8% from October. Unemployment has risen 5.8% over the last year, despite promises by the government to get more people into work.In an interview last month, François Hollande said he would not stand again for the French presidency in 2017 if he had not managed to cut unemployment.

11.43am GMT
11:43

Shares in BP have edged up 0.5% today, after reports that the oil company is close to a deal with its Russian partner Rosneft to develop oil fields in eastern Siberia.BP has a 20% stake in Rosneft and has continued to make plans with the Kremlin- controlled firm despite western sanctions.The latest deal was reported by the Russian daily Kommersant, which says that Rosneft has signed a “strategic partnership” with BP to explore oil fields in eastern Siberia.BP will pay around $700-$800m to get a 20% stake in the Tass Yuriakh field in eastern Siberia, estimated to contain 1 bn barrels of reserves. So far, the two sides have only initialled a preliminary deal, but plan to seal the deal in 2015.BP and Rosneft have declined to comment.BP has insisted it will still do business in Russia, despite warning investors it could be damaged by the fallout from western sanctions.

11.16am GMT
11:16

Holger Zschaepitz, a senior editor at Die Welt, points out that many investors already see Russian bonds as junk.#Russia bond market unchg despite S&P junk warning. 10yr yield stays at 13.17% as markets have treated Russia as junk for several weeks.

11.09am GMT
11:09

Howard Archer, chief UK and European economist at IHS, is not slackening his output when it comes to analysing the latest batch of UK productivity figures.Productivity is rising, but the glass looks half-empty.Some modest festive cheer for the UK economy, with labour productivity showing some welcome and much-needed improvement in the third quarter. Nevertheless, productivity currently remains limited compared to pre-crisis levels and there is still considerable uncertainty as to how much of this is due to structural factors. How much productivity improves going forward will be a critical factor in how soon and how far the Bank of England raises interest rates.  The extent to which the weakness in the UK’s productivity has been structural rather than cyclical has vital implications for the economy’s growth potential and for policy. If productivity fails to pick up appreciably over the coming quarters, it indicates that the economy has less potential to grow without generating inflationary pressures and that interest rates will likely need to rise at a faster rate than currently envisaged. My emphasis He identifies four factors about the recession and recovery that could do lasting damage to UK productivity.

10.54am GMT
10:54

The jolly number crunchers at the Office for National Statistics have released data showing who will spend Christmas Day at work.Here are the stats courtesy of this excellent blog from Guardian’s data team.Most of the people working at Christmas are carers and nurses, with over a quarter of a million people in these professions working on 25 December.The big unanswered question: why do 51% of the clergy get a day off on Christmas?

10.33am GMT
10:33

Here is the UK’s productivity story in graphs.Productivity has improved but not made up ground lost during the economic crisis.London and the south east has its own economy, operating in a very different way from the rest of the country.

10.12am GMT
10:12

UK labour productivity has improved, but remains below its pre-crisis peak.Worker productivity increased by 0.6% in the third quarter of 2014 compared with the previous quarter, according to data released by the Office for National Statistics. It was 0.3% higher than 2013, but 2% below where it was before the 2008 economic crash.Here are the headlines from the ONS release:Updated
at 10.13am GMT
