The man once nicknamed “Putin’s banker” for helping put the Russian president in the Kremlin has filed a $12bn (£7.82bn) compensation claim against Russia, which he accuses of illegally and unfairly ruining his business empire and stealing his fortune. Sergei Pugachev, who secretly left London in June after a judge ordered his assets to be seized and passports to be confiscated, still fears for his life, his lawyers said. The former banker believes he is being followed by Moscow-financed spies who, he says, have threatened him and his family since he fell out of favour. A heavyweight team of defence lawyers from four countries – Britain, France, America and Switzerland – gathered in Paris on Tuesday to outline the international arbitration claim against Russia. They are hoping the claim will be heard in the permanent court of arbitration in the Hague. Announcing that Pugachev had successfully registered his claim against the Russian Federation, J Michael McNutt, Pugachev’s adviser, said: “He is not the first and he is certainly not the last, but hopefully we can get some form of recompense as a result of this action.”Moscow is seeking Pugachev’s arrest under an Interpol warrant that accuses him of embezzlement and misappropriation of public funds. He strenuously denies the accusations, claiming that Russia, with the backing of Putin, has deliberately targeted him with “sham criminal and civil proceedings”. Léa Forestier, a member of Pugachev’s French legal team, said the businessman was living in fear for his life.“He is taking the threats seriously and is living with bodyguards. It’s very harrowing being followed all the time and he has to be careful any time he goes anywhere. It’s not easy for his family who are in London,” she said.  Pugachev, who has Russian and French nationality, defied a court order to remain in Britain before the summer after finding what his lawyers described as “black boxes” under his car and other family vehicles. He reported the boxes to the police fearing they were explosives, but it was later suggested they were tracking devices. Pugachev’s partner, Alexandra Tolstoy, said: “What was most upsetting was that there were these things under a car used only by myself and our three young children. It was horrible.” McNutt said lawyers had proof that Pugachev was still being tailed. “I was with him on Saturday and we were being followed here in France. Mr Pugachev was again followed yesterday in Paris.”  He added that lawyers were considering an additional complaint against Moscow for harassment and violation of human rights laws. Pugachev was once a loyal ally to Putin, helping him ascend to the Kremlin in 1999 during the last days of Boris Yeltsin’s time as president. But relations between them cooled, and Pugachev claims that since he left Russia in 2011, the government first damaged and then cherry-picked the best parts of his $15bn business empire. That included two major shipyards – constructing military ships and icebreakers – the world’s biggest coal mine, and prime real estate in Moscow and St Petersburg. Related: Sergei Pugachev: 'Putin's banker' now lives in fear of man he put into power  “The Russian Federation also has instituted and pursued sham civil and criminal proceedings against Mr Pugachev with the expressed intent to ruin him and his family,” his lawyers said. They added the “persecution and harassment” of their client had continued outside of Russia – resulting in a loss of investment abroad. The Kremlin claims Pugachev stole hundreds of millions of dollars in loans of public money pumped into the Mezhprombank, that he founded in the 1990s, during the 2008 financial crisis. After a British court granted a Russian request for his assets to be frozen and ordered him to remain in the UK, he slipped out of the country, first to Paris then to the south of France. “Over the past few years, Russia has pursued a multi-pronged attack against me, my family, and my investments. I refuse to be intimidated by Russia’s tactics, and I look forward to having an international arbitral tribunal assess Russia’s conduct by applying international standards,” Pugachev said. In 2014, the international arbitration tribunal at the Hague ordered Russia to pay former shareholders of the Yukos oil company run by Mikhail Khodorkovsky, $50bn in compensation for unlawful expropriation. Moscow has appealed against the judgement.Putin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said “no comment” to questions on Monday, but that official investigations were continuing. He insisted Russia’s moves against Pugachev had nothing to do with his relationship with the Russian president.“Investigative or seach actions, of course, aren’t related to the extent to which there were friendly or unfriendly relations [with Putin],” he said.