Russian NGOs that receive funding from abroad will have to register as "foreign agents" and undergo extra checks under a new bill that critics warn is part of a crackdown on independent activists.The bill, backed by the ruling United Russia party, would require foreign-funded NGOs involved in political activities to tag all publications and websites with the label "foreign agent".They would have to undergo an annual financial audit and issue biannual reports on their activities. Individuals in breach of the law would face up to three years in prison and fines of up to 300,000 roubles (£5,850), and their organisations could be fined up to 1m roubles.A video in support of the bill says: "You have the right to know who is trying to influence your opinion. Our country must have an opposition, but if it is protecting foreign interests, you have the right to know that."The bill was put forward by the United Russia Duma deputy Alexander Sidyakin. Earlier this year he sponsored a bill that was passed by the Duma to drastically increase fines for illegal protests, as the Kremlin attempted to put down demonstrations against Vladimir Putin that have drawn tens of thousands on to the streets of Moscow. Putin has repeatedly blamed the mass opposition on the US state department.Many of Russia's most prominent NGOs, including the corruption watchdog Transparency International, the election monitor Golos and the environmental group Greenpeace Russia, rely on foreign grants to operate in a country where the government often views them as enemies.Grigory Melkonyants, deputy head of Golos, said: "They're passing this law to complicate the lives of NGOs or completely stop our financing." Golos helped expose the electoral fraud that marred Russia's recent parliamentary and presidential elections, and has already been the target of a mass discreditation campaign.Supporters of the law have likened it to similar legislation in the US that requires lobbyists employed by foreign governments to reveal their financing. Critics worry that it could be applied selectively in a country lacking rule of law.Melkonyants noted that the bill did not include a definition of political activity, meaning it could be applied far and wide. "Political activity means wanting to come to power – no human rights groups or environmental groups want to come to power. Such a wide formulation of this law is very aggressive," he said.Golos relies on private donations as well as grants from several foreign governments. Melkonyants said finding sponsors among wealthy individuals or businesses inside Russia had become impossible since the arrest of the former Yukos chief Mikhail Khodorkovsky in 2003, which was partly seen as punishment for his funding of opposition and democracy activists.A source inside the Kremlin said on Sunday that about 1,000 of the 230,000 NGOs operating in Russia were likely to fall under the restrictions. The Duma is expected to begin considering the bill on Friday.