Rare is the news story in current western media that inspires an affinity for Russia, its culture, or even its people. While not without foundation, the common portrait of a monolithic, anti-western, conservative-to-a-fault nation ignores the growing diversity of an evolving country and discounts its creative potential.An audience of nearly 400 people gathered earlier this month in the new contemporary art wing of the Hermitage museum in St Petersburg for the Calvert Forum, with Russia's oft-ignored creative community the centre of attention. The event featured an international panel of speakers: Ruth Mackenzie, director of the London 2012 Cultural Olympiad; Dmitry Ozerkov, director of the Hermitage museum's contemporary arts programme; Robert Eysoldt, Berlin-based creative consultant; and former Russian finance minister Alexei Kudrin.It marked the beginning of a new collaboration between St Petersburg State University's Smolny College and the London-based gallery and arts organisation, Calvert 22 Foundation, aimed at raising the profile of Russia's creative sector.Debate focused specifically on questions raised by the case of Berlin. How did Germany's once-divided capital transform itself into a global hub of creative and cultural industries? What could St Petersburg learn from its example? Any parallels between the two cities might initially seem remote, but dig deeper and the comparisons begin to mount.Both cities have been rebuilt twice. Once in the wake of the Second World War, and again 40 years later when reunification and the fall of communism required a second 'reconstruction' of sorts. Comparable in size, they each experienced a decline in population during the late 20th century, but have now returned to population growth, attracting more new arrivals each year. And both cities boast an enviable arts infrastructure, with world-class institutions serving as the anchors required for global cultural status.Where Berlin and St Petersburg depart, however, is painfully obvious. For starters, the freedom and spontaneity enjoyed by Berliners is conspicuously absent in the Russian city. The future development of Russia's creative industries is surely stymied by the country's current political climate and its opposition to political and cultural diversity. As Alexei Kudrin noted, quoting novelists Arkady and Boris Strugatsky: "When greyness triumphs, dark forces come to power. I support a colourful world."Much of the discussion explored how Berlin managed the transformation from divided city to global creative hub. Rather than creating a single grand strategy, the city seems to have concentrated on building the right ecosystem for creatives.As Robert Eysoldt explained: "You can't schedule creativity, but you can create the ideal conditions to attract the creative class required to develop creative industries and sustainable growth." Benefiting from strong urban foundations such as abundant cheap space, good transport, and a solid cultural infrastructure, Berlin's creative community developed a preternatural capacity for collaboration.Networks often developed naturally, but in some cases they received a timely boost from government. Create Berlin, a government-funded organisation helped finance and support design-related companies and projects throughout the city, encouraging them to develop and grow together.Building on this theme of networks, Ruth Mackenzie and Dmitry Ozerkov both argued for the importance of new ideas spread and exchanged across borders. As they pointed out, St Petersburg – built by Peter the Great as his window on the west – was founded on principles of international collaboration and cultural dialogue. The challenge for present-day St Petersburg is to remember that kind of heritage and internationalism in the face of closed-minded politics.The new contemporary art wing of the Hermitage is proof that, in cultural circles at least, there is a belief in the importance of greater openness. As Ozerkov explained, censorship during the Soviet era meant contemporary art arrived late in Russia. As a consequence it still has the power to shock much of the Russian public. The museum's commitment to new art and ideas is no small feat under those circumstances.While the challenges facing Russia's creative industries are significant, they are far from insurmountable. The panel's assessment of Russia's creative future was cautiously optimistic. Questions and comments from audience members revealed the level of energy, ambition and sophistication inherent in St Petersburg's creative classes. The big lessons from Berlin for the city are the need to create a more open and tolerant society, to broaden cultural horizons, and to build stronger, more coherent networks of creative professionals.Following the event, the Calvert Forum will research the development of the creative industries in Russia, looking at international best practice and providing practical solutions for regional and municipal policy makers. The aim of the project is to go beyond the traditional thinktank model.As the launch event in St Petersburg showed, the often-overlooked potential of Russia's creative industries is very real. It just needs to find a collaborative voice.Jonathan McClory is consultant for the Calvert Forum – follow the organisation on Twitter @Calvert_22 and Jonathan @JonathanMcCloryThis content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To get more articles like this direct to your inbox, sign up free to become a member of the Culture Professionals Network.