It is easy to say what the past three months of mass protests against Vladimir Putin were not. They were not a Russian replay of the Arab spring. Nor were they a northern version of the Ukrainian Orange Revolution. Nor, as it turned out, was the outrage triggered by rigged parliamentary elections in December a truly national phenomenon. Moscow was the only region in Russia where Mr Putin did not get a majority.It would be equally wrong, however, to dismiss the biggest wave of anti-Kremlin demonstrations in decades as nothing but a mirage, a bad dream from which last week's lachrymose Mr Putin has now swiftly recovered. The numbers who turned out a week later were a fraction of those who attended the protests in the lead-up to the presidential vote. But this does not mean that Mr Putin's blueprint for "stability" or for a perpetuation of the status quo has prevailed. The judgment on that has to await the next national crisis, another Kursk, or Beslan, or economic shock, to which a country run by a super wealthy elite on behalf of itself is uniquely vulnerable.The protest movement has left two indelible marks. It has proved that the democratic spirit in Russia – expressed in the yearning for political pluralism, the rule of law and an active civil society – did not come and go at the start of the 1990s. It lies dormant in Russia, biding its time. And the movement also showed that a new generation of Russians, generally young and untainted by the chaos and venality of the Boris Yeltsin era, was prepared to pick up the cudgels of reform. Mr Putin would therefore be foolish to think he has recaptured Russian hearts just because he got the numbers, a convincing 64% of the vote. He secured another term of office largely because of a series of negatives – because the opposition was not united, was not politically experienced, had not yet generated national leaders, and had no means to prove to the Russia outside Moscow and St Petersburg that they were a viable alternative. Nor did they themselves want a revolution. Mr Putin must not confuse fear of chaos with positive support.Equally, the hard graft for the opposition is now just starting. Filling the streets was quite easy, but building awareness of civil society in places where it does not exist, or shaking "la Russie profonde" out of its lethargy is less glamorous work. If Mr Putin's vulnerability is not just personal, but a failure of the system he put in place, then the task for the unsanctioned opposition which operates beyond the control of the Kremlin is to behave differently from generations of leaders before them. It is to build constituencies from the bottom up. It would be a novelty for political leaders to represent their people, rather than themselves, but that is what has to start happening.