The foreign secretary, William Hague, vowed yesterday to seek a patient, steady improvement in relations with Russia. His counterpart Sergei Lavrov then provided at least three reasons why they will remain turbulent. He said western support for the revolutions in Egypt and Tunisia would be counterproductive, that Russia would not support further sanctions on Iran, and that serious disagreements in Russia's bilateral relationship with Britain remained.The list of these disputes never seems to lessen: the latest was the refusal to admit entry to the Guardian's Moscow correspondent on what Mr Lavrov called a technicality. Our correspondent is now back in Moscow after a diplomatic protest was launched. However, the reason for his exclusion was anything but technical. It was because of what he wrote. There are regular spy rows; the shadow of the Litvinenko affair is a long one, and at least 40 people in Britain are wanted by Russia on criminal extradition warrants. The question is tritely posed: if businessmen from the two countries can trade with each other – the volume of bilateral trade quadrupled over five years – then why can't their politicians?The two countries certainly have common interests: combating the sort of butchery inflicted by a suicide bomber in the baggage hall of Domodedovo airport is undoubtedly one. But go then to Ali-Yurt, the village in Ingushetia from where that suicide bomber came, and another picture emerges: that of a region seething in anger. What began as a secular insurgency in Chechnya has now been transformed, by the brutality of the security forces' response, into an Islamic rebellion spreading throughout the north Caucasus. The greatest chronicler of this tragedy, the Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya, is now dead. Which side should Britain be on? Not an insurgency which uses suicide bombers against civilian targets, but nor should it look the other way when the security forces launch raids on villages like Ali-Yurt which form the subject of appeals to the European court of human rights in Strasbourg.Ms Politkovskaya said Chechnya's fate was Russia's also. Each spelled the death of democracy. In a smaller sense, Britain's relationship with Russia is inseparable, too, from the extent to which cries of misrule resound unanswered in the empty echo chamber of political life in Russia. Wave after wave of émigrés arrives on these shores as a result. The decision to reset relations after the Bush era is among the few US foreign policy initiatives to bear fruit. Britain has no equivalent attraction to offer Russia. Yes, the two governments should talk directly to each other, rather than snarl through proxies, but there may not be much listening done.