Bill Clinton hugged Boris Yeltsin and it ended in the collapse of the rouble and a war in Chechnya. George Bush looked deep into Vladimir Putin's eyes and they parted company trading missile threats amid a war in Georgia. Barack Obama pressed the reset button with Dmitry Medvedev yesterday and produced a four-page shopping list of subjects about which they would continue to talk - chief among them the intention to cut nuclear arsenals by a third. Whatever today brings with the G20, particularly after the public splits between France and Germany, the US president's first international foray has already achieved results. The cold warriors, who say the west should stand up to Russia rather than engage with it, predict that the relationship between Mr Obama and Mr Medvedev will also end in tears. But there is a self-fulfilling quality to the notion that Russia should only be allowed to join our game when it plays by our rules.Mr Obama has seen a chance to create a virtuous circle. By offering to go slow on missile defence, he could generate Russian pressure on Iran to abandon its attempts to build a nuclear bomb. Russia is key to persuading Iran to stay within the bounds of a civilian nuclear programme, because it is helping Tehran build one. The abandonment of a covert Iranian plan to build the bomb would obviate the need for a missile defence battery close to Russia's border. Deep differences remain over both the missile defence programme and Georgia. Mr Obama said he had no interest in papering over the cracks. But his is more than just a change in tone. The real change is that America has decided to stop making progress on bigger fronts - strategic nuclear arsenals, non-proliferation, military transit routes to Afghanistan - hostage to problems on lesser ones. This could be more fruitful than confronting Russia for two reasons. Russia is no longer a rival superpower, but it is the world's second largest nuclear power. The new dialogue re-establishes a partnership which existed during Mikhail Gorbachev's era, but which disappeared during the Clinton and Bush years. Agreeing to cuts in nuclear arsenals is well within Russia's comfort zone, although it will be more difficult to achieve now that its conventional forces are so much weaker. Second, with a strengthened bilateral relationship, America will be less inclined than it was to see Russia through the distorting prism of former Soviet satellite states. Both Ukraine and Georgia have got their own complex political problems, irrespective of Russia. Their instability is not solely down to the machiavellian manoeuvring of Moscow. Of course, Russia today is less confident than it was only six months ago. Its once-booming economy has screeched to a halt. December saw a double-digit percentage fall in its industrial output. The cranes stopped swinging in Moscow and unemployment is spiralling, despite the practice of companies reducing salaries rather than labour. Tolyatti, the home of the Russian car industry, is in an even worse state than Detroit, and there are demonstrations against Vladimir Putin, the man most Russians venerate. This is no different to what is happening in the UK, except that in Russia inflation is also booming and private debt is out of control. So a poorer Russia could make for a less assertive one.There are bound to be setbacks. Competing visions of national interest, competing gas pipelines and the natural tendency of Russia's neighbours to look west for support will continue to create tensions. A bilateral relationship between Russia and America is easier to achieve than one between Russia and the European Union, which will become more dependent, not less, on Russian gas. But for all this, the path on which two presidents embarked yesterday is the right one - the only one that can ensure Russia's true place as a regional power spanning both Europe and Asia.