Russia does not have political prisoners. That was so last century. It does, alas, retain the unedifying spectacle of show trials. Mikhail Khodorkovsky is the highest-profile victim. The oligarch has spent a decade in prison after two consecutive trials (the second more legally questionable than the first) but, just as he is due to be released next year, there are hints that a third case could be on the slipway. The heaviest hint came in the form of a recent documentary from a once-independent but now wholly tainted television channel, NTV, alleging that the oligarch was behind the murder of the mayor of Nefteyugansk in 1998. Vladimir Putin himself has alleged several times that Khodorkovsky has blood on his hands.But lest anyone forget that the misrule of Russian law applies to all, the country's main opposition leader, Alexey Navalny, faces a six-year jail sentence and a 1m rouble fine on charges that he embezzled 16m roubles worth of timber from a state firm when he was advising the governor of Kirov. The charge is exactly the sort that the anti-corruption blogger himself has levelled against dozens of officials in actual cases of wrongdoing. It goes without saying that this charge is bogus and the result of a political vendetta. Prosecutions on criminal charges are proving to be a useful weapon in the Kremlin's armoury. The six years demanded by prosecutors is below the maximum 10-year sentence, but enough to keep Mr Navalny in jail for 2018, the next presidential election. It also means that he could not run in September's election for the mayor of Moscow, a city whose support United Russia, the main pro-Kremlin party, has lost. Mr Navalny used his closing remarks in his trial last week as a valedictory. The man who called United Russia a party of crooks and thieves, a label that dogged it in the Duma elections in 2011, proved to be up to the occasion. He vowed to destroy the neofeudal system in which 83% of the nation's wealth belongs to 0.5% of the people. It was an overtly political speech to a provincial court in a trial which had nothing to do with Kirov, timber or stolen money.Mr Navalny is not the sole target of the investigative committee, a Russian version of the FBI. Sergei Udaltsov, a leftwinger who forged ties with the Communist party and helped spearhead mass protests in 2012, also faces up to 10 years in prison for "staging riots". Some 27 people who took part in a demonstration last year on the eve of Mr Putin's inauguration to a third presidential term have also been charged. There is only one purpose of these prosecutions: to stifle dissent. Mr Putin's third presidential term is taking Russia down a familiar historical path. It is one cause of the current exodus of its intelligentsia. It could also have a disturbingly predictable violent outcome.