The Associated Press is moving an interesting dispatch across the wires this morning, vis a vis the climactic calamities ongoing in Russia and Pakistan. Charles Hanley writes:The weather-related cataclysms of July and August fit patterns predicted by climate scientists, the Geneva-based World Meteorological Organization says — although those scientists always shy from tying individual disasters directly to global warming......The U.N.'s network of climate scientists — the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) — has long predicted that rising global temperatures would produce more frequent and intense heat waves, and more intense rainfalls. In its latest assessment, in 2007, the Nobel Prize-winning panel went beyond that. It said these trends "have already been observed," in an increase in heat waves since 1950, for example.Still, climatologists generally refrain from blaming warming for this drought or that flood, since so many other factors also affect the day's weather.Stott and NASA's Gavin Schmidt at the Goddard Institute of Space Studies in New York, said it's better to think in terms of odds: Warming might double the chances for a heat wave, for example. "That is exactly what's happening," Schmidt said, "a lot more warm extremes and less cold extremes."Something to think about. The 2007 IPCC report predicted massive droughts in Russia. It also forecast greater flooding "this century" (which is ambiguous but inarguably includes right now) in southern Pakistan.Meanwhile, I see from UN Dispatch that the climate talks in Bonn, ongoing for the last few days, ended without any major agreement. Of course, from a US perspective, it doesn't really matter that much anyway, because in America we need 67 senators to agree to ratify an international treaty and that won't happen in this country for the foreseeable future under any circumstances.I sometimes imagine what it would take, weather-wise, for people to see that we have to do something about this. It puts one in the odd and perhaps I confess morally unsupportable position of cheering for a certain amount of calamity, the better to put the crisis in stark relief, but hopefully not too much calamity, lest many die. But doing nothing and relying on oil-industry-funded "scientists" to argue that it's all a hoax so that said industries can be free of the coffle of state interference is more morally unsupportable, as time and tide shall demonstrate.