Already grindingly destructive and violent, the 11-month long Syrian crisis has suddenly turned worse. The most searing evidence of that was felt on the streets of the insurgent stronghold of Homs on Monday, where Bashar al-Assad's forces kept up a battery of shelling and rocket attacks, causing many casualties amid horrific scenes. Meanwhile, government troops reportedly massed for an even bloodier assault on a city which has been in the forefront of anti-regime feeling. But the real trigger for the renewed fighting was less a shift in the internal military balance than a disastrous change on the international front.The pivotal event was Saturday's failed UN security council resolution. By vetoing the Arab League's Syria plan, even after the drafters had made substantive concessions, Russia and China stopped the international effort dead in its tracks, at least for the time being. This was a dismayingly reactionary decision by the two powers, lamented not just by predictable western nations but also by many in the region who saw the resolution as a chance to underscore the regime's isolation and boost UN credibility in the wake of the Arab spring. Russia's and China's vetoes did the precise opposite. Most lethally, they gave the Assad regime a green light to intensify its assault on its own people. The voting in New York launched the mortars against Homs. Responsibility for the renewed bloodshed therefore lies with Vladimir Putin and Hu Jintao as well as with President Assad himself.The immediate danger is that, under Russia's protection and armed with as many Russian guns as it wishes to buy and Moscow is willing to sell, a discredited and doomed (William Hague's word) regime will now kill even more Syrians in a frantic attempt to reconquer its own territory. But there are other foreseeable dangers too. One is that the UN's failure will be a catalyst for more internal opposition to the Assad regime not less, as some of those who have abandoned the regime, but who had hoped that international solidarity would push Assad out, now throw in their lot with the armed opposition. The flow of arms to the anti-government forces is also likely to increase not dwindle. Civil war would ramp up the pressure on Syria's neighbours, especially Turkey. Iran, with a massive stake in upholding the Damascus regime, will become more involved. And the west risks being gradually drawn into this new cold war whether the west, or Russia, likes it or not.Russia presumably sees this too. There is a case, of an extremely limited sort, to be made for some of Russia's obstructionism over Syria. Moscow has decided it was misled by the west over Libya. It is therefore determined not to help sanction any sort of repetition over Syria (even though the vetoed UN motion explicitly renounced regime change and the use of force). But the issue now is Syria not Libya. Does Russia really want to be the global protector of tyrants who turn their guns on their own people simply in order to get one back against the west after the overthrow of a worthless leader like Gaddafi? There are many dangers here for Russia, never mind the more immediate ones for Syrians. One of these is that Russia becomes the prisoner of its own alliance with Syria, forced to defend the indefensible for fear of losing prestige and influence once the diplomatic effort picks up again, as it must.Russia has put itself on the wrong side of the argument. But its foreign minister and its spy chief are both in Damascus today for talks with the Syrians. They have an opportunity to prove that the Syrian tail does not wag the Russian dog. Russia always protests that it has the interests of the Syrian people at heart. So let it give a clear sign today that this is true. Let it make clear, before it is too late, that it refuses to be the Assad regime's protector against its own people. Let Russia make clear whether it is part of the problem or the solution. Russia must now show precisely how it proposes to broker a credible alternative to the Arab League plan that it has just done so much to destroy.