The jailing of several leading opposition figures, including former deputy prime minister Boris Nemtsov, has hammered another large nail into the coffin of free expression in Russia, human rights activists and foreign observers say. Exactly how David Cameron will justify his visit to Russia later this year is hard to see at this point. Cheap energy and investment are important. But affording undeserved respectability to an increasingly repressive, authoritarian and undemocratic regime may be judged too costly.William Hague, the foreign secretary, made the best of a bad situation in Moscow in October, holding talks with Russia's president, Dmitry Medvedev, a prominent though timid proponent of reform. Cameron's invitation came a month later, when Medvedev met him at the G20 summit in Seoul. Although reportedly caught off-guard, the PM reacted positively: "We have both agreed we want to strengthen the bilateral relationship. I'm very pleased to take up the invitation of a visit to Russia next year."But diplomatic pleasantries, echoing US efforts to "reset" relations with Moscow, cannot conceal ongoing, deep bilateral disagreements. The most notorious is the unresolved poison murder in London in 2006 of Alexander Litvinenko. Britain has sought the extradition of the chief suspect, Alexander Lugovoi, a former KGB officer. Russia has refused point blank. Hague admitted in Moscow that "serious differences" on this and other issues remained.Since then, matters have only got worse. Each country expelled a diplomat last month for alleged spying, after British security sources pointed to a "huge Russian intelligence operation in the UK". That spat coincided with an even bigger row – over Britain's sharp criticism of the show trial of former oil tycoon, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, an arch opponent of Russia's prime minister and self-styled strongman, Vladimir Putin.Condemnation rained down at home and abroad. Lev Ponomarev, a Russian human rights activist, said: "We see how, with the obscenity of despair, the Russian justice system time and time again fabricates charges and carelessly sends behind bars those whom the authorities consider dangerous." Hague took the cue: "I am deeply concerned by the implications … for confidence in how the law is applied in Russia," he said. Putin brusquely dismissed all the criticism as interference in Russia's sovereign affairs.Nemtsov, once an establishment politician who now co-chairs the Solidarity opposition movement, added his voice to the protests at a New Year's Eve demonstration in Moscow upholding free expression. The response was swift. Anxious perhaps to dispel any impression he was abashed by the Khodorkovsky uproar, Putin sent in the heavies. Nemtsov was arrested and jailed for 15 days for "disobeying police". Three other opposition leaders – Eduard Limonov, Konstantin Kosyakin and Ilya Yashin – were also incarcerated.Street protests against the jailings have been occurring daily ever since, and each day, more protesters are detained. Objections lodged by Anatoly Chubais, deputy prime minister under former president Boris Yeltsin, and Serge Mitrokhin, head of the liberal Yabloko party, who called the sentences politically motivated, have been ignored. So, too, has a US statement stressing "the importance of embracing and protecting universal values including freedom of expression and assembly". Now plans are afoot for another big demonstration on 15 January, when Nemtsov is due for release. Even bigger clashes could result.So far, Britain has kept quiet about this latest disturbing manifestation of Putin's ever more menacing police state. This daunting apparatus was reinforced last summer when the powers of the FSB secret police were greatly expanded. Then came Putin's October green light to the police to "crack heads with batons" if people protested without permission. But David Clark, chairman of the Russia Foundation, warned that western countries may find it increasingly difficult to maintain the pretence of normal relations with Russia."The new brazenness in the way Putin is behaving is extremely worrying," Clark said. The drop in Russia's oil export income in 2008-9 and the outcry over the Georgia war had briefly restrained Russian behaviour and fed hopes of reform. But those hopes were fading now, he said. The justice and human rights situation was deteriorating again – and it was possible opposition parties would be barred from this year's parliamentary elections."Putin is gambling that western politicians are too weak and western investors too greedy to stand up to him. They should prove him wrong," the Economist commented last week. "The West should recognise this marks a new, more repressive phase of Putin's rule … If Russia continues to act in this way, it should be chucked out of the G8." Likewise, Cameron should cancel his visit.