Former KGB agent takes over the Evening Standard: it's a headline designed to get columnists at the Daily Mail trembling over their email queues. Unfortunately, Alexander Lebedev is both a shrewder operator and a more impressive character than the stereotype that the British press never tires of trotting out.The KGB, when Lebedev was serving in it in 1992 in London, comprised both the grunts and thugs whom we remember and the highly educated spies and analysts whom we conveniently don't. Operatives like Lebedev were the first to see that the Soviet system was crashing around their ears and were consequently the first to privatise their skills in Russia's fledging free market. When the elite left the service, they were not easily replaced. Lebedev became a banker. Others became bodyguards of the oligarchs. In both cases, the oligarchs became better protected and advised than their counterparts in the Russian state. It took a nationalist like Vladimir Putin to restore that balance. Some argue he still has not succeeded.But the idea that a Russian with a KGB background who takes over a newspaper in London could still constitute some inherent threat lingers in our minds. In Lebedev's case it could not be further from the truth.In his politics, Lebedev is a centrist. Like his friend and partner Mikhail Gorbachev, he has had a mixed relationship with Putin, but has been careful not to stick his head too high above the political parapet. Apart from owning a bank and (he claims) Russia's biggest producer of potatoes, Lebedev owns a Russian newspaper, the bi-weekly Novaya Gazeta. His first stab at newspaper ownership should encourage free thinkers in Britain. This is a liberal newspaper which continues to report on uncomfortable subjects such as corruption in the FSB, the successor to the KGB, and on Russia's ongoing conflict in the North Caucasus. When the paper's most famous reporter, Anna Politkovskaya, was shot dead outside her flat in Moscow, Lebedev offered $1m for information leading to the arrest of her killer – in the full knowlege that the people who ordered her killing would never be delivered to justice.But the bottom line for a pragmatist like Lebedev is survival. When another of his newspapers got a little too personal about Putin (the Moscow Korrespondent claimed Putin had an affair with an Olympic gymnast) he had no qualms about shutting it down. So its independence operates within certain limits.Lebedev keeps Novaya Gazeta at arm's length and whenever he has a statement to make, he uses his own website, not Novaya's columns. The idea that Lebedev is going to turn the Evening Standard into a voice of disaffected Russian dissidents in London is silly. Strip all the rest away and Lebedev's chief sin appears to be that he likes London. Like many Russians.