Our four-week sprint around Europe came to a close last week with a short stop in Poland. There we found lalka in pursuit of Andrzej Stasiuk's "ode to the wild east", On the Road to Babadag, cloud22 on cloud nine with Wisława Szymborska's "playful, witty, sublime" poems and paulvsmith hailing Jan Potocki's "sinister, gothic, compelling, epically scary" The Manuscript Found in Saragossa Way. Thanks for all these recommendations.Back in the discussion, Bruno Schulz and Olga Tokarczuk met with nods of approval, but the discussion also centred around where the World literature tour should head next, with CSinTR's suggestion of China winning general approval.But since this week is the 50th anniversary of Gagarin's space flight and the London book fair is being invaded by a new generation of Russian writers, I've decided to stage a coup.The fair's Russia Market Focus is a marketing operation, featuring the authors the authorities want - for whatever reason - to promote. But have they made the right choices? Who have they left behind? And what about the questions we've already started to explore elsewhere. Is Russian literature being carried into the 21st century by an exciting new generation uninhibited by a Soviet past, as Russian Booker laureate Olga Slavnikova claims in her introduction to an anthology of Debut prize-winning writers? Or is our commenter @Minsredmash right in responding that "The 'New Russia' has failed to produce anything remotely resembling those giants of the past." Were we right in asserting that many of Russia's best-known writers live in exile? Not according to @sarka, who wrote "Nonsense. Not only have there been some excellent (and only in some cases exiled) Russian writers between Gorky and the end of communism, but Pelevin and Sorokin are both extremely good contemporary Russian writers, much better in my view than many of the lionised contemporary novelists of the West . . . And some Russians do pretty cool more pop stuff as well, such as Lukyanenko's Day Watch and Night Watch stuff."So, it's over to you.