President Barack Obama has had precious little to show for his big foreign policy idea of constructive engagement. Attempts to get Israeli and Palestinian negotiators round the table are deadlocked. Iran has rejected an imaginative offer to enrich uranium outside its borders, and is headed for another round of UN sanctions. Mr Obama opted to go in the opposite direction by committing more troops in Afghanistan. After all the soaring hopes and high-flying rhetoric of his speeches, it looks very much like business as usual. The only bright spot on the horizon is America's transformed relations with Russia.Behind the scenes, officials in Geneva are beavering away at producing a replacement for the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (Start 1) which expired on 5 December. And yesterday we learned that they have begun similar talks about curbing cyber warfare and strengthening internet security. It remains to be seen whether Russia will support another set of UN sanctions against Iran or simply let China take the lead in watering them down. Russia has traditionally treated Iran as a reliable neighbour, although there is private anger in Moscow at Iran's rejection of the offer to enrich its uranium, a process that would have taken place in Russia. But all in all, US negotiators are getting more from talking to their Russian counterparts than they have in the days of George Bush. The reset button appears to be working.The same, alas, cannot be said for Russia's relationship with Europe, which suffers, as one diplomat put it, from "reset envy". The west gave a cool response to a recent Russian proposal for a new Euro-Atlantic security pact, which would restrict the use of force by signatories and create a new mechanism for the resolution of conflicts. Britain's response was to say that existing structures such as the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) work well enough, although they could be improved.Two fundamentally opposing views lie behind the exchange: Russia sees Nato as a military organisation whose eastward expansion was stopped dead in its tracks by Russia's military response in South Ossetia last year. Russia now seeks a legally binding guarantee that Nato will never admit either Georgia or Ukraine into its alliance. Why legally binding? Because it says it has been lied to too often by western leaders in the past. Although it is accepted informally that Nato membership is not on the table for either country, western diplomats refuse to put that down in words, because to do so would be to acknowledge Russia's veto over the sovereign decisions of independent countries. The result is that while modest steps can be made in meetings of the Russia-Nato council (such as agreements over the modernisation of Russian helicopters), Moscow's red lines – plans to expand Nato, the fate of the regime to control conventional armaments in Europe, and Nato's military infrastructure coming close to Russia's borders – remain as red and as active as ever.Now, as we all know, there is no such thing as a frozen conflict that remains frozen. South Ossetia proved that in abundance. So Russia's strained post-cold-war relations with Nato and an enlarged Europe remain vulnerable to another regional crisis breaking out – Nagorno‑Karabakh is one, Trans-Dniester another. Faced with this, it is difficult to maintain that there is no need to change the organisations that govern security in Europe. First, because there are still disputed borders in Europe and they have to be dealt with. Second, because one third of the population of Europe lies outside Nato's area. And third, because the status quo can degenerate quickly. So although there should be no Russian veto over what alliance Ukraine seeks to join, neither can Nato expand, as it has in the past, in a manner that ignores Russia's security needs. Europe indeed needs a new security architecture if it is to put the cold war behind it.