 8.39am BST For updates on the G8 summit please follow Politics Live.Middle East Live is now primarily a forum for readers to share links and offer commentary on developments in the Middle East. Please post your comments below.Here's a roundup of the latest news:• President Bashar al-Assad has dismissed as "ludicrous" western claims that his forces used chemical weapons against rebel-held areas. In an interview with the German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung he said the claims were being used as a pretext for military intervention: It is counterintuitive to use chemical weapons to create a death toll that you could potentially reach by using conventional weapons. These allegations are ludicrous ... All the claims relating to the use of chemical weapons is an extension of the continuous American and western fabrication of the actual situation in Syria. Its sole aim is to justify their policies to their public opinion and use the claim as a pretext for more military intervention and bloodshed in Syria.Assad also warned of increased terrorism in Europe if the west supplied arms to Syrian rebels.• Prospects of agreement between Moscow and Washington on how to end the war in Syria looked as remote as ever on Monday after a chilly bilateral meeting between Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin ended with a stiff exchange of diplomatic pleasantries. President Obama said the talks, on the fringes of the G8 summit in Northern Ireland, had been very useful, but both sides acknowledged disagreements over whether Assad should step down and if rebel groups should receive arms from the west.• David Cameron pressed fellow G8 leaders to forge an agreement around five principles for a Syria peace conference due to take place next month in Geneva. The principles risk isolating Russia as they include backing a transition government in Syria that would hold executive powers over all institutions, including the army.• Israel's president, Shimon Peres, has thrown his weight behind US plans to arm Syrian rebels, shrugging off fears the weapons could be turned on Israel and exacerbate the conflict. In an interview with Reuters, he said: "They didn't have a choice ... Unfortunately it is becoming more of a confrontation between two superpowers and (there is) a growing intervention of outside forces ... It is a tragedy."• Obama has announced an extra $300m in aid to help tackle the humanitarian crisis sparked by the conflict in Syria. The US urged countries neighbouring Syria to keep their borders open to Syrian refugees. • President Mohamed Morsi has appointed a member of the hardline Islamist group Gamaa Islamiya to the governorship of Luxor – a tourist city in which militants associated with the group killed 58 tourists in 1997. The symbolism of the appointment has enraged Egypt's sidelined non-Islamist opposition, who see it as further evidence that Morsi is unconcerned about the country's increasing polarisation.• Iran's president-elect, Hassan Rouhani, has promised to reduce tensions with the west, show more transparency on its nuclear front and bring moderation back to the forefront of Iranian politics. In his first press conference in Tehran, Rouhani presented himself as a moderate politician willing to "enhance mutual trust" between Tehran and the international community, including Britain and the US, and as the saviour of the Iranian economy by working to lift sanctions.• Turkey’s leaders are prepared to use the armed forces against protesters if they consider it necessary, the deputy prime minister has warned. With protesters and police continuing to skirmish in Istanbul and the capital, Ankara, the warning from Bülent Arınç was a significant rhetorical escalation in the crackdown on anti-government demonstrations, the Washington Post reports.Updated at 9.57am BST