If you're wondering about the viability of ballet as a living art form, go and see the Mariinsky Ballet dance the work of William Forsythe. This programme launches Focus on Forsythe, the Sadler's Wells retrospective of the choreographer's work which continues with performances of Impressing the Czar by the Royal Ballet of Flanders in November and culminates in April with three weeks of staged works and installations.Forsythe's work pushes classical dance to new boundaries and meshes perfectly with the Mariinsky Ballet's need to redefine itself in a post-Soviet world. Despite decades of poor leadership - artistic director Oleg Vinogradov was arrested for corruption in 1995, and conditions under Valery Gergiev, general director since 1996, have been notoriously thankless - the famous Mariinsky schooling somehow remains intact. Forsythe is a New Yorker and a high priest of the European avant garde but the roots of his work lead back, via Balanchine, to St Petersburg. There's a continuum, and watching the Mariinsky dancers perform his ballets, you see uncanny flashes of family likeness. In Steptext (1985), an acid-sharp distillation of the performance experience, three male dancers propel Ekaterina Kondaurova through fractured passages of Bach. The men patrol the stage like enforcers, communicating moves and angles to each other through a kind of manual tic-tac before engaging Kondaurova in a series of brutally intense duets. With their weird torsions and beyond-vertical arabesques, these seem almost sacrificial, but they represent extremes for which the ballerina clearly hungers.We meet Kondaurova again at the evening's end, prowling the stage like a bored lioness as Thom Willems' score for In The Middle, Somewhat Elevated crashes about her. Kondaurova shares the female lead with Irina Golub, a silky young principal who brings a considerable erotic charge to her pas de deux with Mikhail Lobukhin, despite the latter's psychopathic-looking hair-do - what is it, exactly, with Russians and peroxide? Middle is a tough ballet but the Mariinsky dancers rip through it with nonchalance. The women in particular, their tights worn so low over their dragonfly-green leotards as to barely skim their pubic bones, are unrecognisable as their more classical selves. One of the most distinctive is corps-de-ballet dancer Anastasia Petushkova. Long-legged and soft-backed in the classic Mariinsky mould, Petushkova mooches through the shadows with a secretive half-smile before calmly unfolding the most audacious extensions and turns.These pieces bracket Approximate Sonata, a subdued eight-hander of which only Anton Pimonov and the rangy Petrushkova get the full measure, and Vertiginous Thrill of Exactitude, a slice of high-velocity classicism set to Schubert. This is what the Mariinsky dancers do better than anyone, and taking the piece at breakneck speed, they carve it to ribbons.