Russia was coming to terms last night with its most deadly fire since Soviet times after 109 people died and more than 130 were injured in a blaze at a packed provincial nightclub.Investigators ruled out terrorism as the cause of Friday's fire, but president Dmitry Medvedev said the club owners would face severe punishment and ordered a national day of mourning tomorrow with flags at half-mast. He condemned the managers, who had ignored repeated demands from authorities to change the club's interior to comply with fire safety standards, saying "they have neither brains, nor conscience". Emergency situations minister Sergei Shoigu told Medvedev the owners had been fined twice in the past for breaking fire safety regulations.Vladimir Putin ordered a government commission to investigate the causes of the tragedy, saying: "It is necessary to launch a minute investigation, punish the culprits and discover the causes of this monstrous disaster."The fire broke out at 11.15pm at the Lame Horse nightclub in Perm, in the Urals region some 720 miles east of Moscow. Survivors said an indoor fireworks display went terribly wrong – setting light to the club's rustic wooden ceiling and igniting an inferno."The pyrotechnic show caused it," Andrei, a survivor, told the radio station Echo of Moscow. "There was a cascade of sparks from the floor, one-and-a-half metres high. It looks as if a spark reached the ceiling. The whole ceiling is decorated with twigs."The ceiling burst into flames. The wiring was up there. The electricity went off instantly, smoke poured out, the lights went out and that was it. Then the crush [to escape] began."Almost 250 mostly young people had crowded into the club for its eighth anniversary party. Video on TV news channels showed guests watching a floor show seated around small wooden tables. As the fire broke out, many stayed put. A host then shouted in a casual tone: "Ladies and gentlemen, guests of the club, we are on fire. Please leave." Party-goers stood up – at first nonchalantly – then fled in panic."The fire took seconds to spread," witness Svetlana Kuvshinova told Associated Press. "It was like a dry haystack. There was only one way out. They nearly stampeded me."Another woman, who identified herself only as Olga, said: "There was only one exit, and people starting breaking down the doors to get out. Everything was in smoke. I couldn't see anything." Many died in the crush or were quickly suffocated by thick black smoke as they tried to reach the single exit.Relatives rushed to the scene as news of the disaster spread. "People were still trapped inside. Locals were running around without coats, calling out names and ringing and ringing," one witness reported in her blog.Investigators are trying to establish how a party could have turned into Russia's worst fire tragedy in its post-communist history. Local prosecutors arrested the club's co-owner, Anatoly Zak, and its executive director, Svetlana Yefremova, on suspicion that they had violated fire safety precautions. Officials were seeking four other suspects.Tatyana Golikova, Russia's health minister, said 90 of the 130 injured were in a severe condition, with 59 on artificial lungs. Aircraft took 19 of the seriously injured to Moscow, with others flown to St Petersburg.A Reuters photographer in Perm reported seeing groups of distraught relatives and loved ones of those feared dead as they trickled into a local morgue for recognition. Others – some weeping or smoking nervously – stared blankly at the lists of the dead.The tragedy is merely the latest to befall Russia, which has been plagued by accidents due to ageing Soviet-style infrastructure and rampant corruption. Russian fire officials are often accused of being readier to demand bribes than enforce safety rules.The incident is the second serious one to strike Russia on consecutive Fridays. Nine days ago 26 people were killed and 100 injured when their express train from Moscow to St Petersburg was derailed. Investigators claim the train was blown up and Chechen insurgents claimed responsibility.Russia's internet, however, has been awash with speculation that it was an accident rather than terrorism, caused by faulty rails or a mechanical malfunction. One report yesterday suggested that investigators are accepting that a technical error could be the cause.Despite that, the train derailment has stoked fears that Russia could face a nationwide bombing campaign. Yesterday, however, Russian officials played down any links between the train and nightclub disasters. "There are no factors or signs pointing to a possible detonation of an explosive device," interior minister Rashid Nurgaliyev said.Russia records up to 18,000 fire deaths a year, several times the per-capita rate in the United States and other western countries; worldwide, nightclub fires have killed thousands of people.Officials at the emergencies ministry called the fire the worst in the nation's post-Soviet history. The previous most deadly blaze killed 63 people at a nursing home in southern Russia in March 2007.