The most talked-about and highly anticipated exhibition of recent months, the Royal Academy's From Russia exhibition has finally arrived in London. Diplomatic row aside, the show has been dogged by controversy even up to its glamorous preview opening, with descendants of the Russian tsarist-era collectors seeking compensation for their lost art. All  £3bn of it.Politics has inevitably seeped into today's reviews. The Independent's Tom Lubbuck reminds us that Alexander Litvinenko was "irradiated more or less opposite the Royal Academy, which brings the issue into nice proximity". The blockbuster wasn't worth the diplomatic sacrifice, he writes, and sometimes there is a price to pay for art - and he's not talking about the £11 entry fee.Lubbock attacks the exhibition in two rounds: once surveying the curious and unfamiliar, and then taking the time to stop at the "impressive and transfixing" Matisses. After assessing that "there is a mixture of the terrible, the dull, the interesting, the good and the great", Lubbock refers to his own critique as the kind of "snotty, judgemental thing that critics are always saying". You cannot rank these paintings like "top dogs and prize marrows," he says: sometimes you come across a work and fall under its spell.The Guardian's art critic Adrian Searle is not so intoxicated. There's no doubt the show is a splendid collection of masterpieces from the Russian state museums at the time of the 1917 revolution, but "who wants one damn masterpiece after another?", he asks.Searle calls the show a "great, ghastly, revolutionary and hilarious" ride, while the fluid figures in Matisse's The Dance - billed as the star of the show, ubiquitous on posters around London and hailed as "the most beautiful modern painting in the world" by the Guardian's Jonathan Jones - reminds Searle of "cavorting prawns". No matter, the show "is worth braving the crowds", he reckons.Barely a sentence in and the Telegraph's Richard Dorment practically elbows readers to the front of the queue: "Book your ticket right now," he exhorts. Dorment wends his way around the show's "stupendous" paintings, before the quality of the works takes a momentary "nosedive" in the room dedicated to the cubo-futurists. Luckily, "something magical happens in the last room" of 20th-century pioneers, Kandinsky and Malevich, and Dorment's sense of wonder is restored.Meanwhile, The Times's Rachel Campbell-Johnston declares it a "pretty spectacular" exhibition worth fighting for, with its "rich mixture of treasures" bound to cause a bottleneck in the opening galleries. She identifies the Russian painters' fierce pride and their pioneering, avante-garde art. "The art of diplomacy does not have to be anodyne", she concludes.