Barack Obama ladled on the sugar before delivering the pill. He was lyrical on Russian contributions to the arts and sciences and its war-time suffering. Russia, he said, was a mighty river leaving its eternal mark on the global landscape.Then the medication was drip-fed into the message. Firstly, Russia and the US should co-operate to contain Iran and North Korea's nuclear programme because arms races in the Middle East and east Asia were in nobody's interests.That is more or less digestible in Moscow. The Russian government agrees wholeheartedly on that principle. They are alarmed. It is just the methods – and in particular the usefulness of sanctions – that are in dispute.The Russians agree too that al-Qaida and other jihadist movements are a significant common threat, as Obama insisted this morning in his New Economic School speech. That is why Moscow has agreed to allow the US to use Russian routes to supply its forces in Afghanistan.The bitterest pill came later and was aimed at Russia's sorest spot: its "near abroad". Moscow hates to be lectured to about countries of the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe, where Russia has centuries of history and lots of unfinished business. It sees the prospect of Nato enlargement into Ukraine and Georgia as a hostile act of encirclement.Russians bristle at Obama's suggestion that the idea of "spheres of influence" is a 19th-century oddity. "That's easy for you to say," is the common Russian response to such suggestions. The US is not surrounded by a foreign alliance. It has not in living memory had the experience of being brutally invaded. And Washington is, after all, in a state of constant friction with Cuba, the one persistently hostile country in its hemisphere.Obama's claim that "in 2009, a great power does not show strength by dominating or demonising other countries. The days when empires could treat sovereign states as pieces on a chess board are over" will have drawn mirthless laughter in Moscow. That is precisely how many Russians see the US behaving around the world, particularly in the Middle East. If national sovereignty is paramount in Georgia, they routinely ask, why not in Serbia and Kosovo?The speech was not televised on the major Russian channels and the applause inside the lecture hall was polite. Russia is not vulnerable to Obamania. There are hard-nosed deals to be done over nuclear weapons, Afghanistan and possibly Iran. But the visceral attachment to Russia's "near abroad" cannot be severed by a new face and some sweet rhetoric.