Ahead of last month's presidential election in Russia there was widespread suspicion that the poll was fixed in advance. Several days before the vote, insiders were even able to give accurate figures for just how big a share of the vote Dmitry Medvedev would win.Privately, even the Kremlin's most ardent supporters conceded that the presidential election - like December's parliamentary elections in Russia - would see widespread use of "administrative resources", or put more simply, fraud. Now there appears to be proof.On Monday, the physicist and computer expert Sergei Shpilkin posted his analysis of the official results taken from the website of Russia's central elections committee. As reported by the Moscow Times, Shpilkin found some strange anamolies. A disproportionate number of polling stations returned round numbers - numbers ending in a zero or a five - for both voter turnout and Medvedev's percentage share.In a normal election, the distribution of voting is shaped like a bell curve, with the median and most popular value at the top. In Russia's election the distribution was normal until the figures reached 60%. After that, however, the curve resembled - as the Moscow Times put it - "shark's teeth" - with spikes on multiples of five.In other words, local election officials had been told in advance what percentages to "deliver" for Medvedev, and for how many people needed to "vote". In some places this blatant ballot-rigging appears to have backfired: at a polling station in the Dagestani town of Kizilyurt, for example, 766 people "voted", but not one of them voted for Medvedev.Instead, 95% of residents were said to have voted for Andrey Bogdanov - a pro-Kremlin independent who polled a miserable 1.3% of the vote nationally, compared with 70.3% for Medvedev, Vladimir Putin's handpicked successor. Apparently, gormless local election workers stuffed the wrong ballot papers into the box.All of this confirms that fraudulent elections have now become an established part of Russian political life - in the words of the Soviet dissident Sergei Kovalev, who wrote an open letter to Vladimir Putin just before the March 2 poll, "a tasteless farce played out by untalented directors on the entire boundless Russian stage".Putin, meanwhile, who steps down as president on May 7, has done his best to cover up such shenanigans. In December's parliamentary elections, 99% of Chechens voted for Putin's United Russia party, with turnout in Chechnya also put at an astonishing 99%. Asked by a journalist from Le Figaro about these curious results, Putin described them as "perfectly objective".According to Shpilkin, an election analyst at the Institute for Applied Economics, only 56% of Russians actually voted last month - compared to the official Kremlin figure of 69.7%. Additionally, 14.8m out of the 52.5m votes cast for Medvedev were bogus, meaning that Medvedev's real support from Russia's 100-million strong electorate is around one-third - not the massive mandate the Kremlin likes to claim.Given that, who can blame Medvedev for feeling slightly anxious when he takes over next month as Russia's third post-Soviet leader. It seems that the real power will continue to reside with Vladimir Putin, who becomes prime minister, swapping the Kremlin for Moscow's White House, and who earlier this week took over as chairman of United Russia, the dominant party.Medvedev's election victory was clearly much smaller than claimed - despite his endorsement by Putin, and despite relentless and favourable coverage from Kremlin-controlled television. Given that he was going to win anyway, one wonders why the Kremlin went to so much trouble to manicure his victory.