News broke yesterday that US President Barack Obama sent Russian President Dimitry Medvedev a letter suggesting that the US would forego construction of a missile defence system in Poland in exchange for Russian agreement not to support Iran's nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. As US secretary of defence Robert Gates indicated last week in Krakow: "If there were no Iranian missile programme, there would be no need for the missile sites."Spencer Ackerman, among others, has suggested that this represents a quid pro quo on Iran and missile defence. Quid pro quo, however, means "something for something", and to treat this deal as a quid pro quo implies that the US is giving up something of value in return for Russian action.On the contrary, the Obama administration does not particularly value missile defence, and Russia cannot deliver an end to Iran's nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. What this offer really represents is an effort to reset relations between the US and Russia, by placing the two countries on a more or less equal playing field.It seems unlikely that the Obama administration will go through with construction of the eastern European missile defence shield, even if Russia fails to cut Iran off. Obama's lack of enthusiasm on missile defence was apparent during the campaign, which led to President George Bush's efforts to "lock in" missile defence by concluding agreements with both Poland and the Czech Republic.Were Obama serious about exchanging missile defence for Russia's assistance to Iran, he wouldn't have been hinting at the elimination of the programme for the last several months. Rather, he'd be trying to convince the Russians that he actually valued missile defence. As it is, Medvedev and Prime Minister Vladimir Putin should know that they'll get American concessions on missile defence without offering any of their own on Iran.The notion that Russia can prevent Iran from building nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles is equally problematic. Iran can achieve nuclear capability and build long-range ballistic missiles with or without Russia's assistance. Strong commercial relations between Russia and Iran, as well as Russian technical assistance for Iran's civilian nuclear program, can certainly accelerate the progress of Iran's weapons programme, but they are not preconditions for its existence. The best Russia can offer, therefore, is a delay in Iran's nuclear weapon and ballistic missile programmes, not their elimination.Everyone should know these things, on both the Russian and the American sides. This letter is less about missile defence than an effort to "reboot" the relationship between the US and Russia. Through the letter, Obama is conveying a degree of respect for Russia that often appeared missing during the Bush years.Bush's treatment of Russia on this issue was premised on the notion that the US had the right to construct a missile defence system, but Russia did not have the right to conduct commercial relations with Iran that might facilitate the latter's efforts to build nuclear weapons. In other words, the US was a legitimate actor on the international stage, while Russia was a bad actor that required discipline.The act of offering a quid pro quo, on the other hand, implies that Russia and the US are on equal footing, if not necessarily equal. This is true whether or not the offer actually involves sacrifice of dearly held American foreign policy goals. The letter from Obama to Medvedev doesn't propose a quid pro quo, but it does represent an innovative effort to improve US-Russian relations. Dumping missile defence is a win-win for the US and Russia, and Obama is trying to use this victory as a platform for improving relations across the board.Although serious problems remain between Russia and the US, (not least Russia's authoritarian turn and its relations with the near abroad) this effort does imply that Obama will approach Russia policy with a different attitude than either the Bush or Clinton administrations.