Vladimir Putin said yesterday that Russia was not interested in a return to the cold war. We are all glad to hear it, but it was the Russian president himself who let this particular hare out of the trap. A year ago, at a security conference in Munich, he accused the US of trying to dominate the world "with no restraint - a hyper-inflated use of force". Two months later, at a Victory Day parade in Moscow, Mr Putin said the world faced a threat to peace similar to that posed by the Third Reich. If Mr Putin is now saying that Russia will work "towards the construction of a positive dialogue" with whomever becomes the next US president, that is a change in tone we should welcome.But nothing is that simple. In his last annual press conference before leaving the Kremlin, Mr Putin restated his opposition to the Pentagon's plans to install missile-defence systems in central Europe. He said Russia would be forced to re-target its missiles on Poland and the Czech Republic, where the missile battery and radar station would be based, if the project went ahead. Russia's deputy foreign minister, Sergei Kislyak, delivered the same message when he went to Warsaw last month. Yesterday Mr Putin added the rider that Russia would only re-target its warheads in "extreme necessity".There are two main reasons why the west should not be led down the garden path by those who argue that the KGB is back in control, that Russia has returned to the mindset of the Soviet Union and that we do indeed face a new cold war. First, it is not true. Vladimir Putin's Russia is nothing like Yuri Andropov's Soviet Union. Russia is capitalist. Its armed forces have a fraction of the global reach and power of its Soviet predecessor's. Its military-industrial complex is a pale shadow of America's. Russia does not have a competing ideology; in fact it has little ideology at all. If any country competes for natural resources in Africa or Latin America, it is China, not Russia.Second, Russia is not the same place internally. None of this is to deny the murder of journalists and political opponents, rigged elections or the existence of political prisoners. In today's authoritarian Russia there are all three. Yet, qualitatively and quantitatively, it is a different place. The Kremlin does not have the control it once had over the minds of millions of its citizens. As Mr Putin says, Russia is primarily interested in enriching itself and protecting its interests. It may have difficulty defining those interests, let alone achieving them. Russian diplomacy often feels like a contradiction in terms. It may threaten to cut off gas supplies and bully its neighbours with trade boycotts. But Russia is not a natural enemy, unless the west reacts in a way which makes it one again.