Always remember that Vladimir Putin could have reacted differently. He could have acknowledged that, after 13 years in power, his brand is tarnished and Russia is changing. It now has a middle class that ridicules the division between a Kremlin-licensed opposition and an unlicensed one that craves fair elections, independent courts and public accountability – that craves, in short, civil society.Instead, Mr Putin's reflex reaction to such change (with his uneasy confection of Christian Orthodox and conservative, xenophobic nationalism, Mr Putin is as much a pre-Soviet figure as a Soviet hangover) is to go after the very people who remind him how unpopular he is. A notorious law passed last year required Russian NGOs that receive foreign funding and are engaged in "political activity" to register as "foreign agents" – words in the Russian language that are tantamount to "spies".For eight months, little happened. The levers of the security state are sometimes so rusty that they require several tugs to shift. The president had to go in person on Valentine's Day to the federal security service (FSB), to remind his former comrades that the "law had to be complied with".For the past two weeks at least 30 raids have been launched on Russian and international NGOs alike in Moscow, and many more in the provinces. Distinguished names appear on the FSB hitlist – the Memorial human rights group, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung. Lev Ponomarev, the head of For Human Rights, which itself was targeted, said this was the start of the planned destruction of the NGO sector in Russia.The raiding party typically consists of three people from the prosecutor's office, one from the tax office and, often, a camera crew from the pro-Kremlin NTV station. They demand to see registration documents, tax submissions and computer hard drives. The whole televised charade seeks to portray Russia's political opposition as foreign-sponsored. But, as the majority of Russian NGOs have refused to register themselves as "foreign agents", these raids may just be the start of a campaign to put them out of business.Germany, whose manufacturers have heavily invested in Russia, is greatly irked. It rightly interprets Mr Putin's action as revenge for the embarrassment that the election-monitoring body Golos caused him in the Duma elections in 2011. Russian humiliations in Cyprus at German hands have not helped. Berlin has formally expressed its "concern". But it should do more. With the advent of shale gas, and cheaper natural gas, Russian gas has lost its status as a monopoly supplier. Now, Gazprom needs the west for its profits. Mr Putin should be told that his vendettas will prove costly.