When we talk of great Scottish coasts we're usually thinking about the west: the hundreds of islands and the intricately-jagged mainland shores where each new landfall has its own unique beauty. Nearly 70% of Britain's coastline is Scottish, so it's little wonder there's such variety – from the wildernesses of Knoydart and Jura to the volatile grandeur of St Kilda; from the picture-perfect settlements of Plockton or Applecross to the empty paradises all the way from Assynt to Ardnamurchan.I prefer the west coast, but I'm from the east, the island-less north-east – that heavy chin that juts out into the North Sea towards Norway – but it's hard not to love, eventually, the place that formed you. The temperament in the east is very different from the southern cities of the Central Belt, or the Gaelic-inflected west. You are living by the sea – mostly off the sea – with your back to the Highlands, surrounded by an intense folk culture of myth, song and superstition and the highest density of standing stones in Britain. By virtue of the brutal weather, long winters and endless damp, the north-east people are canted slightly, against the wind and rain, perhaps against the world, and might seem thrawn or taciturn to outsiders. I think, though, that it's being caught forever between great mountains and a huge sea: their eyes have learned to take in distance.As a boy, I was taken round this great jaw of Scotland, from the ruins of Dunnottar Castle to the wind-breaks of Hopeman Beach: wondrous places like Cruden Bay, the hundred-foot sea cauldron of the Bullers of Buchan, and up round the corner to Macduff, Cullen and Lossiemouth. But the best was closest to home. Just north of Aberdeen, on the road that used to sport a homemade sign – Farmers! Do not trust to luck! Try instead our Turriff muck! – you could turn off for Balmedie, and the beach.The sands stretch 14 miles from the mouth of the Don at Aberdeen to the mouth of the Ythan at Newburgh and form one of the finest dune systems in Europe. Kept in place by nothing more than marram grass, these huge sand-mountains are a small Sahara: shifting and sighing and deeply, beautifully, alien – the perfect playground for a child. And below the dunes: the North Sea, softened here by a slow shelf and sand-bars.I was a lifeguard on this beach, for a season: watching the tides, hoping that no one would need to be saved. On the last day of the summer, or near enough, we saw a swimmer in a wetsuit go in north of our flags. We tried to track him, but the waves were high and we guessed he must have come back to shore. Then suddenly there was a black head bobbing up – far out, but right between our flags of duty – so I was obliged, as the strongest swimmer, to go in.As I got to 30 yards away he went down, for longer than felt comfortable, coming up again a little way off. I was against the tide, but pushed on till I got closer; saw him rise and fall again. Drowners come up twice, they say, then down for good. When I finally reached where I thought I'd seen him last, he came up snuffling – and smiling, almost: this 10ft, whiskery grey seal. I almost drowned, myself, laughing.It was not the seal that needed saving, but the place itself. Balmedie has attracted the attentions of that charmless bully, Donald Trump, who built a characteristically vulgar golf resort nearby – with the initial assistance of Alex Salmond. Scotland is a vulnerable paradise but it will survive this, as it has survived most things, and it still has the most sublime beaches I know: empty under a huge sky, dramatic, unspoilt and utterly ravishing.• Robin Robertson's fifth collection of poetry, Hill of Doors, is out now. To buy a copy for £7.99 with free UK p&p call 0330 333 6846 or go to guardianbookshop.co.uk. He reads at the Edinburgh book festival (edbookfest.co.uk) on Sunday