What's going for it?If you're seeking solace, comfort and a retreat from the agues of life in these troubled times, Dumfries is as good a place as any. What possible hardship could come to anyone who lived in Dumfries? The place is as soothing as its name sounds - Dum-freeeece - as soft and gentle as a gambolling spring lamb wrapped in Andrex. The centre is nice enough, with its share of pretty areas clinging to the jaunty river Nith. But what draws the locals is the countryside. Don't come expecting drama. Dumfriesshire is as gentle as the town, though it has its share of wild moors and endless forest to the north. What's so attractive is its quietness, the sheer emptiness. Most of us tend to pass it by en route to glitzier places such as Glasgow, or the ferry at Stranraer, leaving the glories of the Solway coast and Merrick mountain for you to clamber over, letting the prettiness wash over you like a balm. The case againstA little undemanding. Rumour has it the new out-of-town Tesco is gradually draining the centre of life. Well connected? Twenty minutes' drive from the A74(M) and thence the M6 up to Glasgow (two hours) and down to the rest of the world. Trains: hourly to Carlisle (40 minutes) and the west coast mainline; also up Nithsdale to Kilmarnock and Ayr (90 minutes). SchoolsOf those with HMIE inspection reports, "good" or "very good" are St Michael's, Lochside, Cargenbridge, St Ninian's; Lincluden is mostly "good" or "adequate", as is Loreburn, which has "very good" pastoral care. Secondaries: Dumfries Academy "good" or "very good", Maxwelltown Academy and St Joseph's College mostly "good". Hang out at...The Swan at Kingholm Quay, The Lyver or Gracefield Arts Centre. Where to buySouth and west. Select suburbans off Glencaple and Kingholm Roads. Great period property south of the centre around Pleasance Avenue; lovely rosy Victorian semis and villas around Edinburgh Road and Lovers Walk, and off Lockerbie Road. Great stone terraces south of Brooms Road. The centre has its moments, too, especially around Castle Street. Market valuesFive-bed detacheds, modern and period, and farmhouses, £250,000-£380,000. Smaller detacheds, £150,000-£250,000. Semis and bungalows, £110,000 up to £250,000 for Victorian semis. Terraces, £75,000-£175,000. Bargain of the weekListed Georgian end of terrace in the centre of town, needing modernisation, £95,000, with Buccleuch John Sale (01573 224244). Live in Dumfries? Join the debate at theguardian.com/money/property Valentina Bold"Dumfries has three major things going for it: community, countryside and culture. It's friendly, and set in some of Scotland's most beautiful landscapes. Try Rift Valley for jazz and Bruno's Italian restaurant, a Dumfries institution." Andy Doonan"The town itself is not so picturesque, but it's a gateway to miles of beautiful coastline." Jack Lennox"Visit Rabbie Burns' favourite pub, The Globe, and New Abbey, a picture-postcard village." Darren Connor"Dumfries has one of the best small cinemas in the UK, housed in a converted mill."