A Tory councillor who runs a small outfit fighting against Scottish independence seems to have found it hard to make the time to field questions about his organisation, Unity Scotland.Councillor Callum Campbell set up Unity Scotland, its slogan "For a better future. For a better Scotland", last year. It would be:A vehicle through which ordinary Scottish people can voice their support for a dynamic Scotland which can maximise its role within the United Kingdom.The only organisation yet to emerge in the intense debate on Scotland's future which asks for invites you to be a "Friend of Unity Scotland", it makes a bold pitch to potential supporters, offering four tiers of paid membership, ranging from Platinum for a minimum fee of £100, through blue at £50, white at £25 and red at £15. For £100 plus, Platinum friends get a free umbrella, two Unity Scotland car window stickers, a 10% discount on ticketed events, and a "preferential invitation to Unity Scotland events." For £15, Red members get two car window stickers and that preferential invitation.And in October, it claimed it was "fast becoming recognised as the cross-party vehicle" opposing independence. That claim appears to rest on its activity on Twitter: since October last year it has posted 347 tweets, and now follows 1,969 people, harvesting 1764 followers in return. Yet information about its promised range of "sponsored seminars and debates to social events and fund raising dinners throughout Scotland" has proven hard to come by. Since then, several pro-UK campaigns have been launched. One a modest operation run by another Tory councillor, David Meikle in Glasgow, called One Dynamic Nation which publishes regular newsletters; the latest is the biggest of all: the Better Together organisation officially endorsed by the big three UK parties, Labour, the Tories and the Liberal Democrats, and being launched on Monday.Run using serviced offices in Edinburgh's New Town as its business address, Unity Scotland has only one registered director: Callum Campbell, the Tory councillor for Dunblane and Bridge of Allan. He is better known for taking an active role fighting the Beauly to Denny overhead cable in Stirlingshire.There are no other office bearers, trustees, staff members or advisers listed on its website. Nor does there appear to be any evidence of research reports, social events, publications by Unity Scotland either available on its site or in the pipeline. There is no mention of Unity Scotland at all on Campbell's personal website, which features a lengthy biography and regular blogs.We made brief contact with Cllr Campbell late last Wednesday afternoon, after chasing up an unanswered email to Unity Scotland earlier that day. On a train to Stirling, he promised to call back that evening. No return call was received.Subsequent phone messages left via the serviced office in Edinburgh and the Tory group offices at Stirling council has gone unreplied to. Further emails on Thursday to both Unity Scotland addresses, his personal website email address and his council email, asking for more information about Unity Scotland's activities, on how many people had bought membership, its organisational structure, and links to other pro-union organisations, have not yet been answered. There are only two mentions of Unity Scotland on the widely-read Tory Hoose blog, Scotland's best known and most active Tory-supporting political website, both dating back to last winter. In the first blog, Tory Hoose reported: Our attention here at Tory Hoose has recently been drawn to increased Unionist mumblings in cyberspace. Over recent weeks a growing number of people have been following Unity Scotland, a movement which supports the belief that the future of Scotland and its people is best served as part of the United Kingdom.The blog continued to quote a Unity Scotland spokesperson: The campaign has picked up traction relatively quickly as word spreads of an organised movement which brings together all those people who want Scotland to stop short of full independence.In the next article in late November, Tory Hoose reported that Unity Scotland had amassed more than 1,000 followers on Twitter is little over five weeks. To "celebrate reaching that first milestone" it offered 1,000 free window stickers. A spokesman told Tory Hoose: Unity Scotland has gained traction quickly. We are fast becoming recognised as the cross-party vehicle for those who support Scotland's current status within the United Kingdom. We have attracted the attention of a variety of people ranging from grass-roots voters across the political spectrum, to MSPs, MEPs and the media.Reports of any overt contact with MSPs or MEPs are absent from the Unity Scotland website, registered from Campbell's home address in Bridge of Allan on 17 June 2011, some six weeks after Alex Salmond's landslide victory in that May's Holyrood elections.What is known is that One Dynamic Nation, which is run by his colleague Cllr Meikle in Glasgow and does have publicly named backers, has been meeting senior Tories, including the former Scottish leader David McLetchie, who is heavily involved in Better Together. Meikle is considering whether ODN might join Better Together.Asked what he knew about Unity Scotland, Meikle said: Not had any dealings with them. However we approached them but never heard anything. Callum is a Conservative councillor in Scotland. The group wasn't mentioned by David McLetchie during our discussion. Not sure if they have big supporters or have made any progress in terms of grassroots support.With the launch on Monday of Better Together, Campbell may believe the time is right for Unity Scotland to help build that dynamic grassroots movement needed to save the union. He may decide Unity Scotland has served its purpose, and leave the field.