The Broadcasting Commission for Scotland - which reported last week - was set up by Alex Salmond in one of his first acts after winning control of the Scottish parliament. Amid much talk of emergent nationhood, broadcasting was seen as a key battleground and expectations for last week's report were high. Yet in Scotland, while there has been broad support, there has been clear disappointment in some quarters - whilst in the London-based UK press the story was little covered and has already faded from view. The report was expected to cause fireworks, but its reception has been not so much big bang as dull phut. To understand why, one needs to look not so much at what the report did do as at what it didn't. The central recommendation was for the establishment of a Scottish digital channel (somewhat grandiosely described throughout as a "network") with a budget of between £50m and £75m a year. This is meant to be the primary vehicle for "public service competition" with the BBC.Many people - in Scotland at least - quite like this idea, which has also attracted broad political support. There are issues of course. Who pays for it? The report says it should be the UK government as part of a "new PSB settlement". Even if the channel got all the money it wants, it could never compete effectively in drama, comedy, entertainment, news and current affairs, documentary and so on; and could it ever achieve the reach and impact necessary to provide genuine plurality?Meanwhile, more pressing questions about the current broadcasting set-up in Scotland appear to have been ducked. The much discussed "Scottish Six" question is one of them. The demand for a Scottish-based national and international news programme on the BBC is a longstanding one. And as devolution has gathered pace with local administrations taking responsibility for more and more aspects of policy, arguments against it have become thinner and thinner. Since being criticised in its own impartiality review for its coverage of Scotland, the BBC has clearly smartened up its act. Yet the agenda issue remains a critical one. In TV terms, it is hard to imagine anything being more significant for a developing sense of nationhood than a major national and international news programme, with access to the BBC's unrivalled newsgathering network, being run from Scotland for Scotland. But the commission doesn't go there and the BBC is let off the hook. And ITV in Scotland? The national licensee - STV - has the highest satisfaction ratings and the lowest dissatisfaction ratings of any TV channel in Scotland. It also has reach and impact amongst audiences that more than matches the BBC's. And while this is primarily due to the popularity of a good few of ITV's network programmes with Scottish viewers, the reach and impact this confers on STV's news and information services would be virtually impossible to replicate - and certainly well beyond anything suggested in the broadcasting commission's report. Yet there is little detailed analysis of STV's position or of potential regulatory measures that might preserve the service at least up to and beyond digital switchover.Lastly, Salmond's earlier stated objective that responsibility for the regulation of broadcasting should be devolved to Scotland is replaced by a general call for the Scottish parliament to take a greater interest in broadcasting matters.There is plenty in the report about increasing UK broadcasters' investment in production north of the border, combined with a strong push to improve the performance and sustainability of Scotland's creative economy which will no doubt be widely welcomed. Although in many respects - with new BBC production quotas and Channel 4 targets - this process is already under way. Meanwhile the report overall is already in danger of being seen as a political fix and a missed opportunity. By avoiding the vexed issue of the "Scottish Six" - the bête noir of Scottish Labour politicians at Westminster who fear that they'll disappear from view in Scotland if it ever happened - sidelining ITV, glossing over regulatory devolution and choosing to focus instead on a big new digital channel idea (no matter how realistic), the commission has created a consensus across political lines. And then when Westminster declines to find the £75m needed to fund it Salmond will have yet more evidence of English perfidy.