This is the month in which the debate about Scotland's future has suddenly got harder edged – and also more real. Until the end of January it often felt as though the Scottish National party was being allowed to set the terms unchallenged – and would perhaps be able to do so right up to the autumn referendum – all in the confident expectation of a comfortable no vote on 18 September. Until now, the version of Scottish independence under discussion was invariably the one proposed in the Panglossian you-won't-feel-a-thing terms recently cultivated by the SNP – an independent Scotland seamlessly retaining the crown, the pound, Europe, the NHS and Nato. As depicted by Alex Salmond, this Scotland was in many respects not so very different from the devolved and distinct nation of today.But the pretend version cannot be maintained any longer. So in the past eight days everything has changed. David Cameron's soft-cop speech in favour of the union in London, followed by George Osborne's hard-cop address rejecting currency union in Edinburgh on Thursday have raised the stakes. They will also surely galvanise the debate for a long time, perhaps right through to September.These have been co-ordinated interventions, almost certainly long prepared. Between them they represent a twin challenge to the soft-edged version of independence that is Mr Salmond's pitch. On the one hand they promote a more positive existential case for the union than before. On the other they offer a wake-up call about some of the tough things that independence could really mean. Together they are a counter-attack on the SNP's smiley version of a cost-free separation. Given the importance of the issues for everyone in the United Kingdom, this new toughness is largely to be welcomed.There is no doubt, if only because the polls make it clear, that economic issues are pivotal in the Scottish debate. People are more likely to vote for independence if they think their job, their mortgage and their pension are all rock-solid safe. They are more likely to vote against independence if they fear these things are even a little at risk. Recent years have made people cautious. So Mr Osborne's speech was a crucial one – and it could not have been much clearer.The case against currency union is an impressive one. It reflects the mood and the reality of the times, where the stresses and strains of the eurozone offer a warning of the risks of a badly executed or politically opportunist union. It is true that two separating nations that wanted to make a currency union work might find ways to do so. But the SNP is not primarily interested in strengthening the union. So there is no inherent reason why the remaining UK should prioritise anyone's interests other than its own. Yes, Mr Osborne could have made the case against currency union more in sorrow than in anger than he did. But his case cannot be dismissed as bullying or bluster, as Mr Salmond, who always plays the man rather than the ball, claimed.Mr Osborne's case was made politically stronger by the fact it was tightly co-ordinated with Labour and the Liberal Democrats. It remains to be seen how the one in three Scots who say their minds are not yet made up will respond. The likelihood in the long term is probably that the undecideds will divide much as the decideds have done. Taken together with Mr Cameron's speech last week, Mr Osborne's helps give the pro-union parties more standing to make a reasoned case in the face of the SNP's predictable sneering and occasional evasions.Now they need to start spelling out their plans for strengthening the UK's social union and some new, perhaps federalist, thinking about UK governance. This will not be easy for a Tory party that remains so in thrall to Thatcherite ideas and parts of which are destructively focused on Ukip. But the pro-union counter-attack has been launched and all the parties have no alternative except to follow it through.