On the train up to Scotland, I ask Maddy (aged six) what makes a good story. Without hesitation she replies, "A spider who is a princess."Children have such a brutal logic of their own and God help the storyteller who cannot cope with it. I almost ring ahead to warn our host, Andy Hunter, who is meeting us next day in Kirkcaldy for a weekend of story-telling and cycling around the Fife countryside. After all, the chances of him coming up with a spider princess story are pretty remote. On the phone, he had said something about doing tales of local saints – no mention of aristocratic arachnids at all.As we speed north along the beautiful east coast rail route, passing beaches and islands and other evocative locations, I try to tease her away from this idea: sea monsters perhaps, or a holy man with magical powers on an island, or what about a princess in a tower?She eyes me pitilessly. "Is she a spider?"Our bike ride starts on the Saturday morning. Andy seems a genial soul, not at all fazed by Maddy's demands. "There's the one about Robert the Bruce and the spider ..."She nods dismissively. "I know that one."Having met our other companions – Canadian expatriates Allette and Mike – we set out for the coast. Maddy and I are on one of those adult-and-child tandems – a tagalong, but she is not pedalling much. When we reach Ravenscraig Castle, she jumps off and starts leaping around on the lawns and rocks. Andy quietly starts to tell us adults about the American naval commander John Paul Jones and how his attack on Kirkcaldy in 1778 was repelled, either by a divine wind or by his mistaking the village women's red shawls for the coats of soldiers. Maddy pays this no attention whatsoever.Andy gets on to the subject of local wizard Michael Scott who was said to have flown across the heavens on an invisible horse. (A brief pause in Maddy's jumping.) Later Scott became an ambassador to the Emperor Frederick II (Maddy resumes her game of hopscotch), and managed to lock the plague in a dungeon at Glenluce Castle (momentary flicker of interest).We leave Ravenscraig and take the coastal path down to the snug little harbour of Dysart, once home to the sixth-century holy man, Saint Serf. Andy tells of the legendary connection with the desert fathers and Coptic Christianity, but Maddy isn't listening. She's dancing from foot to foot: "I need a wee-wee – I'm desperate."After a stop in the local cafe we head up into the Fife countryside, taking back roads and lanes until we reach Loch Leven, a nature reserve. In the centre of the loch is a sanctuary where Saint Serf lived. Andy tells of how, as a schoolboy, Serf revived a dead robin killed by his classmates. Maddy objects. "That's not actually possible. Magic isn't real."For heaven's sake, I'm thinking, get a spider princess in the frame: don't worry that they aren't real either – she won't mind. We move on until we are opposite a second island. Here Andy calls Maddy over. "Can you see that castle on the island? That's where Mary Queen of Scots was held prisoner for more than a year – trapped like a fly in a spider's web."Maddy stops jittering and pays attention. Her ears are open.Andy explains how Mary escaped when her manservant managed to steal the keys. The pair of them locked the captors inside their own fortress and fled by rowing boat. As they did so, they were said to have thrown the keys into the lake where they were found three centuries later during a drought.After a further hour of cycling, we reach Kinross and our lodgings in the Salutation pub. Over dinner Andy tells stories of giants and magical snakes and red-eyed birds. Maddy is really listening hard now. She is having the traditional Scottish dinner of her choice – macaroni cheese and a can of Irn-Bru – and hearing stories. It is almost as if she has suddenly realised what is happening here: a storyteller who, unlike Daddy, does not say: "No stories – it's bedtime." This man seems to like telling stories too. In fact, she discovers, if you ask him for another, he will invariably oblige. Eventually I manage to drag her away and get her to sleep.Next day as we pedal south through the Cleish Hills, Andy tells me how he got started. "Hearing great story-tellers was very important. In 1985 I heard Willie McPhee at the Edinburgh folk festival, then there was Stanley Robertson and Duncan Williamson – both from the traveller community of Scotland. Listening to them I got the sound of the words, the cadences and rhythms."Is there a Scottish way of story-telling? "Maybe there is. It's quite conversational, like a fireside chat."The art has undergone something of a revival in recent years all over Britain, but in Scotland the upsurge in interest has been particularly strong, not least because of the Scottish Storytelling Centre in Edinburgh which runs training courses."What I want to do," says Andy, "is make the journey more alive and interesting by using stories about the places and things we see."The idea came to him after one particular experience. "I'd cycled through Orkney and noticed, on the Isle of Hoy, the grave of a woman called Betty Corrigall. A few years later I heard her tragic story told by David Campbell and the visit to her grave suddenly came alive. I realised then how much could be done with story-telling to add to the experience of a journey. It's important," he adds, "to slow down."He quotes Matthew Arnold: "And see all sights from pole to pole,And glance, and nod, and bustle by,And never once possess our soulBefore we die."On our bikes we reach the top of a long hill and pause to hear about a robber who was bested by a clever victim. Maddy likes this one a lot. Our lonely route through dark pine forest is imbued with the possibility of adventure. The bicycle has become a horse and our saddles are filled with gold. Behind me I can hear her whipping the horse up and I don't need to pedal any more: Maddy is powering us along, her legs whizzing around, energised by tales of highwaymen. We speed all the way to Dunfermline. Maddy muttering curses at robbers and encouragement to our sturdy horse.When we finally say goodbye and board our train south, she falls asleep in an instant and doesn't wake until after Newcastle. "Daddy," she says, "Can I have a story?"I groan inwardly. "About a spider princess?""No," her eyes light up. "A robber on a horse and a farmer with gold in his saddle, or maybe a giant with a heart in his left heel."Her mind, I deduce, has been broadened.• Andy Hunter's Storybikes (07762 000039) offers weekend tours around Scotland from £75pp per night, including dinner and breakfast; week tours from £590. The next Fife weekend is 12-13 June; the next one-week tour starts 26 September. Kevin and Maddy rode a Revolution Cross bike (£449.99) and Glider tandem trailer (£129.99) from Edinburgh Bicycle Co-operative (0845 257 0808); there are also branches in Aberdeen, Leeds, Manchester, Newcastle and Sheffield.More information on Scotland: visitscotland.com/perfect