If the current polling numbers hold steady, the Scottish public will reject the opportunity to make their country independent from the rest of the UK next autumn. It is perhaps a bit surprising then that the majority of Scots, 62% of them, deemed themselves "Scottish only" in the 2011 census. Only 18% of respondents called themselves "Scottish and British", which suggests that any sort of British national identity is close to fading north of the border. It's important to bear in mind that the census did not just include Scots. 83% of the 5.3 million people resident in Scotland in 2011 were born there while 8.7% were born in England. 8.4% described themselves as 'just British' and 2.3% said 'English'.Unfortunately, this is the first time that the census has collected data on national identity, so we can't see how Scottish residents viewed themselves in 2001 when Scottish Labour were still in power. However, we can take a more detailed look at the make-up of modern Scotland. The area that had the biggest proportion of residents identifying themselves as 'Scottish only' was West Dunbartonshire where 72% of people gave that answer. Only 6% of people identified as simply 'British' while 17.3% were 'Scottish and British'. Both North Lanarkshire and East Dunbartonshire had similar figures. Unsurprisingly, all three of these locations have a higher than average proportion of residents who were born in Scotland. More than nine out of ten people in all three were Scottish-born. While in Scotland's capital fewer than half of respondents identified themselves as 'Scottish only', the proportion identifying as 'British and Scottish' was pretty close to the national average at 18%. This would probably be down to a higher percentage of people born outside the UK being resident there and, accordingly, 11.4% give themselves an identity that is not Scottish or British. Scotland is more diverse than it has ever been, with 4% of the population now coming from an ethnic minority background, which is double the proportion given in the last census in 2001. What was perhaps the most remarkable shift though was the huge increase in Scotland's Polish population. 55,000 people born in Poland were living in Scotland at the time of the 2011 census, more than twice the number born in Ireland. This means that Poland is now the place of birth for 15% of Scottish residents born outside of the UK.Do you read the numbers differently? Take a look and let us know what you think below.• Download the full spreadsheet• Contact us at data@theguardian.com• Follow us on Twitter• Like us on Facebook