Scottish shoppers will have to pay at least 5p to take their purchases home in single-use shopping bags from October.The Scottish government's decision to impose a mandatory charge for disposable carriers comes after similar measures were introduced in Wales in 2011 and in Northern Ireland in April this year. It will leave England as the only UK nation without a mandatory charge on carrier bags.Scotland has opted for a minimum charge that will apply to all retailers handing out single-use bags, no matter what material they are made of. Some types of bag, such as those for prescriptions or fresh fruit, will be exempt.Retailers must hand the proceeds from the charge to charity. Larger retailers will have to report to the government how many bags they have handed out and how much they have donated to charity. Smaller retailers will not have to report centrally, but will be expected to make a public statement on bag use, such as a sign in the store.Scotland's environment secretary, Richard Lochhead, said: "Discarded carrier bags highlight our throwaway society. We use more carrier bags per head in Scotland than any other part of the UK, and this is unsustainable. By reducing the amount being carelessly discarded, we can cut litter and its impact on our environment and economy."Andrew Pendleton, head of campaigns at environmental group Friends of the Earth, pointed to the successful introduction of charges in other countries, and urged a similar move in England: "England is long overdue a plastic bag tax to tackle the appalling waste caused by unwanted bags. We're lagging behind Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and many US states and European countries."The Republic of Ireland and several other countries have also taken action against plastic bags which, while only representing a tiny amount of the rubbish thrown away each year, are viewed as emblematic of human impact on the environment. Bags have been found in the stomachs of animals and birds even far out to sea and are a highly visible and long-lasting sign of pollution when blown into trees and hedgerows.The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), which would oversee any such charge in England, said it was "determined to tackle the blight caused by plastic bags". A spokeswoman said Defra would consider the results of the Welsh scheme and "look with interest at the Scottish government's proposals" to help inform its decision but gave no indication when any regulations might be introduced.Last year, the government-backed Waste Resources Action Programme (Wrap) revealed a 22% drop in the number of single-use plastic bags in Wales in 2011 compared with the year before, while England used 7.5% more.The UK used 8bn bags in 2011, up 5.4% on the year before but a third down on 2006, when retailers signed a voluntary agreement to cut bag use by 50%.Retailers said the recent rise in the number of bags being used reflected in a change in shopping habits as cash-strapped Brits opt for several small shops a week rather than one big trip.Industry trade association the Scottish Retail Consortium said that the country's retailers had already taken a lead in reducing waste and its impact on the environment by cutting carrier bag use by over 40% between 2006 and 2012. "The Scottish government has decided that it wants further and faster reductions and the only way it can achieve this is through legislation. However, it is our view that if we focus solely on plastic bags, we are in danger of being distracted from much larger and more important issues around waste," said director Fiona Moriarty.