With just over a week to go until Scotland votes on its independence, we’ve been hearing from our readers how the narrowing polls are affecting the mood around the country.“Its wonderful to be in Scotland at the moment,” says Dell Henrickson. “I have had chats in the pub, in the chip shop and on the street. All of it animated but good-natured. My moment of the campaign was talking to a young lassie who has never voted before and queued for 40 minutes just to get into the building to register.”“I will be voting no next week, my mind having been made up some time ago,” says kirkrussell, “[but] the momentum with the Yes campaign is readily evident.”Below are accounts from readers from across Scotland describing the atmosphere in their area. Wherever you are in the country, we’d love to hear from you too. What’s the mood where you are? Let us know via GuardianWitness, or in the comments thread below.In my neighbourhood there is a lot of lively if civilised debate about the referendum, balancing about 50/50 . The Yes’ stickers are certainly bigger and bolder, and the No fraternity tend not to advertise. I myself, leaned No, yearned Yes, convinced myself No, and now am surreptitiously creeping Yes. Why? Partly because I never agreed with the current UK government policies on practically anything, so voting no would be a vote for that government and that stuck in my throat, and partly because it would be great for Scotland to stand on its own two feet and develop a national confidence that in some ways it has lacked. There is now almost a certain hysteria propelling the yes vote onwards but if that ‘power’ can be carried forward into achievements if Scotland gains independence then I suspect I know which way I’ll vote. Pindle06I was working at the Yes stall at Perth College Freshers’ Fair for the whole three days it was on, and I found that people really wanted to discuss things, and were very interested overall.We got a great response from my fellow college students, and it seemed like there were a lot of Yes-supporters/Yes-leaners amongst them. We even ran out of quite a few things, despite making extra trips to the local office to pick up more.In a wider context, more and more people in the area seem to be going towards a Yes vote, and posters and window stickers seem to be all over the place. I’ve a lot of friends who are planning to vote Yes - quite a few of whom were undecided until recently; and even one that was, only a couple of months ago, a staunch No.Thankfully, there’ve been no altercations or incidents that I’m aware of, and the debate’s been good-natured everywhere I’ve been - even had some good chat with the people at the No stall while we were all packing up. This, more than all the news stories, is what I think the debate is really like: one of the most peaceful independence movements the world has ever seen. I couldn’t be more glad I’m a part of it.Eóghan MacmillanThere is a sense of disbelief among my friends and family that the referendum appears to be neck and neck. People in the Borders have a strong sense of identity and are proud to be Scottish. But that sits easily beside a calm faith in the Union and the desire to remain part of the UK.ID208248Oban is teeming - Yes stickers, badges and banners all over the place, and the local Yes shop canvas found that around 60% of people were definitely voting for independence. There is a huge banner on the isle of Kerrera that can be seen from distance. I’ve come back through to Stirling for University and the atmosphere is slightly different. The Yes squad are very vocal, but students are incredibly split.  Jonzo67This is a rural market town in south west Scotland and there is the strangest thing going on; no one is talking about the referendum. If it is mentioned people clam up and make general non-committal remark. There is a fear here that showing allegiance either way will invite opposition, ridicule, and even effect your position, or business in the town. Whichever way the vote goes there will be collective sigh of relief on September 19th.IsabellaMcCHundreds of people milled around the statue of Donald Dewar in Buchanan Street on Saturday afternoon. The smiles said it all; real optimism, a tangible feeling of change, and a desire to share that feeling with other people. An impromptu flash mob filled the steps of the Concert Hall with Yes Campaign supporters, singing “Caledonia” and “Wild Mountain Thyme”. It was peaceful, participative, sentimental, lively and joyful; a spontaneous surge of positivity and community after months of speculation, campaigning and debate. If the Yes campaign is not successful in convincing voters to choose independence, then it has been successful in one other crucial way; it has shown the rest of the UK that changing democracy can be a grassroots activity carried out by ordinary people, not just a legislative exercise for privileged and partisan elites.telekomSomeone said on Twitter today it feels like the whole of Scotland is making friends on Twitter and in real life: it really does. I can’t count the number of new friends I’ve made, most of them around my local area and new networks have sprung up that mean events can be organised last minute and still draw a crowd. Fergie4