The conservative hierarchy in the Scottish Catholic church still carries on like a force in the land, but in truth it is a force in a country that is fading away. With singular ill taste on Tuesday, the archbishop-elect of Glasgow, Philip Tartaglia, linked the untimely death of the popular MP and one-time priest, David Cairns, to his homosexuality. A few weeks before, Cardinal Keith O'Brien, the archbishop of Edinburgh and St Andrews, pledged fresh funds for campaigns against gay marriage. The move followed the ignoble tradition of propaganda against an equal age of consent, civil partnerships and same-sex adoption. But the church was on the wrong side of history in these cases, and – after Wednesday's bold words from deputy first minister Nicola Sturgeon – it is set to be on the losing side again.Ms Sturgeon spoke on the close of a consultation which confirmed that the Catholic and, indeed, many other churches retain their power to chivvy their faithful into picking up a pen: two-thirds of a record-breaking 77,000 respondees registered resistance to the change. This power of the postbag has awed parliamentarians in Holyrood and Westminster, sometimes cowing ministers into backing down, as when Labour dropped plans to force faiths schools to offer some places to irreligious pupils. Ms Sturgeon, however, shrewdly refuses to measure public opinion through letters alone, pointing instead to representative surveys which show a rough two-to-one margin in favour of same sex marriage, which is broadly mirrored across the generality of Catholics who have better things to do than respond to consultations.She is thus pressing ahead with legislation more radical than that being considered in London. Whereas Holyrood plans to enable both civil and religious ceremonies, with the necessary opt-outs for churches which could not bless gay marriage in good conscience, the coalition will only allow civil gay weddings. This is bizarre, seeing as the same coalition recently moved to allow civil partnerships in synagogues, meeting houses and chapels that are keen to host them. The bar on religious weddings was meant to reassure the faithful, but the Church of England has twisted the weird and novel distinction between religious and secular marriages into an excuse to oppose the whole reform, while it is left to Labour's Yvette Cooper to speak for liberal Jews and Quakers who resent the continuing bar on them offering ceremonial equality.The Scottish National party has a far from spotless record on gay rights. It backed the right of Catholic adoption agencies to snub gay couples, and took funds from the evangelical businessman, Brian Souter, who made such a noise about clause 2A (Scotland's section 28). This time, however, Scotland is calling the cardinal's bluff. London could learn from that.