In just over two years Scotland expects to be given the historic choice of whether or not to stay in the United Kingdom. That choice will shape Scotland's future, not just for the lifetime of a parliament but for generations. There will be no going back.I welcome a referendum, but I am no longer sure that Alex Salmond, the leader of the Scottish National party, still does. The SNP had a good year in 2011. This year its momentum has stalled. The SNP did not do as well as it anticipated in the Scottish government elections. Recent opinion polls show support for independence slipping. Alex Salmond is wobbling.No wonder. The SNP has had 80 years to prepare for this, yet the party still struggles to answer the most basic questions on Scotland's future: on how the currency would operate; or the regulation of Scotland's banks and insurance companies – a big share of our economy.The question is not whether Scotland can survive as a separate state. Of course it could. The real question is what is best for Scotland's future. There is a powerful case for being a strong partner in a United Kingdom, in a Scotland that offers a modern, positive view of its identity, hewn from a rich history, with wide horizons.In the UK, Scotland is part of a social union, underpinned by an economic and political union. We have a Scottish parliament with real decision-making powers. We also have a key role in a strong and secure United Kingdom.The referendum challenges us to answer some deep questions, about who we are and what we believe. Our links with the rest of the UK – through families and friendship, shared political, economic and cultural institutions – run deep. We don't need to abandon any of the identities we share – Scottish, British, European, citizens of the world.We have achieved so much as a partner in the UK. We created and then dismantled an empire together, fought fascism together, built the welfare state together. The BBC and the Bank of England were founded by Scots. The NHS was founded by a Welshman. The welfare state was founded by an Englishman. We would not have achieved half as much if we had not been a United Kingdom.We are being asked to make the choice for Scotland's future in the most uncertain of economic times. But it has to be about more than just economics.In a difficult world where more than 7 million children under the age of five die from preventable diseases; where the threat of climate change challenges all of us; where the gap between rich and poor continues to grow – these are the big challenges that we can influence as a strong partner in the UK. Independence is an inadequate response.Times are tough and uncertain, particularly in Europe where the difficulties of a currency union are exposed. We need more growth and more jobs. We do not need new areas of instability, uncertainty and division that separation will involve.The SNP, formed in the 1930s to win independence, seems not to have done the most basic homework. It is making it up as it goes along, gambling with jobs, businesses, savings. It has a duty to answer the fundamental questions on separation. What are the risks? The costs? The justification for upheaval and division? This is not an abstract debate. It is about jobs and the welfare state.Scotland trades more with England than with all other countries in the world combined. The UK is the world's oldest and most successful single market. Why turn our biggest market into our biggest competitor?In the UK we share opportunities and we also share risks. Four years ago when Scotland's banks were on the brink of collapse, the size and strength of the UK meant we could stop it happening. Sometimes it works the other way round. That is what partnership means.The UK has unique influence, in the EU, the Commonwealth and the G20 groups of the most powerful global economies. We are one of only five countries in the world with a permanent seat on the UN security council. As part of the UK, we have real clout. Why would we give away this deep influence?Scotland's people can best shape their own country and look outwards to help improve the wider world as a partner in a strong UK. We are better together.• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree