The minke whale can be an inquisitive beast. At its boldest, it will swim over to inspect the small boat idling nearby, displaying its bright white underbelly as it twists over and swims under the hull, the better to see its admirers. For the amateur whale watcher visiting Mull, it is the defining moment of their marine safari.Minke - one of the world's smaller whales - are regular visitors to the shallow inshore waters around the Hebridean island, feeding along the tide lines of the seas warmed by the Gulf Stream coming in from the Atlantic. The animal surfaces with a sudden jet of water, its sleek back and petite curved dorsal fin rising above the water.Basking sharks are also regular visitors, drawn by the plumes of plankton that are pushed up close to the surface by tides and currents. Harbour porpoises and dolphins are a permanent presence around Mull and its junior sisters Coll, Tiree, Treshish and Staffa. These highly sociable creatures often hug the coast in the quiet, sheltered waters of the Sound of Mull in groups. Standing on the observation deck of the Sula Beag, the main whale-watching vessel run by Mull's largest marine tours company, Sea Life Surveys, whale watchers are turned into hunters - scouring the seas for the first glimpse of whale or dolphin. On one such safari in early May - at the beginning of the island's whale-watching season, when the seas are choppy and whipped by cool winds into foam-tipped waves - we picked out several porpoise as their snouts and domed foreheads briefly broke the surface.And once or twice each summer, the hefty black and white form of an orca, or killer whale, will be seen breaking the waves. Sperm whales have been spotted and once in the last few years, just once, local whale watchers have seen a huge fin whale - the size of several double-decker buses - surfacing in deeper waters to the west. But minke are the chief attraction for the day-long expeditions organised by Sea Life Surveys, a family firm that pioneered whale watching in Britain, run from quayside offices in the Hebridean island's main town, Tobermory. Minke are now being sighted up to half a dozen times a day, as the summer season brings warmer waters and calmer seas. "We'll see what they're doing and where they're feeding, and then get into an area where they may well approach us," says James Fairbairn, who recently took over running the firm from his father. "Sometimes they roll on their backs to see us and show their underbelly - it's completely white and you see this massive white thing going under the boat watching us. It's incredible." James's father, "Pops" Fairbairn, originally a farmer, diversified from agriculture into sea-angling trips and creel fishing - a change that put him in contact with local minke. To his astonishment, the whales would approach his boat, watching him work. He began organising amateur whale-watching expeditions - the first in the UK - using a 7-metre boat with just 12 passengers. They now have two 15-metre vessels: the Sula Beag, which can take 40 passengers and the Sula Mhor, which takes 60.Its success has helped make Mull one of the most successful ecotourism destinations in Britain. It has spawned local rivals who also boast of whale encounters on their sightseeing cruises to Fingal's Cave on Staffa and outlying islands, and helped create a thriving wildlife watching industry on the island - particularly for bird-watchers.Drawn often by Mull's rich population of birds of prey, bird-watchers also now crowd the decks of the whale-watching boats. Seabirds play a key role in these expeditions, which cover a wide area of sea to the north and west of Mull, venturing up to 30km northwards to the island of Eigg.The Manx shearwaters, razorbills, kittiwake and puffins that dart energetically just above the water's surface are an excellent guide to whalefeeding areas: they crowd over the plankton and tiny fish that rise to the surface at the tide lines and "upswellings" where tides and currents meet. This is the same food for the minke.Seen from the boats, whose decks rise just a few metres above the surface, the seas between northern Mull, Ardnamurchan Point and Coll to the west are remarkably busy. Shearwaters, their downturned wingtips almost skimming the waves, will fly past in "V" formation; razorbills will flash past in a hurry. Puffins - oblivious to the boat - bob on the waves, while black wing-tipped kittiwakes fly overhead.It is a far more intimate and involving experience at sea level - an experience heightened by the Fairbairns' system of using passengers as amateur field workers. There are no whales today - it is quite early in the season. Fairbairn is now waiting to see what this summer delivers. "You just never know. That's what makes it so exciting."sealifesurveys.com