I will introduce a bill into the Scottish parliament for physician-assisted dying because Jeremy Purvis MSP can't. He started the ball rolling in the last parliament, but his bill didn't attract enough signatures to have it debated. Although he would have tried again, as the Lib Dem spokesman on the economy he's far too busy to follow up on the huge response from the public to a debate in Holyrood to which both of us contributed. I have issued a consultation document proposing that physician-assisted dying should be debated and decided on by the Scottish parliament. I was diagnosed as having Parkinson's about 13 years ago, but that's not why I'm seeking firstly, clarification of the law and then to have the concept of autonomy introduced to the issue of assisted dying. I'm an elected legislator, and this lies at the interface of private morality and public policy. In the course of my work as an MSP, and in making a film for the BBC, I've met people who, like me, would like to exercise control over the manner and timing of their death should their condition deteriorate until it becomes intolerable. Opponents of my proposal point to the need for the highest quality palliative care – all right if you can get it, but not a cast-iron guarantee of a trouble-free, dignified death. For a small number of people, palliative care just doesn't do it. Since it's simply specialised care, it's subject to the same cost-cutting and prioritising as other NHS services. But my first consideration is to persuade MSPs to allow my proposal to be properly scrutinised by the relevant parliamentary committees. The recent cases north and south of the border have highlighted the need to do so. Questions have arisen about the definition of "assisting" a suicide. Dan James' parents have not been prosecuted "in the public interest" but they stand accused of a criminal offence, and the next person to assist a loved one, or patient, to die at a time of his or her choosing may be charged. I fully respect people whose personal religious or moral code has God giving, and taking life. But there are moral and responsible people who wish to have the option of agreeing, with a qualified and registered physician, in advance of the point at which life might become intolerable, that they would be assisted, at their request, to end it.