When the time comes for God to call last orders on the world and the judging of the living and the dead is under way, I wonder if nations will be called to justify their actions too? Will prime ministers and presidents be asked to account not only for their own personal conduct, but also for the conduct of their country when they were in office?So, while Tony Blair may have led a blameless personal life in which he was a loving father and husband, will he also be judged on the charges of waging an unjust war? Similarly, will Jack Kennedy’s private indiscretions be outweighed by his confronting southern racism and resisting the bloodlust of his unhinged generals during the Cuban missile crisis?And will we, too, no matter how pure of heart and mind we are, be asked what we were doing while political and social injustice occurred in our own backyards?Cultural and civic Scotland seems to be quite clear on how it wants to be remembered both in this life and the next. Here lies Scotland: it was the most fair and equal society in the world. We must surely, as a nation, be in the running for a prize in the annual JustGiving awards. During the referendum on Scottish independence, there were so many people, mainly on the yes side, espousing so much nobility of purpose that I often found myself wanting to get utterly howling with it and indulge in some antisocial behaviour and break a few things, just for the hell of it.The SNP government announced last week that it is to undertake a bizarre crowd-sourcing exercise around the country this summer in further pursuit of the higher things in life. Ministers will tour the country asking us, the idiot punters, for ideas on how we can make Scotland a fairer and more equal country.Alex Neil obviously drew the short straw last week as the other cabinet secretaries were allowed to bring in their games for last day of term. For upon him has fallen the task of visiting Coatbridge to launch the scheme. He insists it will be a unique reversal of “traditional politics”: aye, very good, Alex. This is how it will work: when the public turn out in their tens to give you their ideas on making everything fairer and more equitable there will simply be no grass long enough anywhere in Scotland into which to kick them all.Those ideas that do make it on to a ministerial email will not make it past the civil servants who are employed solely for the purpose of ensuring that nothing dramatic will ever ensue. It is a futile exercise in political condescension.The SNP’s initiative came just two days after it was revealed that in Scotland, since 1997, the richest people in the country have seen their wealth expand while the very poorest Scots have got poorer.Let’s put it more starkly: in 16 years of unbroken, left-of-centre, socially progressive government, Scotland has actually become more socially regressive.So, rather than getting her ministers to jolly around the country putting up chocolate wallpaper, Nicola Sturgeon ought instead to be locking them in an upper room of Bute House and telling them not to come out until they have come up with answers why the poverty gap is getting bigger in an affluent country. Blaming it all on Westminster will not be considered a viable response.However, as I’m a glass-always-full sort of chiel who’s always walking on the sunny side of the street, I’ll give Neil the benefit of the doubt and will even provide him with a few starters for 10.Everywhere you look in this country, there is unfairness and inequality. We’ve had eight years of SNP government and the big injustices still remain. Our top judges are grotesquely unrepresentative of Scottish society.About 80% of our first division of law lords were taught at the sort of schools that 96% of the Scottish population can’t afford to attend. Most of these men and women who are allowed to sit in judgment over the rest of us simply do not have a clue about the storms and currents that can impel some men and women in desperate circumstances to act as they do.If you attended a comprehensive school in Scotland, you will have more chance of encountering a hooped unicorn than of ever becoming a top judge in this country.As for the top jobs in Scotland’s civil service, as one prominent member of that faculty once told me: if you didn’t attend a private school in Edinburgh, you need not apply. These people are trained to reject imagination, creativity and risk. It is why absolutely nothing of any radical consequence will ever happen in this country, despite the honeyed words of SNP and Labour.Our top universities are still allowed wilfully to practise their social gerrymandering to ensure that this iniquitous pattern of unearned privilege and cultural engineering persists.In this country, too, as Shelter revealed earlier this month, tens of thousands of Scots are homeless. Yet we allow local authorities to sell off common land to exploitative private builders who build homes increasingly out of the reach of the low paid.What of the rest of us? If there were prizes for soaring rhetoric about lifting our fellow Scots out of poverty and being all equal and fair, those of us who were part of the 45 and who then voted for the 56 would win them all.So, how many of us would be willing to pay more tax in a fiscally autonomous Scotland to ensure that the deficit was within manageable proportions and that vital public services remain intact?Until then, this SNP government will be remembered always as being the most socially progressive-sounding party we have ever had in a country that always talked a good game. Fair and equal Scotland, my arse.