Five years ago Babar Ahmad told me he expected no prosecutions of police officers for his alleged beating in custody, and that justice would have to be pursued through the civil courts (Report, 19 March). His prediction has been proven correct. I spoke to him for the Wandsworth Borough News in 2004, in the window between his release from Charing Cross police station (no charges were brought against him after six days of incarceration) and his re-arrest following an extradition request by the US, which he continues to fight from custody. Broken glass was still strewn in his front yard from the dawn raid, and there was damage visible inside his home, including the prayer room.Ahmad's civil victory can be read not only as an indictment of the Met but also of the IPCC, which twice - in 2006 and 2007 - declared there was not sufficient evidence to bring charges against the police officers involved. This was an incredible decision. The IPCC must have been shown, as I was, photographs of the injuries Ahmad sustained all over his body. They must have seen the medical report from a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons which found "unequivocal evidence that he was subjected to a harrowing physical and psychological assault by police officers".Ahmad's case is not only instructive in exposing the lack of accountability provided by the IPCC, but will continue to be an important test case as he fights extradition under the treaty the UK has signed with the US, which not only allows it to demand that we surrender British citizens without prima facie evidence, but also provides no reciprocal rights for the British authorities.G McGregorLondonDespite the police admitting to carrying out a brutal assault on Babar Ahmad, numerous questions remain unanswered. What happened to the mail sacks of evidence relating to similar allegations against the officers involved? How did the officers' notebooks etc simply vanish? Why are none of the officers facing criminal charges or any disciplinary action? How could the IPCC conclude that Ahmad's complaints were unsubstantiated? There is a dire need for a full independent inquiry into this matter. On another note, it is arrogance of the most appalling kind that Scotland Yard can admit its men committed such a heinous, Islamophobic hate crime, yet refuse to apologise for it, suggesting there is no remorse for what happened.Fahad AnsariLondonIn your article, you mention some of the events at which the Territorial Support Group has been active (Police officers in abuse case accused of 60 other assaults, 21 March). However, you omitted the one at which they killed special-needs teacher Blair Peach. Although this was under a previous name (Special Patrol Group), the death was considered so significant at the time that the name of the unit had to be changed.Tom TrainerLondonI have some experience of making complaints against police officers (mostly involving the Ministry of Defence police agency, which works on US bases). So I am not the least bit surprised to hear from the Met that all but one complaint had been found to be unsubstantiated. All the officer, under caution, has to do is to say, "no comment, no comment, no comment" to questions usually asked by a police investigator. There is therefore nothing to investigate as there is only one side of the story told. Until there is a truly independent complaints process, with no vested interest involved, complaints will continue to be unsubstantiated. Lindis PercyCo-ordinator, Campaign for the Accountability of American BasesOn Friday I saw The Hounding of David Oluwale, a powerful play that details the brutal attacks on a Nigerian immigrant by two police officers in 1969, and the subsequent investigation when Oluwale's battered body was found in the river. The next day the Guardian described a "serious, gratuitous and prolonged attack on a British Muslim man". Forty years on and nothing has changed.Angela SherlockPlymouth, Devon