According to one overexcited nationalist politician, the Scottish independence white paper that was launched by Alex Salmond in Glasgow yesterday made America's declaration of independence look "like a Post-it note". History is likely to see the comparison between the two documents rather less favourably to Mr Salmond, even if Scottish voters decide to cut their ties with the United Kingdom in 10 months' time.The white paper's 170,000 words lack Jeffersonian or even Burnsian phrases. Yet there should be no underestimating the immediate importance of the 650-page document that Mr Salmond and his deputy Nicola Sturgeon released yesterday. The SNP government's offer to Scottish voters is now out there and on the record. It is a big moment for UK politics. The white paper deserves to be studied and assessed by everyone who is interested in the political future of these islands, not just by Scots, before a final verdict on the independence question can be made.The white paper, although fascinating and very detailed in some respects, in fact poses at least as many questions as it supplies answers. In places, it reads like a negotiating position rather than the blueprint which Mr Salmond claims. The reason for this is that many of the largest questions about independence cannot be couched at this stage as clearly defined black and white alternatives.If Scotland votes yes next year, many of these questions would then have to be negotiated between the Scots and the UK government. So the white paper's assertions that an independent Scotland would be part of a currency union with the UK are just that – assertions. So are the claims that an independent Scotland would be seamlessly able to join the European Union or even Nato. Even with the best will in the world, eventual compromises are likely on all these issues and more. This does not just make the white paper a sometimes unreliable guide to Scotland's future. It also raises the possibility, floated by the Constitution Unit on Tuesday, that voters may need to decide in a second referendum in 2016 whether the final terms are acceptable or not.Similar caution is needed in looking at the white paper's calculus about the economic and fiscal impact of independence. Here the white paper is often tendentious, to put it mildly, relying as it does on best or most advantageous case scenarios for contentious major issues as the share-out of UK assets and debts. For example, the white paper posits a share of UK debt interest payments based not on existing UK GDP but on "Scotland's historical contribution to the UK public finances". This historical contribution, however, does not go back beyond the start of the North Sea oil and gas exploitation of the 1970s. Such framing makes it dangerous to rely on some of the white paper's fiscal assumptions, as well as leaving the disturbing findings of the Institute for Fiscal Studies' recent report on Scotland's fiscal options largely unanswered.Looked at in the round, the white paper is in some ways less an argument in favour of Scottish independence than a reassurance that Scottish independence may not have the risk-strewn consequences that the UK government – and the independent IFS – suggest. Indeed it is even possible to view the white paper not just as a manifesto about independence but also as a manifesto about retaining some form of lasting social democratic settlement within the constraints of economic globalisation. Mr Salmond himself preferred to call the white paper not a blueprint for independence but a "blueprint for a fairer country".That language about fairness attracts many voters in Scotland – which is of course why Mr Salmond uses it – as well as voters elsewhere in the UK too. The coming months will test whether Scottish voters have enough confidence that Mr Salmond can deliver on that claim. At this stage the independence case, especially in the light of the IFS's warnings, is unproven. But the issues are momentous for all of us. Let the debate commence.