We start with Idlewild's In Remote Part/Scottish Fiction, partly because the refrain "Scottish friction, Scottish fiction" could be a subheading for this selection. There was much debate on the RR blog this week about which artists were suitable candidates for inclusion. For instance, allowing a (relatively young) Englishman to distil many decades' worth of Scottish songs into a 12-song list full of non-Scottish artists caused blogger Sciencenotfashion quite some concern on St Andrew's Day.I suspect that, despite their Edinburgh origins, Ballboy's I Hate Scotland won't placate him any. But I must assure him we're not here to bash the Scots, but to sing about Scotland. Indeed, notorious English curmudgeon Mark E Smith proclaims himself a fan of Scotland's capital in The Fall's Edinburgh Man, and Paul McCartney shot to a multimillion-selling No 1 with Wings' paean to the Mull of Kintyre, a song blessed with probably the most RR love over the week, much to my surprise. The Waterboys gave us both English and Gaelic versions of Peace of Iona. I've picked the latter, in a vain attempt to distract from the fact that the other two songs came from a Liverpudlian and a Mancunian.But of course, such Sassenach invasions have often caused resentment over the centuries, as is eloquently expressed – in Gaelic – in Fàbharach's Canan Nan Gaidheal ("the disease which has blanched from the south"). Many Scots would be only too glad to see the back of the English, after what has been wrought upon them. Mogwai have one particular person in mind, but anarcho-punks and all-round activists Oi Polloi have a more encompassing symbol they'd like to shoo back over the border. (I don't speak Gaelic; probably a good thing judging by the venomous guitar blast!)Is this all getting a bit fractious? Then let's pause, and take a few minutes to wonder at the prodigious, sadly lost talent that was Martyn Bennett. Mixing the traditional with the modern to great effect, Martyn packed a lot into his [just less than] 34 years, musically and geographically, before succumbing to cancer. He was born in Canada and came to Scotland at the age of six, when his mother returned home after several years abroad. Migration is a fertile topic for Scottish musicians. There's a part in Billy Connolly's comedy routine where he discusses the Scottish diaspora, and the many songs that came out of it. In Letter from America, the Proclaimers wonder what the emigrants would miss; poet Hamish Henderson's song is a hope-filled, revisionist view of the role of the Scots out in the world (national treasure Dick Gaughan sings this version). And should the emigrants want to come home, Runrig's live audience ensure there's a rousing welcome for them.Idlewild – In Remote Part/Scottish FictionBallboy – I Hate ScotlandThe Fall – Edinburgh ManPaul McCartney and Wings – Mull of KintyreThe Waterboys – Síocháin IonaFàbharach – Canan Nan GaidhealMogwai – George Square Thatcher Death PartyOi Polloi – Union Jack? Thall's Cac!Martyn Bennett – Aye?The Proclaimers – Letter from AmericaDick Gaughan – Freedom Come All YeRunrig – Loch Lomond (Live version)• Listen to these songs on a YouTube playlist.• See all the readers' recommendations on last week's blog, from which DarceysDad selected the songs above.• Here's a Spotify playlist containing readers' recommendations on this theme.Reading on a mobile? Listen on Spotify