You seem to have conceived the notion that Scotland will vote for independence (Comment, 20 November). Indeed, it is seeming more likely. I don't have a nationalist bone in my body, but if the choice is between belonging to some kind of a weird Daily Maily-coalitiony Englandshire aspiring to be a second Switzerland (nothing against the Swiss, but is one not plenty, and they are good at it), and living next door to a gently declining but essentially civilised Scotland, I will vote for separation. But you also seem to think such a referendum victory means the end of the UK. Not at all, unless and until the SNP are voted out. They are determined to keep her nibs!Drew RatterOllaberry, Shetland• I'm struggling to find reasons why the Scottish people should have much love for the English but, please guys, if you are going to go, reserve a few million spare passports to enable those of us born to the south and east of the borders to join you. Hard to believe as it may be at times, not all the English are greedy, selfish, anti-European, banker-sympathising, road-raging, Strictly Come Dancing-watching, arrogant public school, weak-chinned wallies.Dr Sam LangridgeBuxted, East Sussex• John Hodgson (Letters, 22 December) wonders what the "rump state" would be called if Scotland were to become independent. Surely the simple answer is that most people, including President Obama, would just keep on calling it "England" as they do at present!Willie MacfadyenStirling• The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) provides us with the clue. England, Wales and Northern Ireland would be known as the FUK.Christopher GordonWinchester, Hampshire• I always understood Scotland put the "Great" in Great Britain, so without Scotland we'd simply become Britain.John WhiteheadLondon• The best suggestion yet is surely United Kingdom of Southern Britain and Northern Ireland.Gregor BentonLlantwit Major, South Glamorgan• John Owen writes that the Welsh name for England is Lloegyr, the foreign lands (Letters, 22 December). The English name "Welsh" means exactly the same, "foreigners". To this day, the German speakers in Switzerland refer to the French and Italian cantons as the Welschland, the foreign parts.Martin D SternSalford