The police van, filled with eight officers, pulled up beside the black Citroën, on the corner of a residential street in east London, at around 6pm. It should have been a routine stop and search, one of hundreds taking place on 11 August as police tried to keep the streets quiet after three nights of intense rioting.Instead, the events that were about to unfold on the street, and later in nearby Forest Gate police station, would, eight months on, plunge Scotland Yard into a race controversy and ignite a public debate on how police treat young black men.At least two Newham borough officers in the van parked on Routh Street, in Beckton, are now suspected of involvement in serious assaults on two young black men, in separate incidents that same night.One, 21-year-old Mauro Demetrio, used his mobile phone to record an officer racially abusing him and said he was "strangled" in the police van. The other, Terelle Ferguson, 15 at the time, alleges he was strangled, as well as kicked, dragged across the floor and kneed in the back, and suffers a long-term injury.The vexed question of race allegedly played out in different but disturbing ways in two cases. Demetrio's recording captures one of the officers, PC Alex MacFarlane, subject him to a series of racial insults, at one point telling him: "The problem with you is you will always be a nigger."Ferguson said that when he complained to MacFarlane about the way he was being treated, the officer said: "You're just being racist, little boy. You're being racist."This week, the Crown Prosecution Service confirmed that two urgent reviews were underway into advice it gave over the prospects of prosecuting police officers allegedly implicated in both cases.Meanwhile, the Metropolitan police commissioner, Bernard Hogan-Howe, urged all 48,000 staff in the force to report inappropriate behaviour, warning: "I will not stand for any racism or racists in the Met."Within a day, three other policemen in east London had been placed on restricted duties for allegedly making racist comments between January and March in a separate incident. On Thursday night a further five cases were referred to the police watchdog.The story starts just after the riots in the summer of 2011. Shortly after seeing the van containing eight officers, Demetrio said he pulled over to the side of the road. He describes seeing police rushing toward his car. "They seemed twitchy because of the riots," he said. "There were a lot of police cars in the area at that time and the officers seemed fired up."Demetrio was arrested on suspicion of driving under the influence of drugs – an accusation later dropped – and handcuffed and placed in the back of the van. He alleges that, while inside the vehicle and surrounded by other officers, he was assaulted, his head pushed against the van window. He says an officer put his knees on his chest and began strangling him. Shortly after Demetrio turned on the voice recorder on his mobile phone. He managed to make two recordings, lasting in all about 12 minutes. They give a few verbal exchanges between Demetrio and the officers over several minutes and are interspersed with long silences and the crackling sound of police radios.Demetrio occasionally raises his voice to complain about his treatment, and insults the officers. Asked to explain why he "strangled" Demetrio, an officer replies "cos you're a cunt", adding that he was "kicking out". The officer adds: "Stopped you though, didn't it?"Minutes later MacFarlane begins abusing Demetrio, using the offensive racist slur. Angered, Demetrio reads out MacFarlane's badge number (KF05) and complains that he had subjected him to racist comments: "I'll always be a nigger – that's what you said, yeah?"MacFarlane replies: "You'll always have black skin colour. Don't hide behind your colour, yeah." He adds: "Be proud. Be proud of who you are, yeah. Don't hide behind your black skin."The excerpts released by the Guardian last week have been listened to hundreds of thousands of times and prompted public outrage. Amid the public furore over the recording questions have been raised about why the other officers in the van did not report their colleague racially abusing Demetrio. The Guardian understands that when investigators questioned the seven other officers in the van about the incident they all claimed not to have heard MacFarlane make racist remarks.The Met says it cannot comment on the details: "This matter is the subject of an independent IPCC investigation and it would be inappropriate to discuss any alleged details prior to their investigation being completed," said a spokesman on Thursday yesterday.Hogan-Howe, however, clearly believes the case raises important questions about accountability. "We have a duty to challenge or report any behaviour by colleagues which is less than the high standard demanded by the service and Londoners themselves," he said in his address to staff. "You cannot avoid that duty. Nor can I."The Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC), which investigated Demetrio's case, referred the matter to the CPS in January, after concluding that three officers may have co mmitted criminal offences. They were MacFarlane, identified as the officer making the racist remarks, and two others suspected of involvement in the alleged assault on Demetrio in the van: PC Joe Harrington and a constable known as Officer C.The CPS initially decided not to bring charges against any of the officers. Senior lawyers at the CPS are now reviewing the case and MacFarlane has been suspended.The paths of Demetrio and Ferguson crossed in the caged cell adjacent to the custody section of Forest Gate police station. The two had never met before. Demetrio had just arrived at the police station after the alleged assault in the van. He later handed in his mobile phone to custody desk officers and pleaded with them to investigate his treatment by Harrington and MacFarlane.Demetrio claimed he saw Harrington allegedly assault Ferguson, a 15-year-old from east London. Demetrio later told investigators he saw Harrington kick the teenager in the back of the leg and, once he was on the floor, knee him in the back.Ferguson had been transferred to Forest Gate from a police station in Stratford, east London, where he was arrested earlier in the day after being asked to attend the police station. The matter for which he was wanted has since been dropped.Ferguson, now 16, this week provided the Guardian with a detailed account of his complaint against the police. He says he saw Demetrio brought into the caged area in handcuffs: "He looked quiet. Reserved. Something was up."Ferguson claims he recognised Harrington as a police officer who had strangled him during a stop and search incident two days earlier, though Harrington says he had had no contact with him then.Harrington's lawyers also point out that he is currently not charged with anything. "PC Harrington has been advised that he is not to be the subject of any criminal proceedings in relation to allegations made concerning events in the custody area on the 11 August 2011," they said in a statement.MacFarlane's lawyers said: "PC MacFarlane was advised by IPCC investigators on the 20 December 2011 that he was not regarded as a suspect in relation to allegations made by the 15-year-old youth, but in fact was being treated as a witness. He has, therefore, never been interviewed under criminal caution in relation to any allegation made by this individual. We consider it inappropriate at the present time to comment further in relation to the complaints made by Mr Demetrio."Days after the alleged assault, Ferguson lodged an complaint with the IPCC. The police watchdog initially supervised a Met police inquiry into Ferguson's complaint; CCTV was obtained, although it is believed to have captured only part of the alleged assault.At an early stage investigators consulted the CPS about Ferguson's case, and prosecutors advised there was no realistic prospect of convicting Harrington for common assault.Then in October, when investigators realised that Ferguson and Demetrio's cases were connected, the IPCC upgraded the inquiry to an independent investigation. That inquiry has been completed and was submitted to the Met on Tuesday.The report is understood to deal mainly with the actions of Harrington and to recommend that the officer, who is currently on restricted duties, is disciplined.However, there remains a possibility that Harrington will be prosecuted over the alleged assault on Ferguson.The Crown Prosecution Service announced an urgent review into the cases, and is reconsidering the advice it gave over the prospects for bringing a criminal charge against Harrington. The CPS said a senior lawyer was now reviewing the case, including evidence that was not available the first time around.