I think that the results for the Scottish parliament are not due to Alex Salmond being a charismatic leader – though he is far and away more so than the bunch of "suits" we have in Westminster – but to his policies (Stunning SNP victory throws the spotlight on independence vote, 7 May). No tuition fees. No council tax rises. Healthcare for the elderly etc. Could they possibly be old-fashioned socialist policies?With the Tories and the Lib Dems shunting themselves well and truly to the far right, isn't it just possible that some socialist policies south of the border might prove to be bigger vote winners than a charismatic leader?Andy BrewerLondon• The Scottish Nationalists have a distinct advantage. All their leading lights want to sit at Holyrood. The most accomplished Scots in all the other parties seek to make their careers at Westminster. Consequently, since the estimable Donald Dewar, the Scottish Labour party has been led by nonentities and time-servers who attract few votes.If Gordon Brown had led Scottish Labour instead, he might now be on his fourth term as first minister in Edinburgh and David Miliband might be prime minister in London. But unless Ed Miliband can persuade the brightest and best of Labour politicians – Douglas Alexander, Jim Murphy, Anne Begg, Alistair Darling – to go home and stand for Holyrood, the SNP will continue to win overall majorities. It's that simple.W Stephen GilbertCorsham, Wiltshire• You state that "Salmond wins overall majority and promises to hold referendum on break from United Kingdom." This is misleading. If a referendum is held in Scotland and the electorate choose independence, it would result in the end of the United Kingdom, not a break from it.The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland comes from the union of two kingdoms, Scotland and England. If Scotland decides to end the union, it will be a divorce of two kingdoms, the end of the United Kingdom. This raises interesting questions over the future status of the province of Northern Ireland and the overseas territories that still fly the union flag (a flag whose use would have to cease). Should the Falkland Islands, for example, be the property of Scotland or England? Then there is the question of the EU, would both the kingdoms have to re-apply to join? Intriguing times lie ahead.Doug HaywoodAberdeen• So Ed Miliband is going to launch a review of the Labour party in Scotland (Miliband puts brave face on mixed results for his party, 7 May)? This is the wrong approach. Far better to split the Labour party into three separate parties. Scotland, Wales and England are three different countries and need Labour parties that reflect this. Each of these parties would have their own leader and policies relevant to their own country. While we still have a UK government, the parties would stand on their own manifestos and, if they formed a majority, negotiate a common programme for government.Peter EvansNorwich• I agree with Jonathan Freedland that there is a real possibility that "the union that has lasted three centuries" might break up (Report, 7 May). But I do not think the main danger to the union will come from the SNP holding a referendum on Scottish independence.The obvious beneficiaries of an independent Scotland would be the Tories. Despite their professed support for the union, I think that any initiative to break up Britain is most likely to come from them, rather than the SNP. As Freedland says, without Scottish MPs, Westminster would be Tory for evermore.Despite lack of public support in either Slovakia or the Czech Republic, Václav Klaus, the then rightwing Czech Republic prime minister, engineered the break-up of Czechoslovakia in 1992, without a referendum, for his own political interest. The Tories have shown just how ruthless they are. Will David Cameron become the UK's Václav Klaus?John MurrayLondon