Should the rest of us just move to Scotland? The wild wooing of the referendum campaign has done its work and it’s hard to shake the idea everything is better north of the border – no university fees, no prescription charges, politically engaged young people and now, the historic and groundbreaking prospect that Holyrood’s three main political parties will all be led by women.Nicola Sturgeon, who is expected to succeed first minister Alex Salmond this week, will become Scotland’s first female leader, joining Conservative Ruth Davidson and Labour’s Johann Lamont in a triumphant triumvirate of women in the country’s most powerful political positions. It’s an unprecedented situation in the UK and a stark comparison to our three Oxbridge-educated, career politicians with privileged backgrounds, born just a few years apart. Any steps to change that are often faced by howls of protest – the last-minute cabinet reshuffle, for instance, was dubbed the Night of the Long Wives – despite just five of 22 cabinet members being women. And yet, without any fanfare, Scotland lines up three state-educated women, aged between 35 and 57, who have worked in journalism and the Territorial Army (Davidson), teaching (Lamont) and the law (Sturgeon).“When I became leader, I got so many emails,” Davidson tells me. “Mainly from gay, male, teenagers who said, ‘I’m interested in politics, but thought I could never get on because I am gay.’ It never struck me before that it mattered who the leader was to people who weren’t in your party, but … it does.” Sturgeon agrees – Scotland’s feminist moment isn’t simply symbolic: “It sends a powerful signal about equality, and the cracking of the glass ceiling.” Her party is now the third biggest in the UK – ahead of the Liberal Democrats. But apart from the refreshing change of seeing three women in charge, will the testosterone-fuelled culture that spawned the so-called Punch and Judy politics be reined in? Will the pay gap disappear, childcare be prioritised and domestic violence convictions soar?Nan Sloane, from Counting Women In, says she is “cautiously excited” as it’s “easy to make assumptions about how women in leadership roles behave, and then offload on to them the responsibility for cultural change”. Men, she says, are still needed on board to usher in societal change.It’s a point backed up by Susan Stewart from Women for Independence, a grassroots campaigning group, who says, “Many of us hoped that the 1999 intake of female MSPs would lead to a more consensual politics, but that didn’t happen.” Notionally, the idea of three women facing each other down at first minister’s questions could herald that change. Sloane, however, believes that behind the scenes, these three women may be more willing to listen to each other. Lamont herself admits, “People think that politicians shouting at each other is not about them,” and while Davidson believes more could be done to “lower the temperature” of parliamentary debates, Sturgeon cannily says: “If I am elected, there may be an opportunity to change the tone for the better.”It makes sense that increased gender balance in politics does correlate with stronger outcomes for gender equality, yet Davidson thinks that one more woman is unlikely to mean childcare, the pay gap and violence against women will radically change: “Alex Salmond has not been stopping those discussions from happening because he is a man – there are many accusations I could throw at the first minister, but that’s not one of them.”Whether the consensus will be changed by stealth or speed, Sloane points out that “too often, women have been told these are marginal, or a distraction to the real issue – whether that is independence or selection”. The hope is “women leaders will no longer allow these to be pushed aside”.Of course not everyone judges female politicians solely on their work – their appearance and clothes are often under just as much scrutiny, even in 2014. At the Labour conference this year, a story on the equalities minister was headlined, “Glorious Gloria tells it in black and white”, referring to her monochrome dress rather than her speech, while the Daily Mail’s “Downing St catwalk” dominated their coverage of the last reshuffle. “The previous female Scottish Labour leader, Wendy Alexander, had a terrible time for apparently wearing low-cut tops – it was nonsense,” says Davidson. “If there were more female journalists, the media pack [wouldn’t] have focused on that.” And such reporting is unlikely to change, says a despondent Stewart: “Will the papers get bored of [talking about their looks]? I won’t hold my breath.”As for heralding a new form of politics, Sloane says women are often elected during crises for the party in opposition to bring in change, as Davidson and Lamont were. After the financial crises in Iceland, for instance, women leaders replaced men in a bid to create a new, clean politics. Yet today, those female politicians are no longer in charge of their parties. While the Scottish parliament is doing better than Westminster for gender parity – 36% of MSPs are women – Sturgeon is cautious. It “doesn’t mean the battle for equality has been won. In 1999, when the parliament started, we had one of the best proportions of female representation of any legislator in the world – we were third – and that has slipped back. So leadership and visible role models are important, but not of themselves enough.”Which is why, says Stewart, Women for Independence will be calling for 50/50 representation of women and men at Holyrood, and why, last Sunday, a cross-party group of MSPs from Labour, SNP, Greens and Liberal Democrats called for legal quotas for Holyrood, local government and public bodies in Scotland.Yet such parity is important, not to tick boxes, but to make better policies, says Sloane. “There is evidence that mixed groups make better decisions overall, which is why you have huge efforts from multinationals to recruit more women into high roles.”Moving to Scotland in the hope of a more equal society, then, may be premature, but there is sure-fire progress dismissing claims – such as those made by MP Austin Mitchell – that female politicians are not “tough” enough. “Austin Mitchell,” says Davidson cheerily, “is a dinosaur. I wish him well in his retirement – and you can quote me on that.”