During this year's Scottish Parliament election campaign Alex Salmond, the SNP leader and first minister of Scotland, made a memorable appearance on the BBC's Question Time staged in Liverpool. He boasted that his government had "eradicated the private sector" from the NHS in Scotland. Furthermore, Salmond implored the predominantly English audience not to allow the Conservatives, Liberal Democrats and Labour to "destroy" their English NHS.The audience gave Salmond's words a warm reception. "We knew health would come up," explained one of the first minister's aides, "and the point we wanted to make was not that we do things so much better in Scotland, but to make the contrast." The aide added: "That was the key moment – he [Salmond] spoke to them as if they were Scottish voters."Indeed, for a party whose ultimate aim remains 'independence' for Scotland, repeatedly highlighting the differences between public service delivery north and south of the border is simply good politics. At the recent SNP conference in Inverness Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish health secretary, echoed her boss's theme, telling delegates it now seemed "inevitable that the Tories, aided and abetted by their Liberal [Democrat] partners, will break up the NHS in England."The rhetoric may be strident, but Scottish Government ministers at least practice what they preach. Across a whole range of areas, public versus private sector, telehealth, pooling health and social care and streamlining management, the devolved government has adopted a markedly different approach for the NHS in Scotland. And although that health service had long been administered separately from that in England, it was the creation of the Scottish Parliament in 1999 that made this increasing divergence politically possible.The Labour/Liberal Democrat coalition that initially ruled Scotland set the ball rolling by ruling out the establishment of foundation hospitals, then being introduced in England, but the SNP – in government since 2007 – has taken a more ostentatiously ideological stance on the health portfolio. "I have said unequivocally that the NHS in Scotland will remain a public service," health secretary Nicola Sturgeon told Guardian Healthcare Network, "paid for by the public and accountable to the public.""I say that not out of blind ideology, but because I have no doubt that our NHS can and will outperform the privatised experiment south of the border. It is well known that we already have waiting times lower than at any time in the history of the NHS in Scotland. What is less well known is that we are now the only part of the UK where hospital waiting times continue to fall."Scottish politics is well known for its fierce competition and unforgiving criticism, but Sturgeon is widely seen – even by her political opponents – to have been a safe pair of hands during the past four and a half years. Although not a radical reformer, her orthodox approach to healthcare delivery has the broad approval of Scotland's professional organisations."Since devolution there has been a growing divergence in health policy between Scotland and England," says Dr Charles Saunders, deputy chairman of the British Medical Association in Scotland. "This has never been more apparent than it is now with the proposed health reforms in England which could potentially undermine the founding principles of the NHS." "In Scotland, we have a government committed to an NHS that is publicly funded and publicly delivered," he adds. "We operate within a system of collaboration and co-operation, while the planned English reforms are very much founded on a principle of competition. We do not support this approach. Patients are not products and the NHS is not a 'business' in the commercial sense of the word." The BMA in Scotland, however, attaches some qualifications to this dichotomy. "While devolution has allowed us to take a different approach to health policy, it has not cushioned the NHS from some very real threats that are affecting patient services across the UK," adds Dr Saunders. This includes providing comprehensive, high-quality services within a shrinking budget, and changes to NHS staff pensions, which would apply across the UK. "The NHS in Scotland is not perfect and we still face serious challenges with waiting times and patient outcomes. However devolution has given us the means by which to address these challenges in a completely different way to that elsewhere in the UK," he concludes.For the time being the Scottish Government prefers to accentuate the positives and eliminate the negatives in healthcare delivery. It is, of course, a means to a radical constitutional end, but with three or four years to go before a much anticipated referendum on independence, the contrast between the NHS north and south of the border looks set to become even more marked.Join our online debate from 1pm today - add questions nowAnalysis: Social care regulators north and south of the border (from the Guardian Social Care Network)This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the Guardian Healthcare Network to receive regular emails on NHS innovation.