Once you leave the M8 near Lanark, the 90-minute drive from Glasgow to the little Borders town of Innerleithen becomes a delight. Soon, you are reproaching yourself once more for waiting this long to discover another of Scotland's beautiful places. The town is a cradle of ancient and modern Scottish history. The outlines of an iron age fort sit at the top of Caerlee Hill to the west of Innerleithen, while local folk history says that the town was founded by the pilgrim monk St Ronan in the early 8th century. "St Ronan cleik't the de'il by the hind leg and banished him," a local legend tells us. For one young family, though, who recently made their home in this magical place, the Devil returned to Innerleithen four years ago and has been tormenting them ever since.Dr Eamonn O'Neill is known to many in the newspaper trade as one of Scotland's finest investigative journalists. His work has obtained justice in several high-profile cases where men were wrongly imprisoned for serious crimes they did not commit. As a senior lecturer at Strathclyde University's acclaimed school of journalism, he now passes on his skills to the next generation. In this context, the irony of what he, his wife and his twin five-year-old boys have been through has not been lost on him.The ordeal began several years ago when two properties below Dr O'Neill's began to metamorphose into a Dodge City tavern, but without the cuddly bits. According to Eamonn: "There were drunken and violent disturbances almost every night of the week with drugs being openly dealt on the street outside."An escalation in the violence occurred when a new tenant took up residence in the property which, the O'Neills learned, belonged to the Scottish Borders Housing Association. The couple's twin sons were less than a year old at this time and Eamonn began to complain to the SBHO. Not long afterwards, he was approached by his new neighbour who threatened to "do" him and to kill his wife and children. The individual would later be revealed in court as James Armstrong, a 59-year-old with a history of domestic abuse. On reporting this encounter to the police, Eamonn was told there was little they could do as there was no corroboration.He didn't have to wait long. The following year, 2011, Armstrong repeated the threat to kill Sarah and the children. This time, though, both adults were present when the threat was made and this enabled the police to arrest and charge him. The O'Neills describe this period as "like living in a war zone".Anxious about the continuing danger to both his wife and children, Eamonn consulted a security specialist. Thus they were advised to construct a "panic room" in their home as a potential refuge for Sarah and the twins in the event of "something" happening when Eamonn wasn't present. Sarah was also supplied with a personal panic alarm. In September 2011, Armstrong pleaded guilty to threatening and abusive behaviour. He surrendered his tenancy as part of his plea and was served with a 12-month asbo stopping him from returning to the building. An extraordinary two-year crasbo (criminal antisocial behaviour order) was also granted preventing him from contacting the family in any way.The family's ordeal was far from over and it is at this point that the Scottish Borders Housing Association begins to emerge in its alternative guise of chocolate teapot. For, despite numerous requests, it failed to have Armstrong evicted, even though he had surrendered his tenancy. Eventually, Armstrong was jailed for a separate crime and, once more, the family pressed the SBHA to move to evict. The SBHA's continued refusal to do so had begun to assume a sinister aspect in the minds of the O'Neills as the existence of three different pieces of legislation in Scots law gave the SBHA ample opportunity to do so. In the absence of any action by the housing association, Eamonn was forced to give evidence against Armstrong in court on several occasions.Ten days ago, this violent individual was released from jail and headed straight back to the SBHA property adjacent to the O'Neills. Astonishingly, the SBHA had failed to process his exclusion. And so, in 21st-century Scotland, home of a groovy new single police authority, a blameless husband and wife and their twin five-year-old boys had to flee from their home in the middle of the night. Again. Somehow, in a country that is addicted to enacting new legislation and discovering new ways of putting people in jail, the protection of the law, of the state and of the judiciary could not reach the O'Neills.I spent last Tuesday afternoon with them at their home to which they had returned after learning that Armstrong was to be removed the following day. In fact, it took two more days for him to leave, during which time the family were prisoners in their own home. When he did eventually leave on Friday morning, it wasn't before Sarah and her two boys, by chance, encountered him in a common alley at their property.This, though, was not the most sickening aspect of last Friday. That came in a press release from the SBHA congratulating itself for having finally brought the issue to a successful conclusion and nowhere acknowledging its connivance at the campaign of terror endured by the O'Neills since 2009.My friend and former colleague has spent his entire working life helping victims of injustice and ensuring that their human rights are respected. This good man discovered – to his horror and to our eternal shame – that his family's human rights were worth absolutely nothing.If any decency at all is to emerge from this, then Julia Mulloy, the chief executive of the Scottish Borders Housing Association, will have resigned by the end of the coming week. And before the end of the year, an investigation into the customs, practices and ethics of the SBHA will be underway.• Comments will remain off for legal reasons