There have been two key events in Scottish and Welsh politics since the UK general election in May. The first was the 20 October spending review, in which George Osborne cut current expenditure in the devolved administrations by around 7% from 2011 and capital spending by around 40%. The second was yesterday, when the two devolved governments – the minority nationalist one in Scotland and the Labour-nationalist coalition in Wales – revealed how they would pass Mr Osborne's budgetary parcel on to their voters. Yet these announcements were shaped by a third event, the Scottish and Welsh elections next May, in which all the devolved government parties aim to run as opponents of cuts emanating from the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition in London.So far, so inevitable. Yet there is a striking difference between the Edinburgh and Cardiff strategies. In Scotland, the SNP's budget covers only 2011-12. Though it aims at balance, it does nothing to address any of the large voter-friendly programmes – free personal care for the elderly, free NHS prescriptions, a council tax freeze – which help the SNP administration to mark itself out from London ways. Little is said, either, about the problematic state of Scottish university funding without any form of tuition fees. Instead, the budget gambles that efficiencies and a public sector pay freeze above £21,000 will balance the books. It is, in short, a shameless electioneering budget, in which all hard choices are postponed until after next May. If voters in Scotland elect a Labour-led administration, then the SNP has given itself a "Don't blame us; blame the London parties" platform for opposition. If Scots re-elect the SNP, on the other hand, expect some U-turns 12 months from now in the 2012-13 budget.In Wales, where the budget is half the size of Scotland's and where revenue-raising powers are, for now, more curtailed, the Labour-Plaid budget is no less indignant but far less opportunist. Having been dealt a tough hand, the Welsh not only look ahead across the whole spending review cycle but also grasp some painful nettles, in spite of their belief that Mr Osborne's cuts are too deep and too fast. Health, schools and social services will be protected as much as possible; the economy, transport and the environment will all take big hits.In both countries, this feels like the end of the easier phase of devolution, when everything was possible. Now, in tougher times, choices between priorities have to be made. Of yesterday's two budgets, the Welsh is a more honest and progressive offer than the Scottish. But times are hard everywhere now, and the days of easy popularity for the devolved governments are drawing rapidly to a close.