Scots are, perhaps, not known for their cheery disposition. But it could be that social work is the exception that proves the rule.The Social Lives survey suggests that Scotland has the highest concentration of contented social workers in the UK - 86% (compared to 82% in England and 78% in Wales). They are also relatively pleased with the amount of money they earn, with 48% believing what they earn is in line with what they do, compared to 44% in England and 35% in Wales. Bang goes another stereotype.But all is certainly not rosy north of the border. Another finding - that 73% of Scots think they cannot give cases all the time they require, compared to 63% for England - chimes with other research. According to the most recent annual report from Scotland's Social Work Inspection Agency (Swia), morale is a challenge, although it says there have been "genuine and well-considered efforts in some councils to address these issues".Overall, however, the Swia report backs Society Guardian's findings, showing that social work in Scotland appears to be a changed beast from just a few years ago. In 2006, when Changing Lives, the report of the 21st century social work review, was published, it found "services under great pressure, lacking in confidence and not delivering their full potential". This was "resulting in a growing mismatch between the values of social work and the experience of people who use and work in services".Turning pointLife has improved since then, says Alan Baird, president of Scotland's Association of Directors of Social Work (ADSW) and director of social work and health at Dundee city council. "I don't think change has been as dramatic structurally as it has been in England, but I think things have been getting better. I think frontline social workers in Scotland feel supported by management and government. Maybe it's part of our public service ethos. I think having the chief social worker [in each council] helps - departments work in different ways across Scotland, but I think that role is important."The ADSW has been working hard to reinvigorate local practitioner forums, which Baird believes are encouraging discussion and sharing among different sectors. He also believes that the focus and support provided by the relatively new Swia has been positive.Sarah Summers, a senior social worker in children and families at West Lothian council, who trained originally as a nurse in London, is happy in her job. "I think Scotland and West Lothian are great places to be," she says. "I originally came here for six months to 'cut my teeth' but I liked it so I stayed - it's supportive and proactive."West Lothian was quick to notice recruitment and retention problems in social work, so set up a strategic review some years ago. "Our terms and conditions were improved and that made a difference," says Summers. "We don't have a waiting list - whatever comes through the door is allocated - and all our statutory child protection work is carried out by social workers, which should be the case everywhere, but I know it isn't."Lucy Houston, a criminal justice social worker with the homeless persons team in Glasgow, is originally from Northern Ireland. She decided to train and work in Scotland. "In England and Northern Ireland I think it's much more about monitoring, but here I think it's about support and care," she says. "I'm sure we'd all like more time with clients and there are increasing paperwork requirements, but it's all important."Panel decisionLike Summers, Kay Smith, a children and families social worker with Falkirk council, retrained as a social worker as a mature student. Indeed, both came to the career after serving on the Children's Panel, Scotland's system for dealing with children who are vulnerable, in need of care, or who have offended. "I thought this was something I could do to make a difference," Smith says. "I think the Children's Panel system is good for child welfare and I think it helps make Scotland a good place to work. There's also good inter-agency working."I really enjoy the job; I like working through issues with a family and getting positive outcomes - and our office always has plenty of chocolate biscuits."Further reform is in the pipeline in Scotland, with the functions of the Swia set to merge with those of the Care Commission (which is the Scottish care regulator) and with the education inspectorate's responsibilities for child protection, to provide an overarching scrutiny body for care and social work. But the survey suggests Scots are relatively relaxed about change: only 50% of them are concerned by new frameworks, compared to 52% in England and 63% in Wales. More of an issue could be funding: local authority budgets continue to be under pressure and Baird thinks that offering more personalised care will be a challenge.Then there's the public profile issue, north of the border as south. Asked what would make life easier, Summers is clear. "The media makes our job harder as I feel we are misrepresented," she says. "People are reluctant to involve social workers because they think we're going to take their children away. Correcting these views takes up a lot of our time. I think we should be standing up for social work - we do a very good job."