Baroness Scotland, the Attorney General, has done nothing wrong in employing an irregular migrant who has been in the UK for many years. Had she done so knowingly, she could have borne witness to her Catholic beliefs. For it is a key tenet of modern Catholic social teaching that "illegal immigrants" – an inappropriate term, as we'll see – acquire rights to stay over time, and should be recognised by the law.The principle was stated only the other day by the Cardinal Archbishop of Chicago, Francis George, who is no liberal. The church does not encourage illegal immigration, he said, "but we should also say you have to respect the people in front of you. If you have neighbours and family members who have been subjected to society financially, socially and religiously for decades, they should be able to live here with security." That's why the US bishops are strong advocates of a pathway into citizenship for long-term irregular migrants, of whom there are close to 500,000 in the UK and many millions in the US. Next year, President Obama will be putting forward just such a plan. The state's right to deport erodes over time; the longer a person stays, the stronger the moral claim to remain. Take Marguerite Grimmond, an 80-year-old woman born in the US but resident in the UK from the age of two, who went on a vacation to Australia only to be told, on her return, that she had no right to reside in the UK and faced deportation. The case came to light in June 2007; she was in every sense an illegal immigrant, who knew that she did not have British citizenship, who had evaded immigration controls. Yet she was allowed to regularise her status, because the moral absurdity of forcing her to leave a place where she had lived so long was evident, whatever the legal technicalities. Time confers a moral right to remain because there is something deeply wrong with uprooting people who have put down roots and formed lasting human connections. How long does that take? Most experts, and common sense, put that period at about five years. So does the Catholic church. On 4 May this year, the Catholic bishop in charge of the church's policy on migrants, said in a homily: "There is clear moral case that undocumented workers who have lived and worked in this country for five years or more should be given the opportunity to build a future in the United Kingdom and continue to contribute to British society."That is the period which the London Citizens campaign, Strangers into Citizens – inspired by the former Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster's 2006 call for a conditional amnesty programme – argues should be the precondition of a UK regularisation programme. The campaigners have persuaded London's mayor, Boris Johnson, to back the idea, which has been been studied by the London Schools of Economics. The LSE says the mayor's plan would regularise 618,000 people and add £3bn to the UK economy. And it would not act as a green light to illegal immigration. How long has Baroness Scotland's 27-year-old Tongan housekeeper, Loloahi Tapui-Zivancevic, been in the UK? More than five years. She came to the UK legally. She goes to an Anglican church in west London. She is married to a solicitor. She gives every sign of being a rooted, contributing citizen of the UK, and is precisely the kind of person who would be eligible under the mayor's proposals. Not only is it morally wrong to deport her, but she has a powerful case to have her residence recognised in law. But for now, surely, the law's the law, and the Attorney-General is there to uphold it? But there are different kinds of laws. Lady Scotland has caused general outrage by saying her offence is no more than failing to pay the congestion charge – "an administrative, technical error". But she's right. Immigration offences are not criminal but administrative violations. That is why the term "illegal immigrant" is absurd. A person cannot be illegal, only a criminal. And an undocumented migrant, despite the best efforts of some tabloids, is not a criminal – any more than is a person who absent-mindedly breaks the speed limit. And someone who employs an undocumented migrant, believing – on the paper evidence – that she has a right to work, is doing nothing remotely wrong. And even if she knowingly did so, as a Catholic, her conscience would be clear. As a lawyer, Baroness Scotland also knows that time erodes the state's power to pursue legal violations. Three to five years is considered the maximum time for enforcing many criminal offences, let alone administrative ones. The notion that foreigners who have put down roots in Britain – often after waiting more than a decade for their asylum claim to be processed – can be deported is simply absurd. No one claims that half a million people can be forcibly removed, by this or any other state. The right step, the step advocated by the church of which Lady Scotland is a keen member, is to give them the legal right to stay.If Baroness Scotland can be accused of hypocrisy, it is that she is apologising for what she has done instead of defending it from the best principles in both her faith and the law.