This weekend saw Changin Scotland at the Ceilidh Place in Ullapool (no, I don’t understand why it’s missing a ‘g’ either). Now in its twelfth year, this biannual gathering of politics, culture and ideas was predominantly ‘yes’ (still a thing: more of that later), more lefty than SNP, with a strongly Highland flavour. (Indeed, in his talk on land and social change, Jim Hunter argued that centralised SNP government had not been good for the Highlands and Islands: “from a nationalist perspective Scotland is one nation and the idea that parts are unique makes them uncomfortable”.) The gathering was founded by writer and researcher Gerry Hassan, and the MSP, Ceilidh Place owner and all-round renaissance woman Jean Urquhart. Here, she talks about the “idea of the ceilidh” as a place of debate as well as dancing.Another speaker was Madeleine Bunting, who travelled through the Hebrides this summer researching a book on the history of the relationship between England and Scotland. In her own talk she said a fascinating thing: “ ‘Remote’ is a political term”. Here she picks up on the suggestion from constitutional lawyer Adam Tomkins that the experience of the Scottish independence referendum had revealed England (outside of London) to be the worst governed part of the UK, as well as the presentation by Lateral North on Scotland’s future as a northern nation.A few gossipy notes: Adam Tomkins, who was also one of the Conservative representatives on the Smith Commission, told the audience that it was Harriet Harman who vetoed the devolution of abortion; some eyebrows were raised at Makar Liz Lochhead’s very public joining of the SNP; Ross Colquhoun admitted that National Collective had at one point during the referendum campaign sent a yes sign into space (photographic evidence here; no, really). Talking of Smith, land reform expert Andy Wightman thought that giving Holyrood responsibility for the management of the crown estate in Scotland was a recommendation that had been seriously under-played in its significance. Here he explains why.This isn’t a weekend for technocrats, however. At around 130 attendees, many local to the area, it wasn’t the biggest post-referendum event I’ve been to in recent weeks, but it was brimful of ideas. With around half of the audience new to the gathering, much of the discussion focused around how to harness and realign the energy unleashed by the pro-independence movement in this liminal period post-Smith, pre-general election. (It would be a disaster, the Radical Independence Campaign’s Cat Boyd told the audience, to get trapped in a decade long battle between Labour and the SNP.)Lisa MacDonald, a teacher and poet from Ullapool, describes her own first impressions of Changin Scotland and the political awakening that brought her here:One note of caution: for all the heartfelt talk of reaching out to the 55% who voted no, it was still the case that the temperature in the village hall dropped by several degrees when Adam Tomkins was speaking. Certainly, the man is a Tory, but one of the most simpatico you’re likely to stumble across in Scotland these days. “Reaching” was an active verb last time I looked. This was one theme of playwright David Greig’s talk. Greig, for my money one of the most subtle observers of indyref behaviour, insisted that it was “incumbent on the people who want the spirit of yes to continue” to create a public realm that doesn’t calcify into yes and no. He also asked the hugely pertinent question: why are we not talking about currency anymore? Greig elaborates on both points below. This gathering also marked the final one to be organised by Hassan and Urquhart. There was some discussion on the final morning of how best to keep the kettle boiling: the Ceilidh Place is still keen to be a venue, and other groups like National Collective might offer their services. In the meantime, if you’re looking for an events organising role before next March, you know where to apply....