"Remember you're an upside-down turtle!" shouts Duncan, who has noticed my kayak wobble perilously as I try to land. The technique may lack dignity – thrust your backside into the cockpit with legs flailed skywards before completing the manoeuvre with a "back-to-front" press-up to bring yourself to a standing position astride the vessel (just do in reverse to get back in) – but it's a surefire way to avoid a dunking. When afloat, the kayaks are so stable that capsizes are rare. Like flying, it's the take-off and landing that are the most hazardous moments. Slithering around calf deep in seaweed, now ashore, I regret my choice of flimsy neoprene footwear. Next year I'm bringing wellies.   I'm on a five-day sea-kayaking taster and we're spending the afternoon on Shieldaig, a sea loch on the western Highlands coast, mastering basic navigation skills, in order to prevent us drifting off towards Ireland when we venture further afield. The polite introductions at Inverness railway station have developed into collective camaraderie, peppered with the odd expletive, as we rescue dropped paddles, carry boats off and onto dry land, and struggle with fitting spraydecks over the cockpit – a feat not unlike stretching a fitted, single-bed sheet onto a king-size mattress.The introductory course is, admittedly, more a watersport version of glamping than a remote expedition. Cafetieres, luxury biscuits and camping stoves are all stowed in hatches for morning coffee breaks, and we return each evening to a cosy bunkhouse by upper Loch Torridon. People who sign up tend to have little, if any, seafaring experience and Duncan explains that several hours on the water, combined with a hot shower at the end of the day, is sufficiently adventurous for most beginners.  Comforts aside, the meticulous planning that Duncan and his co-guide Lisa put into the daily itinerary means we clock up miles of coastline on seal watch, learning precisely when it's time to drop our skegs. Is that the colloquialism for "trousers", someone asks, cheekily. We are even rewarded with a glimpse of Tarka the Otter's descendant basking on driftwood – a first for many of us.While the heatwave is, of course, a bonus, our guides' enthusiasm is so infectious that a good time would still be likely in the pouring rain. Having changed careers to become outdoor instructors, the pair, who plan to marry in the autumn, show that pipedreams can work out if you are prepared to put in the graft.In only a few days everyone has overcome the nervous-paddler syndrome and feels ready for a Helen Skelton-esque adventure down the Amazon, until two porpoises effortlessly overtake the boats, just to remind us novices how it's done.A line-up of our rainbow-coloured kayaks, with the Cuillin mountain range providing a majestic backdrop, sums up the trip. "Bet that'll be on your screensavers in the office on Monday morning," Duncan says. There is no need for him to point out we've spent the week bobbing about in his.Emma is from LancashireTHE JUDGE, Guardian travel writer Dixe Wills, says: "I enjoyed the way Emma thrust us straight into the action of her sea-kayaking course. From then on, she captured the essence of the holiday so well that I almost felt I'd been paddling alongside her – a sure sign of a good piece of travel writing."THE PRIZE: A three-night stay for 12 people at the new Mad Dogs & Vintage Vans glamping site in the Wye Valley, which features a collection of four vintage caravans, private compost loos, a communal shower shack and campfire, courtesy of Canopy & Stars (0117 204 7830, canopyandstars.co.uk). The prize includes a cider keg, and a meal for 12 on the second night.Never go back, they say… but if your roots are in the Trossachs, like Martin Raymond, home has to be worth a second lookWhen I found my teenage smoking den, I realised this wasn't an ordinary weekend break. Going on holiday to the place where you grew up isn't for those of an overly nervous or introspective disposition. Meeting ghosts doesn't always make for a fun trip. But first, obviously, you have to be lucky enough to come from a place you could reasonably want to visit on holiday.Callander in Perthshire, now at the heart of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park, might lack the louche glamour of Tracey Emin's Margate… and Bruce Springsteen's Asbury Park it isn't. But there is a common condition attached to growing up in a resort: "You mean you lived there?" people would gasp, mystified that these houses weren't just props. Like being from Venice – sort of.Callander and the Trossachs have been tourist destinations since tourist destinations were invented by Walter Scott. Wordsworth and Keats passed through, a classy start that led to pensioner-affordable bus tours, days out from Glasgow (it's less than an hour) and the area's present incarnation as a national park suitable for mountain biking and nature communing.My partner and I (never take teenagers on a trip to the place you grew up – ever) camp out in the forest nearby, in a luxurious log cabin. This is as insulated from the frequently dripping trees as a five-star hotel. There's even a hot tub, if you feel like giving the midges a big night out. Midges and rain are as much a part of a Scottish Highland holiday as castles and whisky, but neither are true spoilers.OK, I could be persuaded on the midges, but that's the other drawback of the return of the native – a lack of patience with the tourist board puff. And yet, as we wander the wet woods and shelter in the fine cafes and restaurants, I start to see the place through the eyes of the day trippers who have kept this place alive in tourism terms for nearly 200 years.Being just at the point where the jaggy Highlands suddenly rear out of the Lowlands helps a lot. It might rain a bit, but relentless sun is over-rated… just watch the mist lifting out of the narrow glens. Watching it fill back in again is less entrancing, but when the sun re-appears the hills look like something out of your imagination. I took it all for granted as an adolescent. I mean, I had to hide in the woods to smoke! Where's the urban edge in that? My old spot was just a short walk from the tartan-shop main street. I couldn't have missed it, what with all the dog-ends lying about (not my tabs, of course). Thirty years on and this slice of my past is still a community resource for the local teenagers.Martin is from Kinross, PerthThe judge says: "Martin's unusual angle – going on holiday to the place where he grew up – is eye-catching. The honesty he displayed about his trip is also heartening, especially when he turned a travel writers' cliche on its head by describing the dispiriting sight of mist filling the glens."Janet Rogers enjoys a little piece of heaven on the North York Moors – for both human and canine guests at a remote innGeorge sat in the corner of the bar, sucking air through the gaps where his teeth used to be. He was consuming large quantities of beer and whisky, named after moorland sheep and birds."Them's millionaires," he said, nodding in the direction of a group of young men, flush, with four-legged friends and four-wheel drives. I'd seen them that morning, vehicles parked on the cobbled forecourt of the old inn, high in the Yorkshire Dales; men in flat caps and body warmers and woolly socks with tasselled bits at the top, strutting around with guns over their shoulders.A man entered the bar with a dog on a lead. A cacophony of barking broke out. Dogs emerged from under tables and dark corners. Sleeping dogs stirred and joined in the fray.The barking subsided and the dogs settled back, camouflaged on the grey flagstones. This was doggy heaven, I thought; wild moors to roam all day, grouse and rabbits to chase and, at night, lounging in front of log fires. It was human heaven, too.We had travelled from the south to a place with foreign-sounding names like Yockenthwaite and Hubberholme and strange words such as "grikes" and "ginnels". We thought we were staying in Pateley Bridge but when we arrived and asked for the Crown Inn, the traffic warden shook his head and stared with the vacant gaze of a sheep.I looked again at our instructions and, in small print, just before the name Pateley Bridge, was the word Middlesmoor. That was the clue. We wound round single-track roads, hemmed in by dry-stone walls and climbed to the top of the moors. We were almost 1,000 feet up in a tiny village, where the stone houses seemed to cling to a network of steep paths. From our bedroom window in the old inn, we could look down to valley pastures.Later that afternoon, we ambled in the dale; it was warm and balmy and the sky was speckled with white cloud. We passed through meadows of creamy thistledown floating in the breeze. We skirted a pine forest and returned through a field of black cows.The next day we awoke to a thick mist, the trees and buildings just shadows and beyond them, nothing. The hills, once emerald and lime green, had disappeared under white muslin.We walked in rain among the remains of ancient settlements, parts of walls and piles of stones, everything lying in a mess, no order, just flung down and embedded in the landscape, and claimed by the sheep who wandered through it.We returned to our hill-top inn for dinner. George was still in the corner, supping beer and whisky. The shooting party were celebrating. The dogs were resting. A retriever came up and nudged me. I stroked him and asked his name. "That there's Riley," the publican said. "This is the life, isn't it?" I said as I patted him. And I'm sure Riley nodded.Janet is from West Sussex The judge says "Janet produced a wonderful thumbnail sketch of a trip to Middlesmoor in North Yorkshire. Her piece is evocative and well-observed and comes with a clever and witty final note."