Local people call it the Secret Beach and they won't tell you how to get there. It is, to me at least, Britain's most beautiful beach and what's more no one seems to know about it. I found it by accident as I wandered along the Sutherland cliffs from Durness, catching the last of the May sunshine before the promised rain set in for the day. I walked on springy green turf speckled with white daisies, stopping to check the cliffs for nesting puffins and to scan the sea with my binoculars. I hoped to spot the spouts of dolphins, or even a whale, or the bobbing head of a seal. A brisk wind chased clouds across the sun, turning the sea from turquoise to slate grey, and back to blue again. It was still early in the morning and clumps of thrift were haloed in pink by the low sun. I walked for perhaps a mile, keeping to the edge of the cliff. There was no path, but no obstructions save an occasional wire fence.Suddenly, there it was below me. The perfect beach. Cupped by the precipitous cliffs lay a semicircle of smooth sand decorated with chunks and towers of toffee-coloured rock like an exotic dessert. At first there seemed no way down, but then I noticed that at one point the craggy cliffs softened to a slope to allow a small stream to make its way to the sea. The long grass beside this rivulet was flattened in places by occasional feet, the secret access to this hidden cove. I slithered down. Sand the colour of Dulux Magnolia squeaked under my trainers. There were cowries and other shells along the high tide line, and a few bits of seaweed, but otherwise it stretched unblemished to the surf. Mine were the only footprints when I took my shoes off to paddle, and the only tracks around the towers and pinnacles of grooved and scalloped rock. The wind-whipped rain spattered my face as I walked back to the hotel, but I was grinning with delight at what I had discovered. My beach; the secret beach. But it's there for anyone who looks; just don't tell the locals.• To get to there head due east from Smoo Cave Hotel (www.smoocavehotel.co.uk) in eastern Durness until you reach the cliffs, then follow them south to the beach. It's less than a mile. Durness is Britain's most northwesterly village and the jumping off point for the wild expanses of Cape Wrath. For more information and accommodation options go to www.durness.org. There's a daily bus to Smoo Cave as well as Durness from Inverness