The Labour government's white paper proposing greater tax powers for the Scottish parliament has been dismissed as an exercise in pre-election window dressing. For a start, it will never be implemented because there is not enough time for legislation to pass Westminster before the general election. It looks like a pre-election spoiler before the SNP government publishes its bill for an independence referendum on St Andrews Day. But that doesn't mean it is worthless.The Scottish secretary, Jim Murphy, is clearly offering Scottish voters a choice: vote nationalist and get an independence referendum few appear to want – recent polls suggest barely a third of Scottish voters favour independence – or vote for Labour and get a better devolution, a Scottish parliament with extra powers, based on the proposals in the Calman commission report published earlier this year.The Calman commission was set up by the main opposition parties in Scotland nearly two years ago as the answer to the new SNP government's "national conversation" on its plans for an independence referendum. Sir Kenneth Calman, the former chief medical officer for Scotland, held hearings for more than a year and came to the conclusion that if the Scottish parliament is to be responsible and accountable, it should raise at least a proportion of the money it spends on services. The Scottish government has about $33bn to play with, thanks to the Barnett formula, which calculates increases in spending on a per capita basis. This bloc grant arrangement is unsound, according to Calman, because it encourages politicians to spend without having to go to the people to seek endorsement for raising the tax revenues to meet spending decisions.Critics of Barnett, especially in the UK Conservative party, have long argued that this bloc grant is a licence for MSPs to vote for measures like free school meals, free higher education and free prescriptions which are paid for by the English taxpayer. This is not true, of course, since any spending pledges made by the Scottish government have to be financed by savings elsewhere in the Scottish budget. The Barnett formula does not automatically increase the bloc grant to pay for manifesto pledges.However, Calman accepted the argument that there needed to be more transparency in the arrangements and that spending should be seen more closely to match taxation, so he proposed to split income tax between the Scottish parliament and a revised Barnett formula. He also called for the Scottish parliament to have control over stamp duty on house sales, land tax and possibly other taxes such as air passenger duty. His proposals were criticised by economists for being incoherent and in many ways they are. Why make the Scottish parliament only half accountable by letting it raise half of income tax? What about oil revenues? Why not sales taxes?There may indeed be problems with the mechanisms for taxation proposed by Calman, but the importance of the report is that it has built a political consensus around a proposal which can only lead to a form of federalism. The Scottish parliament already has primary legislative powers over most domestic policy – except for a few anomalies that Calman said should be addressed by looking at giving the Scottish parliament powers over broadcasting, firearms, energy policy and drugs.If Holyrood now were given substantial taxation powers we would be living in a new UK, which may be why the SNP has been rather more favourably disposed to Calman. It realises that once the principle is established that Scotland should raise the money it spends, then the logical conclusion can only be a form of fiscal federalism and greater power for the Scottish parliament.So why is Jim Murphy, the ultra-unionist Scottish secretary, so keen on implementing these measures? Well, historically it has always been Labour that has moved home rule on to the next stage. It was Labour that led the Scottish constitutional convention in the 1980s which campaigned for a Scottish parliament – the SNP boycotted it. It was a Labour government that passed the Scotland Act which set up Holyrood, so it should be no surprise that Labour is now heading a drive to extend devolution to the new level. Labour has had to find a way to undermine the success of the SNP in the Scottish parliament, and it has done so by the traditional means of offering more power within a reformed union.The question now is – what will the Tories do if they win the general election?