The advent of spring has evidently tempted some British politicians to try out a favourite sport: kite-flying. The past few days have seen a steady stream of stories about the future of Royal Bank of Scotland, the bank that was once the biggest in the world and is now 83% owned by British taxpayers. There have been a string of pieces, on the BBC and across the papers, suggesting that the British government is in "serious" talks to sell off a sizable chunk of the RBS to Abu Dhabi.The Treasury has done some dutiful hosing down of the more excited speculation – but it is notable that the Conservative backbencher Matthew Hancock, formerly chief of staff to George Osborne, and a reliable signatory to party press releases, has popped up to defend a hypothetical sale. With fortuitous timing, Vince Cable has been issuing calls for RBS to be turned into a fully state-owned and -operated bank. Just three months after Richard Branson put up his first Virgin flag on a branch of Northern Rock, after the rushed sale of that mortgage lender, whether RBS remains in state hands, and on what terms, is up for debate.This is not the place to enter into a he-said, she-said measuring up of what will happen to one of the government's biggest assets, into which taxpayers have poured £45bn. Treasury officials have been talking about selling a stake in RBS to a sovereign wealth fund in Asia or the Middle East since Alistair Darling was chancellor. George Osborne is also clear that he wants RBS to go back into private hands; the Whitehall assumption has long been that one of the swiftest ways to achieve that is to get in a big foreign buyer. And last year's bargain-basement sale of Northern Rock to Mr Branson indicates that ministers are not even bothered about making a big loss, as long as it rids them of one more headache. Mr Osborne might not use the same terms as Stephen Hester, but his position is not that far from the RBS chief executive, who declared earlier this month (again, the timing is striking): "The faster the government starts selling its stake, the better for everyone."Nothing is amiss with that last sentence, apart from the fact that it is completely wrong. It is wrong for taxpayers, who will surely stand to lose substantial amounts in any such fire sale. It is wrong for small businesses, as ministers and voters will lose whatever grip they had on directing lending to hard-pressed companies that are facing bankruptcy or big losses thanks to the harsh financing terms extended by high-street banks. And finally, it is wrong for the British economy, which is struggling to emerge from a severe recession caused by banks running wild.The only people who might get some advantage out of the sort of sale suggested this week is the Conservative part of the coalition. It is not hard to imagine the flourish with which Mr Osborne would announce a deal, as evidence that he is getting on with sorting out Labour's legacy and the country's finances. But any such boost would surely be very short-lived, once taxpayers realised how much they were out of pocket. The government bought RBS shares at an average price of 50p. They are now around 28p, so a sale at these levels would mean a £20bn loss. It would have been better had Gordon Brown not paid RBS shareholders anything for stock that was then arguably worthless, but we are where we are. Any attempt to do a deal now will lead to a cut-price sale, and rub more salt in taxpayers' wounds.As Mr Cable says, there is a strong case for keeping RBS in public hands and directing it to regenerate Britain's wrecked economy. A fully privatised finance sector would not help with that, as evidenced by bankers' behaviour during the boom. At the height of the bubble in 2007, about two-thirds of all bank lending went either into property or to other banks. Labour frontbenchers have sketched out plans for a state investment bank, but has got nowhere near the detail. But rather than invent a lender from scratch, it would make far more sense to use RBS. In this case, the best investment would be a long-term one.