Major retailers have been forced to suspend online customers' deliveries – and in some cases even new orders – in Scotland as a result of the continuing bad weather, which is affecting thousands of Christmas shoppers.Marks & Spencer, Tesco, Sainsbury's, Boots and Parcelforce have all suspended deliveries to Scottish customers using their online services. In some cases, customers have been warned that orders may not be ready in time for Christmas.The suspension of home deliveries comes as courier firms used by the retailers struggle to overcome a backlog – in some cases involving up to a week's worth of parcels built up during the recent bad weather. Generally, food and drink deliveries are unaffected.Tesco said: "Every delivery company operating in Scotland has been affected by the recent severe weather. We don't want to cause disappointment to customers and have taken the decision to suspend new Tesco Direct orders in Scotland."We are working hard to ensure that orders already placed with us are delivered." He said grocery deliveries were unaffected.Sainsbury's said: "Despite our best efforts, the adverse weather conditions mean we have had to suspend our non-food deliveries in Scotland. We would like to apologise to our customers for any inconvenience this has caused. Our grocery deliveries are continuing as normal."Marks & Spencer said: "Due to the recent bad weather, we've had to make some changes to our deliveries to Scotland for online orders. We are still accepting orders for delivery-to-store for collection, which is free of charge, and at this time we are confident that all previously placed delivery-to-home orders will be delivered pre-Christmas."However, we are currently not accepting orders for delivery-to-home for Scottish postcodes as we can't guarantee a delivery date. It is very unfortunate that we've had to make this decision but we don't want to disappoint any customers."The bad weather has also disrupted parcel deliveries. Parcelforce said it regretted having to take the "unprecedented decision" not to accept deliveries for its depots in Scotland's main cities. In a statement on its website over the weekend, the delivery company said it would not be accepting any parcels for delivery in its Glasgow, Edinburgh, Perth and Aberdeen centres until it was "confident" it could honour Christmas deliveries.Fiona Moriarty, the director of the Scottish Retail Consortium, said: "This is disappointing for customers, but retailers have had their hands tied and are doing their best to restore deliveries as soon as possible. They tend to use a number of major courier firms, so to an extent have had their hands tied."Deadlines for online shoppers wanting guaranteed delivery before Christmas vary between retailers. For John Lewis the final deadline is 3pm on 21 December, but this is later – 23 December – for Marks & Spencer, Boots and Littlewoods.Snow and icy temperatures are expected to return across most of Britain on Thursday. The limit of the past few days' respite was confirmed today by the Met Office, which said the thaw would end abruptly as prevailing winds veer and allow an Arctic front to move in from Scandinavia.Temperatures are expected to drop towards the levels of 10 days ago, with lows of -10C (14F) along the eastern seaboard from Scotland to Kent. Only the south-west has a chance of escaping."It will be very cold and unsettled," said a Met Office spokeswoman. "There is a risk of drifting leading to temporary blizzard conditions."Scotland had an early return of freezing temperatures today, with police reporting icy roads in many parts.• This article was amended on 14 December 2010. The original subheading and second paragraph included Amazon in the list of those companies suspending deliveries to Scottish customers using their online services. This has been deleted as incorrect.