In an interesting piece in today's G2 by Allegra McEvedy, she discusses Defra's campaign to increase the number of UK food products with protected status and points out that Britain has just 38 protected food names compared to over 300 from France and Italy.Famously, Melton Mowbray pork pies now have protection after attempts by others to produce them without the care and attention required to achieve the high standards of the originals - the move there was reactive, safeguarding the product from an immediate threat. Stilton, Cornish clotted cream and Arbroath smokies are likewise already protected. Simon Majumdar has written on WoM before about attempts to protect the Birmingham balti and Glasgow's chicken tikka masala.Unfortunately, it's too late for many British products and dishes, most depressingly perhaps in the case of cheddar cheese which is now so widespread, churned out across the globe, that as far as I'm aware we can't now reclaim the name. That's a lesson UK producers should all take to heart. We have thousands of wonderful producers who we all too often take for granted. More of them should be celebrated and their products safeguarded. As well as the laborious application process which can be so offputting for small producers, I think the British personality is to blame.Last night I was at a wonderful dinner hosted by Atul Kocher from Benares, and featuring several prominent Indian chefs from around the world. Speaking to Cyrus Todiwala, the Bombay-born British restaurateur who runs Cafe Spice, we discussed his feeling that in India, as in Britain, there's a tendency to favour produce from elsewhere - a mentality that says "If it's ours, it can't be that good". There's an obvious pride in Indian cuisine, in street food and in home cooking, but perhaps in the developing restaurant culture that pride is matched with a fascination for what's going on elsewhere, which can be a good and a bad thing.The chefs put out a wonderful menu, and in honour of Vancouver restaurateur Vicram Vij from Bombay also showcased Canadian and Indian wines. While serving a decent shiraz from Nashik and an absolutely stunning British Colombian ice wine (Riesling Reserve Mission Hill 2006), always there was the caveat, the discussion, "they're not Italian or French"; "we're younger producers"; "the land isn't mature yet, but they're decent." All quite true, but why dwell on the negatives?The Italians and French have a pride in their cuisine which is bought into by the rest of us, and their confidence has grown on the international gastronomic stage. Meanwhile we've been reproachfully obsessing over what's wrong with our food culture (and there is much) instead of celebrating what's right. It's a vicious circle and Allegra has it spot on, it's absolutely right to stop it now.Allegra points out that producers of any foodstuff can apply, and mentions our wonderful asparagus and the many high quality cheeses on display at Neal's Yard Dairy. But shortly after reading her article I found myself staring at a BBC story from yesterday about one of the current producers seeking protection - the haunting image you see above: the square Lorne sausage. It's named after the Kirkintilloch-born comedian Tommy Lorne, who apparently came up with the mix of nutmeg, coriander, beef and pork. The recipe is in fact reproduced in Maw Broon's cookbook which attracted criticism for its unhealthy recipes a couple of years back. Now there's no doubting the square sausage is much loved. It's one of the things that improved my teenage years vastly (strictly behind my parents' backs) - in a roll, smothered with brown sauce and grabbed from the hatch of a snack bar. I loved them. I haven't had one for years but I can recall the fried square patty of fatty meat and spicy flavours as if it were yesterday.I have mixed feelings, though, about this one. The Lorne sausage has always figured in my memory as a bit of a guilty snack. It's not exactly associated with health in its cooked form, and uncooked it resembles a big sludgy, meaty brick. Neither is it made from decent meat - usually it's the cheapest of the cheap bits. To be honest, it feels a bit ... well, embarrassing that this should be one of the first things Scotland should find to shout about. Wouldn't the likes of Stornoway black pudding or haggis (currently being argued over by English and Scottish historians), be more suitable products to protect? Doesn't the Lorne sausage bid reinforce our reputation for culinary embarrassment? Or am I suffering from the affliction I describe above - after all, if protected status was about healthy foods, the numbers would shrink by hundreds (and whisky would surely be the first to go).