At corners, they pose as much threat as a Hobbit would against a team of Orcs. Their passing and shooting are laughable while their ability to keep the ball from reaching the back of the net is only mariginally better than that of an English goalkeeper. Robot footballers have a long way to go, it would seem.Yet great things are expected of them, it transpires. According to the organisers of RoboCup, the international football competition for humanoid players which kicked off in Singapore yesterday, the skills that are being built up through the design and manufacture of robot players for the tournament are performing a vital role in helping engineers and scientists perfect a team that will have the prowess and the ability to take the official World Cup trophy away from humans.That target has been set by RoboCup's organisers for the year 2050 and was established following the success of the artificial intelligence chess challenge that was fought out in the 90s. That clash was eventually won in 1997 when IBM's Deep Blue computer program beat world chess champion Garry Kasparov.Now RoboCup wants to repeat that success with the beautiful game – though a quick glimpse at a few YouTube videos of robot players in action will reveal just how difficult that task is going to be. Metre-high players scuttle crabwise across the pitch. They lash out but miss the ball. Occasionally one falls over for no discernible reason. It sounds like a typical England training session, in other words, and suggests that the designers of robot footballers have a great deal of work ahead of them before they can create players that are able to beat humans.Improvements are constantly being made, however. For example, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh have developed a program that lets robots predict where the ball will go, rather than merely reacting to its movement. Tests show that such robots outperform rivals, allowing them to bend it, not so much like Beckham, but like R2-D2. Indeed, Manuela Veloso, a computer science professor at CMU, is convinced this programme will bring success for his team at RoboCup. "I don't see any reason why we won't win," he says.So the day of the robot football player may not be that far off. And in any case, most of them are already blessed with one major advantage over their human counterparts: they look more lifelike than Peter Crouch when they celebrate after scoring a goal.