When Anthony Chen was a child in Singapore, his parents employed a Filipina nanny. Generally speaking, he says, the relationship between such maids and employers is "quite brutal. You invite a stranger into your home and have them form a relationship with your children over a number of years. Then when you decide you don't need help any more, you send them home, and that sense of family is very brutally erased."Instead of erasing his own nanny, Chen made a film about her. And it isn't brutal at all. Ilo Ilo, which won the Camera D'Or award [for best debut feature] at last year's Cannes film festival, is a sensitive, observant study of a Singaporean family under pressure, and their new Filpina domestic help, who's under even more pressure. It is set in 1997, around the time Chen was just saying goodbye to his nanny, who had been part of the family for eight years. The character in the film has the same name: Teresa, or "Aunty Terry", as Chen called her, and Ilo Ilo is the province of the Philippines where she came from and returned to. In the film, Aunty Terry's treatment is somewhat harsher than in reality, Chen stresses. She sleeps on a roll-out bed in the same room as the vindictive little brat of a boy she's charged with looking after. And when she's not being stitched up by him, there are the domestic chores, the cold, imperious mother, the father pushed to the brink by the Asian economic crisis, and her guilt over her own son, growing up without a mother back in the Philippines. Mary Poppins it ain't.This type of domestic arrangement has been the accepted norm in Singapore and affluent parts of east Asia for decades now – to the extent that few film-makers have examined it. Probably half of all Singaporean families have a live-in domestic helper, Chen estimates, though most of them are now from Indonesia: "Filipinos have become too expensive." "It's not like the western bourgeois idea of having a servant to show you're of a certain class," he says. "Eighty per cent of Singapore is middle class, but both parents have to work to bring in the bread, and they need someone to help with the children. So it's not so much a luxury, more a necessity. It's simple economic pragmatism." That cliched "Asian work ethic" cuts both ways, though. "You could argue that a lot of the maids have forsaken their own children in the same way these working parents have, in pursuit of a better life. There's a lot of irony there."The traditional Chinese parenting style has been boosted by Amy Chua and her "Tiger Mom" philosophy, and notoriously rule-bound Singapore could be seen as the embodiment of those cliched "Asian" values: self-discipline, respect for authority, hard work, corporal punishment. Ilo Ilo doesn't indict or defend the situation, it simply observes. It is marvellously even-handed and empathetic towards all its characters, even the brattish son, which makes it feel like the work of a veteran auteur. Chinese families around the world have told Chen they recognise so much in it, he says. Like the family banquet scene, where beneath the respectful niceties, relatives subtly jostle to impart their status, keeping a lid on their problems and making a show of generosity so as not to lose face. "My films always revolve around human relations and the delicate emotions between people," he says. "I'm very wary of making a sort of activist film or a huge socio-political statement. The last thing I wanted was to make a film that's didactic – what's right, what's wrong – life is too complex for that."One of the things that helped Chen portray his country so clearly was the fact that he didn't live there when he wrote Ilo Ilo. He came to London to study at the National Film and Television School in 2007 (where Pawel Pawlikowski was one of his tutors) and has been here ever since. He had already made 10 short films in Singapore, some of which won awards at Cannes and other festivals, but he felt he had more to learn before making a feature. "I'd heard horror stories about American film schools," he says. Directing had been an ambition since he was 15. While other kids were watching Jackie Chan films and Hong Kong crime thrillers, Chen was drawn to the work of Taiwanese auteurs such as Hou Hsiao-Hsien, Ang Lee and especially Edward Yang, to whom he's often been compared (Yang's A Brighter Summer Day is his all-time favourite film). He also discovered the French New Wave and China's "fifth generation" film-makers like Chen Kaige and Zhang Yimou. "I probably didn't understand what was going on in those films, but growing up in a concrete jungle, I took an interest in the beauty of the countryside," he says. He was also smitten by Zhang's regular leading lady, Gong Li, it seems. Predictably, Chen's film-making ambitions didn't go down a storm with his own "tiger parents", he says, though his younger brothers are in banking and business, so he's off the hook.He's practically a national hero back hom now. Ilo Ilo was the first Singaporean film to win an award at Cannes, and it has accumulated dozens more across the world since, including the Sutherland Trophy at last year's London Film Festival (Edward Yang won the same award back in 1987). He's met the president and the prime minister, and the film has been a commercial hit domestically – usually the Cannes laurels are the box-office kiss of death in arthouse-resistant Singapore, he jokes. He still can't believe it all. "Being selected for Cannes is every film-maker's dream, but to be really, really honest, I was quite worried as well, because it's a very humble piece of work. It's a delicate film. I made it for £300,000. A film like that could go unnoticed and undiscovered among all the heavyweight auteurs and big stars there."After a year promoting Ilo Ilo around the world, he's now "itching to make another film", he says "I feel so useless when I'm not working." It could be an English-language film (he's talking to British producers), or he has some ideas set in Singapore. Before that, he has another project to complete, he says. His wife is studying for a PhD in London, and they hope to have a child soon, he says. Their conversations about childcare should be interesting.The success of Ilo Ilo also had one unexpected repercussion: Chen found his Aunty Terry. His family had lost contact with her when she moved back to the Philippines, when Chen was 12 years old. Finding her was all but impossible, he thought. "How do you look for someone with no address? The Philippines is huge: 90 million people! The only thing I knew was that she came from Ilo Ilo province. I didn't even know her last name, she was just Aunty Terry." But the film caught the attention of the Filipino media, which launched a campaign to track down Aunty Terry. Two weeks later, a niece of hers living overseas heard about the hunt on the radio. It turned out Aunty Terry, AKA Teresita Sajonia, was living in a wooden hut in a small village, raising ducks and chickens. Chen and his brother went to see her and had an emotional reunion, he says. She had tried to write to the family but they'd moved house. "She kept such strong memories of us because she didn't have children. In fact, she had a blue pouch she wears everywhere she goes, and she told us that my mum gave it to her, like, 17 years ago. When she opened it, inside were photographs of me and my brothers. That really moved us to tears."