Singapore ZooFancy breakfast with the wildlife? At the zoo’s “jungle breakfast”, you’ll hand-feed the elephants while they have their morning bath, pose with snakes and eat with the orangutans, and then return to the buffet before tackling the zoo proper. Most enclosures have hidden barriers or moats to keep their residents in, so you really do get the chance to feel close to the animals.Singapore Botanic GardensThese Unesco world heritage gardens are a treat for nature lovers. Check out more than 1,000 species of orchid in the National Orchid Garden, before tracking down the 47 heritage trees, not missing the giant Jelawai Jaha along Liane Road, which stands over 50 metres tall. A whole day is easily spent here.MacRitchie Nature Trail and Reservoir ParkImmerse yourself in nature at this underrated park, hiking the peaceful well-signposted trails and heading into the trees on the impressive canopy walk, which features a lofty suspension bridge. You’ll see plenty of locals jogging or taking group classes and you can hire a kayak to get out on the water. Look out for monkeys – and don’t feed them. Hort ParkHort Park is Singapore’s top drawcard for gardeners and gardening enthusiasts. Set among the Southern Ridges, a 6 mile stretch of open green space on the tip of Singapore harbour, Hort Park offers visitors fantastic array of recreational and educational gardening activities, as well as a world-class garden retail centre. While you’re at it, be sure to check out Henderson Waves, the spectacularly designed pedestrian bridge affording brilliant views of the Southern Ridges and the city. Sungei Buloh Wetland ReserveThis pristine wetland is a must for bird lovers. As well as being home to a host of species year-round, from the vulnerable lesser adjutant to the blue-crowned hanging parrot, there are some 230 visiting species. The best time to catch the migratory birds refuelling on the mudflats is from September to March. Anyone can join free guided walks on weekends.Gardens by the BayFor those who like their nature a little more controlled, Gardens by the Bay makes for a fascinating day out. Don’t expect untouched nature here, this is very much an attraction, with guided tours, audio tours and even an app. Be sure to visit the flower dome – the world’s largest glass greenhouse is impressive on its own and the flora’s pretty good too.Green CorridorA fascinating combination of nature and history, the Green Corridor was a railway retained by Malaysia on Singapore’s independence in 1965. Returned to Singapore in 2010, residents campaigned to preserve it as a green space for the community and, once the rails were torn up and returned to Malaysia, the government allowed nature to take over. Today it’s a unique place for a walk, and an unbeatably interesting route across the island. Night SafariThe world’s first safari park for nocturnal animals will appeal not only to humans of a nocturnal persuasion, but to wildlife lovers of all stripes. This is home to more than 130 species, of which 38% are threatened. The 40-minute tram tour through the park’s seven geographical zones is the perfect introduction before you strike off on one of the four walking trails. Chinese and Japanese GardensCollectively known as Jurong Lake Gardens, the Chinese portion is modelled on the northern imperial style. The seven-storey pagoda is particularly striking, as is the Bridge of Double Beauty that links the garden to its Japanese neighbour. The Japanese side is designed to be more calming and, with fewer features, it stays true to the style of the Muromachi period (1336-1573) it is based on.Pulau Ubin islandOften called the last kampong (village) in Singapore, nature lovers could spend days on this beguiling island. The Chek Jawa wetlands are a major draw, with the largest intertidal flat in northern Singapore surrounded by coastal forest and mangroves. There’s a visitor centre, boardwalk and tower for bird-watching – all best accessed on a rented bike.