The short conversations you have with taxi drivers reveal a great deal about a city's character. In Milan, where I have discussed Armani and Dolce & Gabanna with Italian cabbies, the local fashion scene is covered with aplomb. In Singapore, while in the city to attend Men's fashion week, my chat about the country's biggest fashion event drew a blank with drivers. Instead, they were more interested in talking about what a mollycoddled generation Singapore has produced in its youth.Singapore has the highest concentration of millionaires and shopping malls in the world, but relatively few locals have had an interest in high fashion or the arts. I remember my frustrations growing up in Singapore in the early 2000s; my hunger for creative energy could only be satiated through copies of Vogue and Dazed & Confused. Today, however, change is in the air. The government is charging towards their goal to become a global arts hub by 2015. This is 'arts' in the broadest sense: the ban on casinos has been dropped, and locations such as Marina Bay Sands, a venue for the fashion weeks, have begun to attract international attention. "We no longer want to be the Switzerland of the world, but the Monte Carlo of the world," said one local friend in a humourous but accurate remark.This men's fashion week (MFW) was the first of its kind in Asia, devised by Singaporean philanthropist and entrepreneur, Frank Cintamani, who set the ball rolling when he flew a group of Parisian couturiers to Singapore last October for the city's first Haute Couture week. The agenda for 2012 was to bring music and menswear together – "Who is Lady Gaga without the fashion she wears?" Cintamani quipped. The budget for this year is $8 million SPD (£4 million), highlighting the scale of the project. "We're making the first serious attempt to marry fashion and music," Cintamani, looking sharp in a Givenchy suit, tells me when I meet him during MFW. "But the same objective remains – that this is a platform for Asian menswear designers." Is roping in a whole other industry a bit too much too soon? "I couldn't wait half a generation before this picked up, I needed to inject the music component to propel it to the next level. It needs to be ten times the scale of what it is," he adds. MFW found sponsorship this year from brands such as Aston Martin and Leica.What the majority of designers at MFW brought to menswear were new possibilities to be both comfortable and stylish. Approaching the music and menswear element most holistically was Hisashi Fukatami's label Diet Butcher Slim Skin, inspired by the experimental compositions of pianist H Zett M, who gave a live performance while the Japanese designer spun electro sounds on stage. The collection made combat style chic, with a touch of romanticism. Three-piece suits were fresh with cropped trousers, particularly in the ombrés and embroidered linen. Another highlight came from Korean brand Beyond Closet, where designer Tae Yong used American sportswear to inject humour into the workplace – his opening look rather strangely but successfully spliced an old-fashioned blazer with elements from a varsity jacket, while another style elongated the baseball jacket to knee-length. One of more directional collections came from Britain's Bodybound, if perhaps aided by the buzz in the build-up to their show: Royal College of Art-educated Kim Choong-Wilkins – whose mother is of Singaporean descent – and Pliny Champion created a new collection that expanded on ideas from their home show, but a pair of clear PVC culottes set tongues wagging: Will they, won't they show bums? They covered up in the end, which served as a benign reminder that this is the country that issues penalties for public indecency. "We didn't want it to be a statement for the sake of it," Champion said. The collection overturned traditional menswear with a considered jam on rivets, studs, transparency and metallic knits. But where is the local talent? Of the 19 designers chosen, just one – Reckless Ericka – could be truly considered Singaporean. The small island has always struggled with its own design scene; it is now playing its strength as an efficient melting point – "a postmodern pastiche of the best bits," Charlie Casely-Hayford remarked. Afton Chen and Louis Koh, the duo behind the label, displayed great construction skills, creating volume and drama out of the lightest of fabrics (a must in the tropics) and received a well-deserved standing ovation.So does the Singapore approach represent a new future for fashion shows? Among attendees, there was some discussion as to whether the Singapore Men's fashion week is bringing back a charm that is lost and occasionally reminisced about– where professionals, with ever-increasing hunger for newness, dart in and out the European shows. "At least there's entertainment here instead of all the waiting around and chaos in London – it's never this relaxing!" another London-based journalist said to me, as K-pop group Se7en took the stage in between the catwalk shows. But as well as a dearth in homegrown designers, the music-fashion fusion puzzled some designers and industry attendees. Each fashion show was followed by a performance from K-pop and Asian stars throughout the five-day event. Never mind that I knew little of the artists or the songs; the energy sometimes failed to penetrate several guests as seats emptied after each designer's bow. The event's ambitions were grand; the 220,000 square feet venue was significant, though of what was fundamentally a showcase of 19 designers over five days, the result sometimes felt a little underwhelming. But let's remember that it took 20 years for power players to start taking London fashion week seriously. Like every new kid on the block, Singapore needs to offer something original to gain credibility. What I can be sure of is that Cintamani and Singapore have this in common: what they say they'll do, they will get done. And there certainly exists a growing group of locals tired of hearing what a cultural desert the country is. Within the next few years, Singapore's cab drivers may well become rather more fashion-literate.• This article was modified at 09:57 on 25 April to correct the spelling of Reckless Erika. The headline was also modified as the piece incorrectly identified this as the first men's fashion week in Singapore.