Would they dare to quit London? Could it be a case of "bye bye banks"? Faced with a threat of swingeing reforms, Britain's top financial institutions have been hinting they're in Britain out of choice, not duty, and could move elsewhere.A five-strong independent commission chaired by Sir John Vickers will tomorrow deliver its interim findings on the shape of the financial industry. The panel is likely to urge chancellor George Osborne to force a degree of separation between banks' high-street branches and their City trading floors.HSBC is in the middle of a triannual review of where it wants to be based. Headquartered in London since 1992, is looking into a return to Hong Kong and is even reported to be receiving overtures from Paris. Chairman Douglas Flint says HSBC's review of where it wants to be based is a dispassionate one: "If you were coming down from Mars with our business configuration, where would you seek to place the international headquarters?"Meanwhile, Barclays, under US-born chief executive Bob Diamond, is being buttered up by New York mayor Michael Bloomberg, who declared that it would be "great" if the British bank relocated to the Big Apple.Analysts at UBS wrote last week that Barclays may soon have "little option" but to consider shifting its domicile. But Diamond says: "London is where we want to be. Of course it's our obligation on behalf of shareholders to look at the alternatives, but this is home and where we want to stay."Lloyds and RBS would struggle to justify leaving as they are partly owned by British taxpayers. But Standard Chartered has no such obligation. Its chief executive, Peter Sands, said a year ago that the £2.5bn levy on banks' balance sheets meant relocation was "something we have to think about".The departure of any bank is not to be taken lightly. Banks contributed £53.4bn in taxes in the year to March 2010, according to PricewaterhouseCoopers, and financial services support a million jobs. Even in business circles, a departure would be controversial: Andrew Witty of GlaxoSmithKline said recently that the disloyalty of businesses that regard themselves as "mid-Atlantic floating entities" dangerously erodes public trust in big corporations.Others are not worried. Ian Mulheirn of the Social Market Foundation says our economy has been "lopsided" for years, with a bulging financial sector keeping sterling strong to the detriment of exporters. "The government should be ambivalent," he says. "The tax take, in future, would come from other profitable industries which have been crowded out."So, as a public service to wavering bankers, we have put together a handy guide to alternative bases – including eateries where our relocated financiers could offload part of that hefty bonus.PROS Spending money is Dubai's pleasure. Far from sneering at huge bonuses, Dubai celebrates such excess. The Mall of the Emirates is great for shopping – or for skiing; it houses an artificial slope. It was the world's largest shopping centre until the Dubai Mall opened three years ago. There are ultra-low taxes, great beaches and good golf, and Dubai is keen to attract investment: it has set up "free zones" exempt from corporation tax for 15 years.CONS The possibility of a jail term for indulging in public shows of affection is off-putting, but it is the night-time traffic in Dubai that is the city's most unappealing characteristic. The automated metro network is not yet fully operational and tailbacks make driving infuriatingly slow. Furthermore, the brittle nature of Dubai's rapidly acquired wealth was evident during the financial crisis when it needed a $10bn bailout from its neighbour, Abu Dhabi. And Dubai is not ideal for fair-skinned types prone to sunburn.WEEKEND GETAWAY The Maldives are a short hop away, and so too is Goa.TO CELEBRATE THAT DEAL Drink martinis at the Burj Khalifa, the world's tallest building.OFFICE COST PER DESK $9,230 pa (source: DTZ)Banker-bashing rating ■PROS More exciting than staid London, but less overwhelming than Beijing, this is the frontier of China's new capitalism. Income tax is levied at just 15%. "In terms of dynamism, Hong Kong is very exciting," says a regular visitor from the UK. As the centre of rapidly expanding foreign-exchange trading in the Chinese yuan, Hong Kong's economic importance was officially acknowledged for the first time in Beijing's 12th five‑year plan.CONS City insiders say that it's impossible to get your kids into a good English-speaking school, and the cost of living is sky-high, with the spillover from the property bubble in mainland China pushing up the price of a place to live, particularly in sought-after neighbourhoods higher up Victoria Peak. Not much in the way of political freedom: Hong Kong's chief executive is chosen by an 80-strong electoral college rather than by a popular vote.WEEKEND GETAWAY Outlying islands, including Lamma and Cheung Chau, provide a quiet escape.TO CELEBRATE THAT DEAL Kick back at Ozone, on the top floor of the newly-opened Ritz Carlton hotel — the world's highest bar.OFFICE COST PER DESK $22,330 paBanker-bashing rating ■■PROS Loads of good-value office space as five new skyscrapers go up on the site of the World Trade Centre, pictured. Mayor Michael Bloomberg, a billionaire from financial information himself, is keen to attract international banks. The US is an aspirational society that generally respects wealth. A handy heliport at the end of Wall Street provides quick access to the summer beachside hangouts in the Hamptons.CONS There is still a residue of anti-Wall Street sentiment in the US – an online poll found that 93% of Americans want bankers and traders to face criminal charges over the credit crunch. Although relatively modest in their scope, Wall Street reforms enacted by the Obama administration have restricted proprietary trading and created a potentially powerful consumer financial protection agency. Smoking in bars is strictly prohibited and there are no casinos in Manhattan. Also, it's an awkward time zone for banks eyeing far-eastern growth.WEEKEND GETAWAY The HamptonsTO CELEBRATE THAT DEAL Bottle of Cuvée Dom Pérignon costs $405 at Bobby Van's Steakhouse, opposite the New York Stock Exchange.OFFICE COST PER DESK $14,990 paBanker-bashing rating ■■■PROS A ready-made financial district around the Grande Arche de La Défense, pictured, is crying out for cosmopolitan inhabitants. The French are ambitious to build Paris's presence as a banking centre after winning the right to be home to the new European Securities and Markets Authority. A merger between Euronext and NYSE in 2007 put Paris's stock exchanges in the big league. Finance contributes 4.5% to GDP, accounting for 700,000 jobs.CONS Nicolas Sarkozy reckons bankers' activities "defied common sense" as they played "pass the parcel" with toxic derivatives. The president is an enthusiastic backer of an international tax on speculation. There are signs of detente, however, from finance minister Christine Lagarde, who has described bank bashing as futile. Taxes are relatively high, and unions can be militant. The reputation of French finance was damaged by rogue trader Jérôme Kerviel, who ran up £4bn in losses at Société Générale in 2008.WEEKEND GETAWAY Côte d'AzurTO CELEBRATE THAT DEAL The spring tasting menu at Alain Ducasse's restaurant at the Plaza Athénée will set you back €360 ($520).OFFICE COST PER DESK $15,740 paBanker-bashing rating ■■■■PROS A stable place with decent schools and hospitals as well as safe streets, due in part to a small (5m) population and extremely capable, well-paid officials. Public transport experts get very excited about the road pricing and metro systems, a side benefit of an authoritarian government that has seen the island ruled by the People's Action Party for more than 50 years. Ranked by the World Bank in 2009 as the world's easiest place to do business.CONS US writer William Gibson described it as "Disneyland with the death penalty". Spitting and chewing gum are punishable by law. This also gives Singapore a reputation for being a touch dull. It attracted a reputation as a frontier of the financial "wild east" when Nick Leeson ran up vast losses to break Barings in 1995.WEEKEND GETAWAY Destinations such as Thailand are a short flight away and Malaysia, stuffed with many fine beaches, is just over the Johor Strait. Some beautiful Indonesian destinations are not too far away either.TO CELEBRATE THAT DEAL The classic Singapore Sling cocktail at the Raffles hotel. Alternatively, there's Little India if you're missing that Brick Lane blow-out.OFFICE COST PER DESK $10,430 paBanker-bashing rating ■PROS The financial sector accounts for 6% of all jobs in Switzerland and 16% of tax revenue. Zurich boasts a low crime rate, easy access to ski slopes, good schools and political stability. Banks are concentrated around the Paradeplatz, pictured, where UBS and Credit Suisse both have headquarters. The tradition of banking privacy attracts wealthy customers worldwide. There were only modest public protests over the global financial crisis, even when the government invested $60bn saving UBS.CONS Unpopular with younger staff, who view Switzerland as a snooze. With 1.4 million people, Zurich is smaller, less cosmopolitan and more conservative than rival centres. Shops, restaurants and accommodation are expensive. And Switzerland's banking privacy is under threat from a long-running dispute with the US, which takes a dim view of its wealthier citizens squirrelling away funds in Swiss banks to avoid tax.WEEKEND GETAWAY VerbierTO CELEBRATE THAT DEAL A bottle of Louis Roederer Cristal champagne costs SFr450 ($490) at Kronenhalle, a venerable Zurich restaurant bedecked with Picasso paintings.OFFICE COST PER DESK $16,700 paBanker-bashing rating ■■