Nobody is betting that Singapore’s powerful ruling party will lose Friday’s election. Yet a weakening economy and the fact that, for the first time, all the city-state’s voters will be given a choice of who they want in power provides the greatest electoral test yet for the prime minister, Lee Hsien Loong.Also worrying for the 63-year-old leader is the fact that he will be facing the polls for the first time without his father, the first prime minister of Singapore, who transferred much legitimacy to his son after three decades as premier.Having transformed the impoverished island into an economic powerhouse, Lee Kuan Yew died in March aged 91. The younger Lee will be hoping his father’s wide support base did not die with him.On Friday all of the 2.5 million registered voters in the south-east Asian country will be able to decide if they still support Lee’s People’s Action party (PAP), as opposition groups will contest all 89 seats. In 2006, only residents in 47 of 84 seats had a choice. Later, in the 2011 polls, resentment over housing prices, the cost of living and high immigration left the PAP – in power since independence 50 years ago – with a drop in votes. It still won 81 of 87 seats but secured only 60.1% of the overall vote, the lowest percentage in its history.With that in mind, Lee called a snap election last month, more than a year before the deadline for the next polls. Observers say he hoped to ride the ruling party’s popularity boost after the country’s birthday celebrations on 9 August.“I called this general election to seek your mandate to take Singapore beyond SG50, into its next half-century,” Lee, who has been premier since 2004, posted on Facebook. “More than that, you will be choosing the team to work with you for the next 15-20 years, and setting the direction for Singapore for the next 50 years.”The election department allowed only nine days of campaigning, the shortest legally allowed period. But the feelgood, national pride factor may be overshadowed by sagging economic growth. The government revised August GDP forecasts from 2-4% to 2-2.5%.The country of 5.5 million people has no natural resources and has relied on open immigration policies to provide cheap labour to support its global fame as a financial services hub and electronics manufacturer.Lee has had to balance public demands to reduce immigration into the cramped city-state. Tighter immigration policies have been partly blamed for the drop in growth forecasts.Andrew Wood, the Singapore-based head of Asia country risk analysis at BMI Research, said he expected “the PAP to achieve approximately the same share of the popular vote that it garnered in 2011, or around 60%”.The PAP has been “very transparent about the fact that a slowdown in immigration inflows would blunt economic growth, and this is exactly what has transpired”, he said. In Wood’s view, the party has struck a good balance between answering the public calls to reduce the inflow while maintaining a healthy economy.“However, conversing with many people on the ground, it is clear that not everyone is satisfied with the pace of the immigration cutbacks, and many will still prefer to pressure the PAP to tighten its immigration policies even further,” Woods said.Another major issue, perhaps an indication of Singapore success, is a spate of public transport disruptions. Local research firm Blackbox found that overall satisfaction with the government declined 4% between April and July after train delays and shutdowns.Although both Lees have been criticised for hampering political opposition and independent media, Blackbox found that satisfaction for government accountability stood at 89%, with civil rights and free speech also high at 79%, suggesting these issues will not be top of the electorate’s agenda.Still, social inequality is cited as a major issue for the 2015 polls and this is where the main opposition, the Workers’ party, will want to grab seats – its candidates wear blue shirts to symbolise the party’s connection to blue-collar workers.The group’s leader, Low Thia Khiang, claims voters back the opposition to create an alternative to the PAP and has likened the ruling party to a sinking ship. “I’m afraid the cruise ship is over capacity limit. It used to be a luxury cruise ship. The designer claimed that it’s not sinkable,” he told reporters this month. “The name is Titanic.”But with only a handful of seats currently filled in parliament, the opposition’s driving public strategy – despite its leader’s vocal attacks – seems not to be an attempt to secure executive office but that Singapore needs a stronger opposing voice.Leon Perera, a Workers’ party parliamentary candidate, told supporters at the weekend that the PAP expected the “blind faith” of voters. He said the Workers’ party’s vision was to lobby for a “strong responsible opposition”.“This shows the danger of relying on one crushingly dominant party to steer this country,” he said. “There is another model, my friends. There is another way. Balance instead of dominance.”