There's very little to get excited about on the domestic front today, as is usual on a Sunday in this country. Memo to the seven committees charged with sorting their Bens from their Brians and popularising the sport - put top-class racing on when people can get there, including on Sundays and Bank Holidays.The excellent David Barron should be able to send out a winner at Ripon from his North Yorkshire base in the shape of Sirvino (4.10) who looks the type to go on and win more races while, being an habitué of Fakenhm, I think the sharp track will suit the front-running Beherayn (4.20).The racing to get excited about, though, is at Longchamp and Kranji in Singapore where a whole host of top-flight runners are lined up with such as Takeover Target, Presvis, Goldikova and Coastal Path among the runners. Those races will be well worth close scruitny and you will read about them here first. Watch this space.Phew - now that was a horserace as crack Hong Kong sprinter Sacred Kingdom bounces back to form and defies the previously unbeaten red-hot favourite Rocket Man in a ding-dong battle up the straight for the International Sprint title at Kranji in Singapore.Godolphin challenger Diabolical finishes a distant third by sprint-race standards anyway while Takeover Target, who is scheduled to return to Royal Ascot in June for the Golden Jubilee Stakes, found very little despite being well positioned on the home bend and came home among the also-rans.Takeover Target's jockey Jay Ford said: "He never seemed to be travelling that well. I was pushing along early and he could only go one pace when I asked him. This was a below-par run." The Australian gelding was 8-1 third favourite for the Golden Jubilee prior to that run but there will be a shake-up of the betting after that.had eThe Ascot heat looks a race with some shape as Overdose, the ante-post favourite is currently sidelined with an injury. I thought King's Apostle ran a terrific race at York last week and he has already won over track and trip. The 16-1 available looks good each-way value to me at this stage.Back to Singapore and Brett Prebble on Sacred Kingdom would surely have been straight into the stewards' room if he had ridden a horse like that in Britain such was his (over)use of the whip in the closing stages.Poor Presvis. The British challenger has been denied by a head by French runner Gloria De Campeao in the Singapore International from his coffin box draw in 12 of 12.Ryan Moore dropped the favourite out early from his very wide draw and Presvis was forced to race from the back. He was last until just before the home turn and after finding no room on the inside in the home straight, Moore was forced to switch to make his challenge. Presvis made up many lengths in the final furlong and only failed by a head to catch the leader.The runner-up was clearly the best horse in the race and it's such a shame that this former handicapper, who is now one of the highest-rated horses in the world, won't be racing in Britain this season but campaigned for top international prizes despite being trained in Newmarket.The winner was last seen in the Dubai World Cup when he was second, no less than 14 lengths behind runaway winner Well Armed.The racing manager to Coastal Path's owner Khalid Abdullah did warn that the Ascot Gold Cup hope wouldn't want it too soft and the ground may have been the reason for the favourite's abject performance as he trailed in last in the Prix Vicomtesse Vigier at Longchamp.The race was won by Coastal Path's stablemate Americain at 14-1 who held off Pointilliste in a close battle for the Group Two prize. Coastal Path was clear third favourite at around 8-1 for the Gold Cup before today's event. Victor Chandler responded by pushing him out to 12-1. They bet: 5-2 Patkai, 7-2 Yeats, 10-1 Eastern Anthem, 12-1 Coastal Path, Geordieland and 14-1 Pointilliste, Schiaparelli and Watar.Stacelita looked a filly going places as she kept her four-race unbeaten record with a convincing win in the Group One Prix Saint-Alary at Longchamp. She heads for the French Oaks next month and if the ground rides similarly soft she is going to have obvious claims. Half an hour later the same combination of jockey Christophe Lemaire and Jean-Claude Rouget made it a Group One double with Neve On Sunday in the Prix d'Isphan. Breeders' Cup hero Goldikova and the Luca Cumani-trained Curtain Call had every chance but found disappointingly little in the closing stages.Talking Horses finds a winner as Sirvino, who was denied a run all the way up the straight in the 4.10 at Ripon, gets home virtually on the line after finally getting in the clear. The 15-8 winner would have been an unlucky loser and can be supported next time as he can't be put up that much for this.They are just off at Fakenham and Beherayn is being held up and pulling far too hard! Hoofnote: Ugh - horrid fall for Beherayn. One to avoid I'm afraid.Click here for all the day's racecards, form, stats and results.Click here for today's latest odds.