Prevented from playing at home since 2009 due to security concerns and shorn of star spinner Saeed Ajmal, who was suspended for an illegal bowling action last month, Pakistan’s cricketers nevertheless continue to defy the odds. Last week it was Australia who were sent packing in a 221-run Test defeat in Pakistan’s adopted home base of Dubai. Spinners Zulfiqar Babar and Yasir Shah each took seven wickets while batsman Younis Khan scored hundreds in both innings, becoming Pakistan’s leading century-scorer. “I’d like to see him not make as many runs, especially against Australia, but I like watching Younis bat,” was Australia captain Michael Clarke’s verdict. Elsewhere the crisis engulfing Caribbean cricket deepened after India’s board confirmed they would sue their West Indies counterparts for losses arising from last month’s abandoned tour.Robin van Persie’s late goal rescued a deserved point for Manchester United at home to Chelsea, but could not conceal the sobering reality of the club’s worst start to a league season for 24 years. Veteran striker Didier Drogba, in his second stint at Chelsea, put the league leaders in front, but despite the draw they remain four points ahead of second-placed Southampton, who beat Stoke, and six clear of Manchester City, who lost to West Ham. Meanwhile, splendid news from Fifa, which has shelled out $32m on a glossy, hagiographical movie about itself. United Passions is said to contain an unsurprising lack of focus on allegations of bribery and tax avoidance, but may be worth tracking down if only for the mind-boggling prospect of Reservoir Dogs actor Tim Roth portraying Fifa’s permatanned big cheese Sepp Blatter. Possibly coming soon to a petrol station DVD rack near you. A difficult month for Serena Williams ended happily as she beat Simona Halep 6-3, 6-0 to win the WTA Finals title in Singapore and reaffirm her position at the top of women’s tennis. Williams last week received support after derogatory remarks about her by the president of the Russian Tennis Federation. Shamil Tarpischev was suspended by the WTA for 12 months and forced to issue an apology. In Spain, Andy Murray saved five match points against Tommy Robredo to win the Valencia Open 3-6, 7-6, 7-6. It was the Scot’s third title in five weeks and almost certainly secures his place at the season-ending ATP World Tour Finals in November. South African sport was in shock after a week that saw the deaths of two of its most prominent athletes. Senzo Meyiwa, captain of the national football side, was shot dead last Sunday in Vosloorus township near Johannesburg. The 27-year-old goalkeeper’s death came just days after former 800m world champion runner Mbulaeni Mulaudzi, 34, was killed in an unrelated car crash.Enjoying a welcome if entirely unexpected spike of attention after the Super League Grand Final punch-up controversy, the real man’s sport of rugby league moved on to international Four Nations bragging rights, with England narrowly beating Samoa in the first-ever Test between the sides and New Zealand coasting to a comfortable victory over weakened co-hosts Australia. The four sides play each other in a mini-league before the final, which takes place in Wellington on 15 November.