Singapore officially slid into recession today after falling consumer demand from the US and Europe hammered its manufacturing exports.The south-east Asian country's economy contracted by 6.3% in the third quarter, on an annualised seasonally adjusted basis, having shrunk by 5.7% in the second quarter of 2008. This forced the government to cut its growth forecast for this year from 4%-5% to 3%. Analysts had expected a small rise in GDP."There's no question that growth will continue to slow down," said Yuwa Hedrick-Wong, economic adviser in Asia for MasterCard Worldwide. "2009 will likely be a very difficult year."Singapore's economy, which is heavily dependent on exports to the developed world, is one of the first in Asia to be hit by a global economic slowdown. Following the rampant growth of China and India, many analysts believed Asia was well positioned to weather the storm. But Asia relies on the west for trade, so slowing US and UK economies hit growth.Along with markets worldwide, Singapore also experienced the gloom of Black Friday with stocks closing 8% lower earlier todaySingaporean manufacturing sector shrank by a hefty 11.5% in the third quarter, driven by a slump in pharmaceuticals. Construction and services activity maintained steady growth. Prime minister Lee Hsien Loong said Asian economies faced slowing growth for at least the next year and will not be spared in this global crisis."The problems facing financial institutions in the US and Europe are complex and grave," he said in a speech. "Asian countries cannot avoid the impact of weakening US, European and Japanese economies.""The world is caught up in a financial storm, and dark clouds fill our immediate horizon. The fear and panic gripping financial markets everywhere will take time to subside."Singapore's central bank, known as the Monetary Authority, today shifted its foreign exchange rate policy to a "zero per cent appreciation" of the Singapore dollar from a "modest and gradual appreciation" in a bid to boost the competitiveness of the country's exports.The government said last month that non-oil exports plummeted 14% in August after a 5.8% fall in July."A strong Singapore dollar has been quite detrimental to growth, especially manufacturing," Hedrick-Wong said. "It's much better to take a risk with inflation and deal with growth by making the Singapore dollar weaker and support exports."Last month Ireland became the first member of the eurozone to fall into recession.