From Fitzrovia News:While tenants in the City of Westminster are struggling to pay their rent in the face of rising property values and housing benefit caps, luxury apartments due to be built on a plot in Fitzrovia are being sold off-plan in Hong Kong and Singapore for up to £8,500,000 a piece.They learned this from Channel News Asia, which reported the developer of the future Fitzroy Place finding ferocious demand for prime location London properties in Hong Kong and Singapore. Planning permission for the development in question was granted only in February.Like the man said, these super rich investors are, "Buying for capital growth and as a safe haven." That's one way the London housing price bubble stays inflated. The other way is lack of supply. Not much sign of either changing. Fitzrovia News adds:Permission was given for the development in February after [Westminster] City Hall's planning committee agreed to a contribution of affordable housing provision, amounting to 17.4 percent of the total residential floorspace on-site plus £5.94m towards the City Council's affordable housing fund.Planning policy normally requires that 25 percent of the apartments should be affordable housing, but a larger contribution of affordable housing was rejected by Exemplar who argued that it was not viable to provide any more. Westminster's planning committee agreed...The development...was given planning permission in the face of huge opposition from people living around the site.More on that here. Meanwhile, Westminster's new leader Philippa Roe has strongly refuted the charge that government housing benefit caps are leading to the alleged "social cleansing" of poorer residents, despite its own research forecasting that these might oblige a fifth of the borough's primary school pupils to move to somewhere cheaper. As the Guardian reported in March:Addressing the consequences from the cap in the private rented sector, she [Roe] retorts: "Even in that sector we have a 45% 'churn', so even if the worst predictions are realised and every single person living in a property with rents above the cap had to move – it's less than 10% additional 'churn' in one year.""Furthermore, one-bedroom flats are readily available beneath the cap in Westminster," she says. "Two-bed flats you can get in some of the less expensive areas. It's only the larger properties [three and four bed homes] where people are going to have to move, and 50% of the people affected by the cap are in one-bed properties. We are seeing rents coming down. We've been negotiating with landlords, sometimes reducing rents from £800 to £400 a week."And she insists other nearby London boroughs can take up the slack. "Even if people do have to move, they don't have to move very far - Camden, Brent, Southwark, Lambeth are on our doorstep and there are properties in those areas beneath the cap."A Westminster council officer has explained to those affected: "To live in Westminster is a privilege, not a right." No-one suggests that these issues are straightforward. But is this the way we want our city to evolve?This article was augmented on 18 May 2012 to reflect Westminster Council's position more fully.