The Scotch whisky industry boosted the value of its exports last year to a record £4.2bn. Brazil was the fastest growing market, recording an increase over 2010 of 48%, with Singapore and Taiwan close behind on 44% each.The volume of exports was up by a healthy 19% showing strong worldwide demand and growth was not simply driven by producers raising prices. In 2010, volume was only marginally ahead at 2%.The Scotch Whisky Association said the value of exports was up 23%. The USA was the biggest importer, followed by France, although by volume France was ahead.Rising demand in emerging and more mature markets has resulted in export values increasing by an average of 10% a year over the last five years, said the Scotch Whisky Association. Exports contribute £134 per second to the UK balance of trade.The value of exports to the USA broke the £600m barrier for the first time in 2011 to reach £654.9m – up 31% on 2010. Exports to France increased 27% to £535.4m.Affluent young professionals in fast growing economies are increasingly developing a taste for Scotch, viewing the drink as "a status symbol" and "trendy," said SWA's Rosemary Gallagher.To meet increased demand, distillers are investing record amounts in production capacity across Scotland. In the last four years the Scotch whisky industry has invested more than £1bn in new facilities. The industry employs 10,300 people in Scotland and another 35,000 across the UK supply chain.Gavin Hewitt, chief executive of the SWA, said: "Despite continuing economic uncertainty, Scotch continues to meet increasing demand from all corners of the globe. It continues to appeal to consumers in countries such as the USA and France and is being enjoyed by younger professionals in newer markets in Asia and Latin America."Exports have increased for seven consecutive years, contributing to delivering an export-led recovery, a focus for the UK and Scottish governments. But some markets saw a decline, including Spain and South Korea.Hewitt added that securing fair market access and reducing tariffs is now a priority for the whisky industry. A free trade agreement between the European Union and South Korea came into force in July. India is a priority for this year.Hewitt said: "We are hopeful a free trade agreement can be signed which will lead to a reduction in the onerous 150% import tariff. The industry is investing in Scotland to ensure it can seize these overseas opportunities."The SWA figures derive from HM Revenue & Customs data. They are based on individual company declarations of the export customs value and volume of shipments to each market (which may not be the final destination of the consignment). The figures do not reflect the mark-up charged by retailers.Scotland's Rural Affairs Secretary Richard Lochhead said: "Scotland is rightly hailed as a land of food and drink, which is underpinned by the record exports achieved in both areas in 2011."This demonstrates that people around the world are appreciating the high quality and delicious products that Scotland's larder has to offer."With exports increasing by more than a fifth, the whisky industry has seen hugely impressive year-on-year growth, while Scotland's seafood remains at the heart of our food exports offering. It's also heartening to see a substantial 60% boost in fruit and vegetable exports."James Withers, chief executive of Scotland Food and Drink, said: "Our food and drink industry is Scotland's biggest growth story right now."These new figures mean that the 10 year target industry set itself in 2007 - to grow our total exports by 38% - has been achieved six years early."Whisky has been a trailblazer across the globe. But our food sector is now following its lead, with exports up a staggering 62% in just four years, as our reputation as a land of food and drink grows day-by-day."