The National University of Singapore (NUS) has topped the QS Asian university rankings for the first time, rising from second place in last year's table.Singapore's other large public university, the Nanyang Technologucal University, joins the NUS in the top ten, rising three places to be ranked seventh. Their success is thanks to a combination of investment by the Singapore government – aimed at improving performance in science, technology and innovation – and collaboration with the country's flourishing high-tech start-up sector.The other big success story this year is the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (Kaist), which rose four places to take the number two spot. Its triumph is echoed across the country's universities: 14 of the top 20 Korean institutions have maintained or improved on their 2013 rankings. The tables' compilers attribute this to an improved performance in research, as well as a concerted effort from the universities to internationalise – nearly all course at Kaist are now taught in English.Ben Sowter, head of research at QS, a company specialising in higher education data, says: "Singapore and Korea have been successful for many reasons, but common between them is a focused international strategy and minimal political interference in institutional governance."Singapore is a desirable place to live and work, and its universities have made the most of this in attracting high-calibre international students and building international partnerships."Korea has a new mystique, with K-Pop and Korean cinema gaining youth interest and Samsung and LG establishing Korea as a leader in consumer electronics. Institutions there have been aware for some time of a demographic bubble leading to a shortage of students, so a fight for survival has driven competitiveness."Hong Kong, whose institutions which have topped the table since it was first compiled in 2009, has seen its best two universities pushed down to third and fifth place this year. However this could be a temporary blip: both the Hong Kong University and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology switched to a four-year undergraduate degree model in 2012, which has led to a double intake of students and a decrease in their score for student to faculty ratio.It's a bleaker story in Japanese institutions, where Sowter says there has been "a steady decline over the past five years". This year 13 of the top 20 institutions rank lower than in 2013, with just three improving their performance.Japan's top performing institution, the University of Tokyo, drops to 10th this year - its lowest ever position. Having ranked 3rd in 2009, Tokyo's position has progressively declined ever since. Despite remaining the region's top institution for academic reputation, Tokyo has struggled to keep pace with its rivals' internationalisation programmes. While institutions from Singapore and Hong Kong have succeeded in attracting top international academics and students in vast numbers, Tokyo ranks outside of the top 100 in three of the four internationalisation indicators used in the rankings.Join the Higher Education Network for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter @gdnhighered.