Why, as this newspaper inquired the other day, the constant churning revolution in the NHS? And why, it might have added, so many parallel convulsions down in Mikey Gove's dream school canteen? On the menu this lunchtime: reindeer steak and noodles.You know how Gove and his minions tour the globe like magpies, hunting for bright educational wheezes to nick. Last year: Finland's policy of letting only the brightest graduates teach. This year: Singapore's "special express" ride for clever kids, so they skip GCSEs altogether and get on with As from age 14. First, let's ask for the whole menu.Both Finland and Singapore are world leaders when it comes to results. Finland is naturally great at community schools, at true comprehensives, at brilliant classroom leadership: an appetising stew of wholesome ingredients. Singapore stands for streaming, relentless testing, rigorous league rankings: the ultimate pressure cooker. And Gove's struggling old England? Think chips with everything.Thus we come to Professor Alison Wolf, Gove's close adviser and author of a new, headline-catching review that tells how we're failing the two-thirds of our kids who aren't academically focused: students who will need a way of earning a living, or several different sorts of living – and make up the bulk of the million or so young who can't find work today. What is our system doing for them? Mostly failing, as usual.They don't have priority, says the professor. Keeping them in education – in class or training till 18 – won't be much use if the diplomas they toil away at lack street cred with employers. It's crazy to chain them to desks, but not to insist they do GCSE English and maths until they pass. But does any of that happen? Not really. Dreadful for them, bad and shameful for us, she concludes.And you can begin to see a pattern forming. University entrance shrinking in numbers, not expanding exponentially as the cuts bite. Universities themselves more divided than ever between the research-grounded best and the rest. Schools – under Gove's traditional tutelage – spending more time on the "English bac" subjects, and less on newer, softer options.Is there anything Finland or Singapore can throw into this pot? Absolutely: in the way that, two or three years from the end of schooling, they split into different areas. University aspirants go one way, the more technically inclined another. Everybody knows these human candidates, setting out on life, are of equal worth. Nobody pretends they are equally academic, or that one style of learning fits all.In the England of 50 years ago we'd have known the labels to fit such categories: universities, polytechnics; grammar schools, secondary moderns. But then came other, more aspirational labels. Ones where equal worth equalled equal status. Ones in which a single, giant size of school fitted all. Ones in which the same catchment area supposedly helped create cohesive, classless communities.But now, as you survey the results of so much churning, it's difficult not to feel that old English weakness returning. Take Wolf's bleak diagnosis of "a systemic denial of opportunities". Take the 66% who won't get to university, or perhaps anywhere much else. Take the status of our academic traditions, but not the reality of the training most children need. And take the actual example of Helsinki and the Straits, where separate institutions serve separate pupil needs.An end to the comprehensive ideal? The birth of advanced, new-age secondary moderns? Another convulsion replacing the last? From top to bottom, you can see its elements falling into place. Pass the soused herring and egg foo yong.