Seeing as he supports Arsenal FC (where they haven’t sacked a manager since Bruce Rioch in 1996), Standard Chartered boss Peter Sands might be one of those rare souls who believes the words in those dreaded votes of confidence he keeps getting. They typically get issued by football chairmen just before they stab their manager in the back, but things get done slightly differently in north London – and maybe at the struggling international bank too.Sands, along with chairman Sir John Peace, got the official vote of confidence in July, and then again at the end of October. Peace was out trying to rally the troops last Wednesday, insisting to 300 of the bank’s senior managers in Singapore that the business was not “broken”, while the company also issued the itinerary of an investor trip to Hong Kong this week, in what looks like the latest attempt to help the embattled Sands stay in his job.Still, it’s funny how Peace’s views seem to have altered on this topic. Some 14 years ago, just after he’d ousted Lord Wolfson as boss of Great Universal Stores, Peace rationalised that change thus: “I think if anything happened in that period it was that we issued a profits warning. That tells you that you have to instigate changes instantly. You need to take action.”In the past year, Standard Chartered has issued three profit warnings.Nottingham had the highest proportion of households where there were no adults in work in the UK last year, figures showed last week. Still, one city-focused household with plenty of jobs belongs to John Peace, Lord Lieutenant of Nottinghamshire, plus the chairman of Standard Chartered (see above) and Burberry. Apart from swanning around Asia, Peace’s eye will also be on the luxury goods group this week, where interim results will be fronted by chief executive Christopher Bailey, now six months (and one pay revolt) into the job.Despite Bailey’s well-known talents, the company has been telling City analysts not to expect too much, with profits predicted to be down following a “punishing” period with foreign exchange. There are also concerns about China (a recurrent Peace theme) and Burberry has already admitted to some “softening in growth from Chinese consumers”.Still, the good news is that everybody seems to love celebrity offspring Romeo Beckham, who’s appearing in Burberry’s new Christmas ad. It lasts a full four minutes, and this time shareholders have definitely got their money’s worth. It seems longer.“Lonmin is pleased to announce that it has achieved a full calendar year without a fatality. This important safety milestone was reached on Monday 27 October 2014 ... The last fatal accident was on 26 October 2013 when Mr Siyabonga Sibango succumbed to his injuries after an underground vehicle accident.”Obviously, the announcement that nobody has been killed at its operations for a year represents decent news for the group’s employees and their families. However one wonders, before its results this week, if Lonmin might now moderate the crowing.Eight days after unveiling that positive news, it emerged that a South African judicial commission of inquiry will hear arguments from Nelson Mandela’s former lawyer about how Lonmin execs should be investigated as accomplices to murder for their role in a 2012 police massacre of 34 striking mine workers. Oddly, the group seems less keen on press releases about that.“Lonmin has consistently said that it would not publicly comment on evidence as it is given [to the commission],” it blocks. “This stance, whilst the right thing to do, has occasionally meant the company has been unable to deal with false or misleading allegations as they have emerged.”​ Who’d have thought it?