The Liberal Democrats' fugitive donor was located by police in a Caribbean hideaway because he was desperate to receive medicines for his dog who is named after the party's former leader, Charles Kennedy.Michael Brown, who gave the party £2.4m of stolen money, had been on the run for nearly four years when he told a business associate the address of his Dominican Republic bolthole as he grew increasingly concerned by tics infesting his alsatian-rottweiler cross Charlie.Bill Chua, a businessman from Singapore who is owed $140,000 (£90,000) by Brown, claims he sent medicine for Charlie. But he also told City of London police the address, enabling detectives to close down bank accounts and forcing Brown to leave his villa.The disclosure explains for the first time how detectives came to know the whereabouts of one of Britain's most-wanted fraudsters and pass them on to the Dominican Republic authorities and Interpol.Brown, who had been sentenced to seven years for fraud-related charges in his absence, was forced to go on the run in the Dominican Republic without access to money.On Monday, Brown, 46 was handed a further six months in jail for fleeing the UK ahead of his trial. He has started serving his sentence.Chua, an energy trader from Singapore, said that he informed police after Brown sent a fake cheque to repay a $140,000 loan. "Brown gave me his address because he loved Charlie the dog and wanted medicines which I sent to him. But he deserves to go to jail because he is a cheap fraudster," Chua said.The Liberal Democrats have faced calls to repay the donation but Nick Clegg has refused to do so, saying it was received in good faith. The high court ruled in 2006 that the money was only given to the Liberal Democrats so that Brown could give himself a veneer of respectability while defrauding victims of their savings.Brown emerged from nowhere in 2005 when he gave the money to Kennedy's general election campaign. He was not registered to vote, lived abroad and was not a party member but was welcomed with open arms when he offered the party its biggest ever donation.Brown told reporters at the time that he was backing Kennedy, not the Liberal Democrats. During the election campaign, Kennedy flew around Britain in Brown's private jet, sometimes with the donor. At the birth of Kennedy's child, Brown and his wife, Sharon, sent them a hamper.But months after the election, the truth about Brown began to emerge. He had set up a fraudulent scheme to entrap high-yield investors by claiming he had guaranteed bonds. Investors including the former Manchester United chairman Martin Edwards parted with up to £36m.Brown went on the run in July 2008 while awaiting trial for theft and false accounting having changed his name to Campbell-Brown and altered his appearance.Chua, 62, said he first came across Brown when the Glaswegian posed as an oil trader called Michael Campbell-Brown in spring 2008. Unbeknown to Chua, Brown was on bail, but still attempted to sell Chua 100,000 tonnes of diesel for $42m.Even then, Brown's associates were boasting about Brown's Lib Dem connections."I was told by the guy who set up the deal that Brown was an influential guy who had funded a political party. He was some sort of kingmaker," Chua said.The pair met in London, but the phoney deal fell through. Chua said he then did not hear from Brown until the end of 2010 when Brown again contacted him offering to sell diesel. By this time, he was living in the Dominican Republic but refused to give his exact address. Chua said he began to Skype with Brown regularly. They would often talk of their mutual love of dogs. "Brown would talk about Charlie all the time. Charlie's picture was his Skype identity and he told me about how they would go for long walks on beaches," he said.But in February 2011, Brown contacted Chua and made a claim that, at the time, seemed plausible to Chua.Brown claimed that he had been kidnapped and said that his life was in danger if he could not raise $140,000 in ransom, Chua said."I was stunned. I even spoke to a kidnapper. At that point I said OK I will pay," Chua said.Chua sent the money to bank accounts in the Dominican Republic and the US. In May 2011, Brown again called Chua in desperation. Brown's beloved dog, Charlie, had fallen ill."Brown told me that his dog was ill, had terrible tics and could hardly see. He wanted me to send him some medicine. And so he gave me his address." Brown's Skype identitity was Charlie the dog, Chua said.Brown, it emerged, had been living in a luxurious three-bedroom villa in the exclusive resort of Punta Cana, on the eastern most tip of the country with his dog and a housekeeper.Chua the sent the medicine to Brown, but became became increasingly irate that Brown had not repaid the "ransom".Brown eventually sent him a cheque, but it bounced. Chua was then contacted by a businessman who told him that the man posing under the names of Campbell-Brown had escaped the UK using the name of Darren Nally and was actually Michael Brown, a wanted fraudster.Chua then contacted the British police and told them of Brown's address.Detectives closed down some of Brown's bank accounts and told the Dominican Republic police of his whereabouts, forcing Brown to flee.On Monday, at Southwark crown court, Brown was jailed for a further six months, to run consecutively with his seven-year jail term. Judge Alistair McCreath said: "When a defendant makes a considered decision to abscond as you did he or she has shown a contemptuous disregard for that important obligation and that in itself matters."