Singapore Laneway festivalReturning to Singapore on 30 January 2016, this festival brings a heady mix of left-field electronica, punk, intelligent pop and boundary-pushing R&B. More than 20 acts will play in the Gardens by the Bay with the Marina Bay Sands hotel providing a space-age backdrop. Singapore international festival of arts (SIFA)Whatever kind of art you have a passion for SIFA is sure to have it in spades, with over a month of activities (during August and September) from theatre and dance to music and visual arts. Now running for three decades, SIFA is one of the most significant arts events in Asia and worth planning your trip around.The IstanaOn five days of the year, the Istana (the president’s official residence) is open to visitors. Built by the British colonial government and completed in 1869, this palatial building makes for a fascinating tour. Open days fall in February, May, July, August and November but the Sunday before National Day (in August) is the best option as you’ll be able to watch the spectacular National Day fireworks in the evening too. Singapore FlyerFancy dinner at 165 metres up – and served by your own butler? The Premium Sky Dining package aboard the world’s second tallest observation wheel gives you a 360° view of Singapore’s landmarks while you tuck into a four-course menu. Alternatively, drink in the views along with the country’s most famous cocktail in the Singapore Sling package.Chinese new yearSingapore is the only country outside of greater China where ethnic Chinese make up the majority of the population (76% in 2014) – so Chinese new year is a big deal here. For three weeks leading up to the actual day (8 February in 2016), the city is swathed in lucky red lanterns and you may well be stopped in your tracks by a lion dance.The Esplanade – Theatres on the BayThe locals may refer to them as “the big durians” or the ‘two microphones’, which describes the world renowned performances at these theatres. Cameron Mackintosh’s Les Misérables will run for a month from 29 May 2016 and, with a host of local and international artists playing throughout the year, there’s bound to be a performance to excite your inner thespian.Ballet under the Stars (BUTS)BUTS takes place every year in July, and is intensely popular among locals. Tickets are usually released two months ahead of the performances and sell out fast, so keep an eye on the Singapore Dance Theatre Facebook page. You might want to take extra care when using the event hashtag: #iloveBUTS.National GallerySome 10 years in the making, Singapore’s National Gallery finally opened its doors in November 2015. Housed in the former supreme court building and city hall, it hosts a whopping 8,000 artworks, making it the world’s largest collection of Singaporean and south-east Asian art. The gallery also hosts international travelling exhibitions, so check the website for what’s on. ARTStage SingaporeRun by former Art Basel director Lorenzo Rudolf, ARTStage Singapore is arguably the leading art fair in Asia, attracting many of the world’s top gallerists, curators and private collectors. Run as a five day event this year, ARTStage Singapore pulled 51,000 visitors with its extensive showcase of Asian contemporary art alongside global luminaries such as Damien Hirst. ARTStage 2016 will run between 21-24 January.Chingay ParadeSingapore’s Chingay Parade is the largest street performance and float parade in Asia. The parade includes dancing dragons, prancing lions, stilt walkers, masters of the martial art wushu and performers in traditional costume. To view the festivities in comfort, buy a ticket in advance for the viewing galleries. The 2016 parade is on 19-20 February.