Singaporeans have two passions: shopping and eating. Among the malls of Orchard Road are hundreds of restaurants and stalls serving Malay, Indian and Indonesian food. The many Chinese restaurants show Singapore is a melting pot of mainland Chinese.My friends Chee Pheng and Kong Wei had taken us to a small Chinese herbal restaurant. We entered through a herbalist's shop where medicines were stored in rows of wooden drawers. The herbalist was wrapping a prescription of dried black mushrooms in newspaper.The Chinese have always been conscious of the links between food and health. A balanced diet is fundamental to harmonise the yin and yang inside your body. Many medicinal foods are eaten to replace or enhance chi, or energy. As we looked down the menu Kong Wei explained how all the dishes were chosen to balance or enhance chi.There was an almost audible intake of breath from the waiter when I ordered a Tiger beer. Alcohol is frowned upon in herbal restaurants.The tradition of herbal cooking originated in the imperial kitchens of ancient China, but Mao Zedong's rise to power in 1949 and the birth of the People's Republic was the end for the chefs and many fled the country, taking their skills with them.Our starters arrived: tiny plates of dried carp skin with grated carrot, the fish skin like piscine pork scratchings. This was followed by egg white with shredded dried scallops, good for the complexion.We chose hot and sour soup with prawns and bamboo. "Not a normal bamboo", explained Kong Wei, "but one with medicinal qualities." Kong Wei settled for double-boiled snake head fish soup, for replenishing chi: "Very good after an operation."Our main courses were braised fresh scallops with eucommia bark, eggplant with pine nuts, cod with lily bulbs and duck stew with ginkgo nuts; these covered calming a surfeit of yang in the liver, lowering cholesterol, fortifying the heart and lungs and improving the memory. Dessert was double-boiled aloe vera with wolfberries and honey, for eyes and kidneys. We finished with ice-filled glasses of hawthorn juice to help digestion. "Don't order the whip soup unless you really need to", advised Chee Pheng. Lu bian soup – main ingredient: deer's penis – is natural Viagra. You have to order 24 hours in advance.