Prudential is pushing higher again following last night's news that two sovereign wealth funds have agreed to underwrite a chunk of the insurer's £14bn rights issue.Both Qatar and Singapore's biggest fund GIC have both agreed to back the fundraising, which will be used to part-fund the Pru's £23bn purchase of the far eastern businesses of AIG. The news has lifted the Pru 6.5p to 519.5p in early trading. Eamonn Flanagan at Shore Capital said:We note the announcement that an additional 30 banks are set to get involved with Pru's $20bn rights issue, to fund the AIA deal.Of greater interest to the market are the last two sentences in the announcement. The first reports that Qatar Holding LLC and Singapore Investment Corp have agreed to underwrite a 'significant portion' of the rights issue. The second reports that demand for primary underwriting is 'well in excess of the size of the rights issue'. There is clearly a long way to go before completion of this deal, vulnerable as it is to the vagaries of the macro-economic environment…be it pound versus dollar or the general economic climate in Asia. However, to us, this announcement should allay any market fears over the potential demand for Pru stock in the placing, thus reducing the likelihood of aggressive 'shorting' by hedge funds. This is especially the case with the confirmation that two major sovereign funds are keen to participate. Cognisant that volatility is likely to remain a feature of the Pru's share price over the coming weeks, we reiterate our buy recommendation – to us, the strategic rationale of this deal remains compelling.Overall the FTSE 100 has climbed 16.13 points to 5543.29 ahead of the US non-farm payrolls later. Owen Ireland at ODL Securities said:The release of the non-farm payroll data will dominate markets today, as investors look to see the strength of the economic recovery. If the US is to move forward, the primary driver will be getting people back in to jobs, which will then stimulate spending, which in turn will get the cogs in the wheel turning over once again.