I'd like to take my twins, who are about to turn four, to Iceland for a week in late May/early June. We'd like to see the whales, but is there much else for little kids to do there? Amanda Beal, BarnesIceland is a great place for kids and has a very child-friendly attitude. This is reflected in the wide range of discounts available for kids. Most tour companies and attractions offer 50 per cent off for children.Reykjavik zoo and fun park can fill a day, as can the Sagamuseum history museum and open-air Árbæjarsafn. This recreated 19th-century Icelandic village has arts and crafts demonstrations as well as traditional houses to explore. Iceland's natural attractions should also be popular. Geothermal areas are noisy, smelly spectacular places, and roaring waterfalls will make exciting stops. If you're planning to explore much beyond the most popular south-west of the country, you can spot icebergs in Jokulsarlon in the southeast, explore lava fields around Myvatn in the north and see huge glaciers in Skaftafell National Park. The country's colourful Viking history and folk tales of elves, trolls and ghosts should also fire the kids' imaginations.If all else fails, most Icelandic towns have geothermal swimming pools with dedicated children's areas that only cost a pound to get into. Visit Iceland (visiticeland.com) has more planning tips.I am planning to go to Sydney with my family in September to celebrate my mother's 80th birthday. My husband and our children, who are adults, would like to fly with Singapore Airlines (preferably on its new A380 superjumbo). I have tried several websites and the results have been very expensive. My wish list is a stopover on the inbound and outbound journeys, with hotels, and to be able to see the Great Barrier Reef.Dolly Silvester, by emailThere are two A380s in commercial service, both operated by Singapore Airlines, flying daily between Singapore and Sydney. From 18 March Singapore Airlines A380s will also fly Heathrow to Singapore. Currently it costs no more to fly economy class in the A380 than on one of their other planes, but supplements do apply for business class.It is hard to get seats for the A380 flights from London and Singapore, so you'll need to be flexible with dates. There is availability, for example, on 7 September to Sydney and returning from Sydney on the 28th. With a stopover each way in Singapore the fare would be £969 with Austravel (0844 412 4620; austravel.com). Malaysian Airlines charges £825 for similar dates, so the difference is not that great. Austravel suggests a three-week itinerary including a three-night stopover in Singapore, 10 nights in Sydney and three nights on Hamilton Island (for the Great Barrier Reef) for £1,753 flying on the A380. You'll have more stopover options flying Qantas: following a similar itinerary, the price comes down to £1,647. Read more about the A380 at a380.singaporeair.com. While scanning the TV guide I noticed that About Schmidt, starring Jack Nicholson, was showing. I remember when I first saw this film and the interest I developed in an RV (recreational vehicle) holiday. The opportunity may finally become available this year. Ideally I would like to pick up in Las Vegas and fly back from Minneapolis-St Paul. Is this feasible?Bryan Gray, by emailA one-way RV hire is easy to arrange, though you'll pay an extra fee for dropping off in a different location. Cruise America (00 1 800 671 8042; cruiseamerica.com) has offices across America, including Las Vegas and Minneapolis. Expect to pay around £65 a day, depending on exactly when you travel. If you can avoid July and August, you may be able to cut this rate further.The main pitfalls to be aware of are the insurance, collision damage waiver and fuel costs that are tacked on when you book. Get as much information about this as you can upfront and try to fill the fuel tank yourself rather than pay for them to do it. You'll often incur penalties for late or early drop-offs. Provided you're travelling in off-peak periods you shouldn't need to book in advance, but if you are in the US over the school holidays, reserve at least a few days ahead for campsites and RV grounds. Campusa.com is a good source of listings.·  We welcome letters. Email escape escape@lonelyplanet.co.uk or write to Lonely Planet, Second Floor, 186 City Road, London EC1V 2NT. The writer of the week's star letter wins a Lonely Planet guide of their choice, so please include a daytime telephone number and postal address. No individual correspondence can be entered into.To order discount Lonely Planet books, call 0870 066 7989.