A journalist from Australian broadcaster ABC faces up to 20 years in jail and 15 strokes of the cane after being arrested in Singapore for alleged drug possession.Singapore's central narcotics bureau arrested the Australian journalist on Wednesday. ABC confirmed early today that the man arrested was Peter Lloyd, the broadcaster's New Delhi-based south Asia correspondent.The director of ABC News, John Cameron, said that Lloyd was on leave in Singapore from his posting in New Delhi and that the organisation had not been told the full details of the case.Lloyd had allegedly supplied a Singaporean man with drugs. He was caught after a tip-off with 0.8 grams of methamphetamine, a pipe and six syringes, according to Singapore's narcotics bureau. His urine had tested positive for amphetamine, the bureau added.He faces between five and 20 years in prison and five to 15 strokes of the cane if found guilty.The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade confirmed the arrest of the 41-year-old and said he is expected to be charged in court later today. "We can confirm the arrest of ABC journalist Peter Lloyd in Singapore on drug-related charges on 16 July 16," a spokesman for the department said. "The Australian High Commission in Singapore has visited Lloyd and is providing consular assistance to him."Singapore imposes severe penalties for drug use and possession, including a mandatory death penalty for anyone caught with more than 15 grams of heroin or more than 500 grams of marijuana. The death penalty does not apply to synthetic drug possession. The narcotics bureau said Lloyd was arrested during a follow-up search after a Singaporean man was taken into custody earlier in the day for alleged possession of methamphetamine. An investigation revealed that Lloyd had supplied the Singaporean with the drug, the bureau added. · To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication".