Asian universities take all five top spots in the list of the world’s top 50 universities under 50, in the latest QS rankings published today.The rankings list the top 50 universities that are less than 50 years old. Taking the number one spot is Nanyang Technological University (NTU Singapore), a specialist in science and technology, and the only Singaporean institution listed. In the world rankings published by QS last week, NTU Singapore was ranked at 39.The university has swapped places with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, which took the top spot last year and is now ranked second. Ben Sowter, head of research at QS, described NTU Singapore’s upward rise through the rankings as “nothing short of impressive. Even more so, considering that this world-class institution has been established less than 25 years ago”.NTU Singapore’s president, professor Bertil Andersson, said that the university had recognised early on that science and technology were vital to innovation and economic progress. He described the university as a “magnet for some of the world’s best professors and young talents”.The UK has four universities in the top 50: Bath (12), Loughborough (23), Heriot-Watt (47) and Brunel (48), all founded in 1966. Heriot-Watt is a new entry. While the global QS rankings, published last week, are dominated by US and UK universities, this list paints a very different picture. The highest ranked European institution is the Netherlands’ Maastricht University, which takes the number six spot.Australia has the largest representation in the list, with 10 institutions featured, followed by Spain with five. Hong Kong and the UK have four each while Germany has three. South Korea, Sweden, USA and Canada have two apiece. In all, 25 countries are represented in the list.“The dynamic nature of this ranking makes it an interesting comparison with our global and regional rankings,” said Sowter. “By focusing on the performance of these younger institutions alone, the list aims to spot the up-and-coming higher education powerhouses in the global arena.”