Thomasina in Spain. Photograph: PRThe surprising thing about Thomasina Miers' OFM award last week is that it was for "cheap places to eat." You'd never guess that from the looks of her Mexican eatery, Wahaca - though I've only had a margerita and some guacamole there, it seemed to me the epitome of sombrero chic. But then, Thomasina Miers is full of surprises.I'd got to the point where I hated TV cookery programmes. They've become so palpably phoney, with insincere presenters more concerned with their egos than with eggs. And when their best-before date passes and they try to make a controversial comeback like dippy Delia, they do real harm to the cause of good food (and in Delia's case, to animal welfare standards as well). In this regard, Hugh and Jamie's recent efforts are exempted from my ennui, but life's too short even to reach for the remote to switch off Gordon or Roy Strong.Masterchef was high on my list of I've-got-something-more-exciting-to-do-than-watch-this, like reading theology textbooks, or counting backwards from 999,999 - until I saw the finals of the last series, and had the subversive thought: "these contestants are real people, and I'm interested in what happens to them." Which is why I missed Thomasina Miers 2005 Masterchef victory. (By the way, the original Masterchef format was ripped off from the Observer/Mouton Cadet cookery competition of the 1980s.)I saw a bit of her first series, The Wild Gourmets, in which she and "forager" Guy Grieve cadged, shot, fished and trapped (or whatever) their grub, and cooked in equally primitive fashion. But I found it precious, and failed to see many parallels between what they were doing and what I do for food, which is to nurture our good butcher, patronise the local dairy, grow the veg I most like to eat, and try to remember to have the Aga serviced regularly.On the other hand, I've now see the first two hours of A Cook's Tour of Spain, the same pair's gastronomic swoosh through the country, and I love it - and especially her. Thomasina's unscripted genuine enthusiasm and, above all, her own curiosity about the ingredients she encounters and the people she mixes with are as convincing as the Diet Girls' recipes and Delia's packet-opening are not.I've made a TV series myself, and (although ours was princely by today's standards) I know that nothing inspires a presenter like having a low budget to work with - you're thrown back on your own resources (plus a few landscape shots) to entertain the viewers. And Thomasina rises beautifully to all occasions, hair flying, wonderful gappy smile beaming. Forgetting that she's called the bacon "pancetta" in one take, and "tocino" in the next simply adds to the helter-skelter charm. Seeing the blood and guts of the wild boar (though wasn't it actually a sow?) really put the stamp of authenticity on the production, as did her participation in the matanza in the earlier programme. Even Guy Grieves was a winner this week, as he bagged the quail and dispatched the boar so cleanly. Okay, this is nature red in tooth and claw - but you know, it is. Thomasina Miers has learned the real secret of good TV food programming - it has to be about the food, not about the person. With this series, Miers has made herself credible. How many TV cookery presenters ever manage that?