Near the Príncipe and Isla gardens and the Royal Palace, this 18-room hotel in the world heritage-listed city of Aranjuéz, 47km south of Madrid, is calm and relaxed. The overall feel is of grown-up but unshowy chic (the odd zebra-print lampshade aside) with cream, toffee and aubergine colours, and wooden floors and doors. A bar and lounge provide plenty of chill-out space, but grab a seat or cushion in the vast interior courtyard (discreetly overlooked by some of the bedrooms) for the ultimate in summer escapism.• +34 918 754 350, elcocheron1919.com. Doubles from €78Pitched somewhere between a designer hostel and a boutique hotel, this Barcelona bolthole plugs an obvious gap in the market, catering to travellers with champagne tastes and beer budgets. Its rooms are simple, modern and smart, with shiny white paintwork set off by glass screens, beech shelving and flatscreen TVs. If you want more space, supersize your booking by opting for an "economy plus" or "business" room rather than a standard double. Though, of course, what you save on sleeping you can spend on tapas; the hotel is in the Gothic quarter, ideal for grazing.• +34 935 454 000, denit.com. Doubles from €89Farnals, ValenciaCan't decide between city and coast? You can have your holiday cake and eat it at this Valencia hotel. The closest you'll get to Miami this side of Seville, Hotel de la Playa is a sparkling box of a building, painted the colour of Mr Whippy and set right by the beach. Its dozen neatly stacked rooms are sleek and white, with big windows and balconies looking out over palm trees, sand and surf.• +34 961 468 464, hoteldelaplaya.com. Doubles from €85 if you stay three nightsThis is the latest property to join the welcomebeyond.com fold, a "hand-picked" holiday property portal run by two Berlin hipsters, but you'll have to move quickly if you want to bag some dates at these two flats in Girona's old town. It's a successful marriage between ancient and modern – Alemanys 5's architect owner has taken stone, concrete and wood, and spun them into a thing of wonder, set apart by soft lighting, natural textures and such show-stopping features as an open fire, balcony and minimalist pool. And the dining table is on wheels, so it can be moved from the kitchen to the veranda on sunny evenings.• +34 649 885 136, alemanys5.com. Alemanys 5 can be rented as a whole (up to 11) or as two flats (from two to six); flat for four from €180 per night or from €360 for the whole house; discounts for smaller parties and long-term rentalsWhen independent tourists began exploring another side of the Canaries – one that veered away from the happy-hour hell of the big resorts and out to its wild beaches, black soil vineyards and historic villages – this hotel in the centre of Lanzarote was one of the first places they started checking into, and it's still going strong. Caserío de Mozaga has real wow factor, from its chic candlelit restaurant to bedrooms that blend family heirlooms with contemporary finca style and a general Ibiza-ish vibe.• +34 928 520 060, caseriodemozaga.com. Doubles from €63Run by the fifth generation of the Echaurren dynasty, this foodie outpost in wine-producing Rioja was the first restaurant in the region to win a Michelin star, and continues to draw in gastronauts with its recipe of well-priced accommodation and fine food (there are two main restaurants plus a bistro and a tapas-centred gastrobar). Be warned, though, that with people coming here to eat rather than sleep, the bedrooms themselves are not as luxe – or as stylish – as the eating areas.• +34 941 354 047, echaurren.com. Doubles from €70This place might breach our £100-a-night limit, but it's worth the extra for such an acutely hip hotel. Set among olive and almond groves outside Teruel, this design-savvy escape is steeped in relaxation and respite. Guests can choose from two rooms in the main building – a Nordic room featuring Alvar Aalto lamps and Danish furniture or a baroque room dressed with velvet armchairs and gilded paintings – or 10 individual "Kubes" that come with black slate baths, private terraces, floor-to-ceiling windows and toiletries made with local herbs. There's also a sleek outdoor pool, a library, a restaurant and a "playground" complete with TV and Wi-Fi, and at night you can DJ your own tunes.• +34 978 856 755, consolacion.com.es. Doubles from €135It was love that brought Simon Beckmann and his wife Donna to this off-the-beaten-track corner near Almería. Having passed through on their honeymoon, the couple (they're both artists) decided to return and the result is this seriously stylish guesthouse. Genuine eco credentials are another draw: solar panels, wind turbines, wood from the surrounding almond, pine and poplar trees, and a grey-water recycling system help make the retreat carbon neutral. And while many guests come for the creative courses the couple run – the latest is a food illustration course that combines trips to local markets with artistic instruction – if you want to unwind it's possible to book in just for B&B.• +34 020 31 372 096, losgazquez.com. Doubles from €85 (minimum two nights) From the outside, this six-room hotel, in the countryside east of Bilbao is like any other. Inside, though, things are not what they seem; it's a real surprise just how contemporary the interior is. Expect slate floors, Tom Dixon lights, a pared-down aesthetic and an overall monochrome colour scheme interspersed with jelly baby colours.• +34 650 402 775, aldori.es. Doubles from €70You might not expect a former foundry to feel cosy, but that's exactly the deal at Hotel Ansotegi in the hills between Bilbao and San Sebastián. The buildings include a manor house, foundry and mill, and they've been renovated and reimagined as a contemporary country escape. With its exposed stone walls, wooden beams, red velvet sofas and wood fires, this is the perfect place to retreat to after a day spent swimming in the local river or exploring ancient monasteries.• +34 94 616 9100, hotelansotegi.com. Doubles from €100Opened just last year in a former convent, this hotel boasts stylish (if fittingly low-key) rooms and fairytale 17th-century architecture, but its main claim to fame is its setting, on one of the largest estates in Europe. The surrounding 16,000 hectares are mainly used for producing cork and pork (Iberian mountain pigs), and it is reached via a forest track. Hiking, biking and horse riding are on tap.• +34 956 693 002, laalmoraimahotel.com. Doubles from €60Tired of lookalike boutique hotels? There is no chance of pleather and wenge fatigue at this genuinely one‑off hotel in the hills just outside Granada. Fresh flowers, a pool shaded by olive trees, sun-dappled terraces looking out across the Sierra Nevada natural park, bedrooms that veer towards the more homely side of chic and the distractions of Granada five miles away; if you could shrink-wrap the quintessential summer holiday, it would probably look like this.• +34 958 308 010, laalmuniadelvalle.com. Doubles from €100A comfortable hideout for hikers, lovers or peace-seekers, this remote retreat in the Matarraña mountains is surrounding by medieval villages, terraced vineyards, ancient oak trees and not a lot more. Go now if you want solitude; online booking agent i-escape is promoting this area of Spain as the new Tuscany. The hotel may be a 17th-century stone farmhouse but the facilities are strictly 21st century, not least its cool outdoor pool. Surprised by the (tasteful) smattering of tartan? The owner, a documentary film-maker, is from the Grant's whisky family.• 07970 610 316, i-escape.com/mas-de-la-serra/overview. Doubles from €110Not everyone likes to leave behind their urban sensibilities when they visit the sticks. If the idea of angled steel, glass, wood and stone appeals, but also cotton curtains, cosy rugs and views out across village rooftops to vineyards, this modern Galician hotel could be just the thing. Unusually for a hotel in this price bracket there's also a pretty lavish spa.• +34 918 595 665, bit.ly/eAXKZh. Doubles from €92A slice of Balearic living on the mainland, this laid-back hotel, 15 minutes' drive from the beach south of Tarragona, helps guests make the most of the southern sunshine with cushioned terraces to lounge on, simple tiled or wooden-floored rooms to retreat to and shady olive, fig and almond groves to explore. It's a proper "gastrotel", with a vegetable garden providing some of the produce served in its restaurant and a list of local wines.• +34 977 262 601, masmariassa.com. Doubles from €90 if you stay three nightsNot your usual seaside hotel, this village house outside Santander is less than a couple of kilometres from the coast but feels like it's way up in the hills. Conventional on the outside, it's anything but inside, with pared-back decor, simple colour schemes and lots of glass, letting the mountain, forest and sea views take centre stage. Though the hotel serves great home-cooked meals, seafood lovers will definitely want to explore other options: all the surrounding fishing villages mean the restaurants here serve some of the freshest fish in northern Spain.• +34 985 853 272, elbabu.com. Doubles from €78There are so many chi-chi hotels in and around the small white town of Vejer de la Frontera that you're in serious danger of getting tangled up in an Issa kaftan or being bashed by a Bottega Veneta tote bag as you stroll through its quaint streets. If your budget doesn't stretch to the swankier places in town, this small hotel, in a former apothecary, does a nice line in simple, hippy chic. Its 12 clean, white rooms, interior courtyard and roof terrace are speckled with colourful tiles and fabrics.• +34 956 450 225, laboticadevejer.com. Doubles from €60Squeezed between Mount Galatzo and the Mediterranean, Hotel Nord is perfectly positioned to cover almost any interest. Hiking, bird-watching and cycling are all possible around the village. Or wander down to the nearest cove for swimming, sailing or lolling with a book. The village itself is very pretty and the hotel, right in the centre, mixes traditional and modern to good effect. Breakfast and dinner are served in the flower-filled courtyard.• +34 971 149 006, hotelruralnord.com. Doubles from €88Low-key and intimate, this hotel is set by a pine-fringed cove not far from the city of Girona, and is about as far as you can get from the stereotypical image of a holiday on the costas. Here you can take your pick from one of five simple bedrooms and hide away from the world in laid-back comfort. There's also a lovely restaurant; grab a candlelit outdoor table when the evenings start getting warm.• +34 972 622 845, hostalsarascassa.com. Doubles from €80; minimum two-night stay at weekends, four nights in July and seven in August"The Almond and the Gypsy" is still a relative rarity among Almería hotels, with only five very elegant rooms, a minimalist pool, a 300-year-old oak tree and a remote location (though you can still get to the beach within 10 minutes or so). It's set in the Cabo de Gata natural park, so big skies and open landscapes reign. You can book massages (€50) and dinner (with a day's notice, €50 for two people), though most guests trip down to the neighbouring village to eat.• +34 67 850 2911, laalmendrayelgitano.com. Doubles from €110This article was amended on 19 April. The original version said that the Caserío de Mozaga in Lanzarote is a former dairy, which was incorrect