"The French are bleeding great at literature, aren't they?" Well, yes, Lord Adonis, they certainly are. They may not be much good at cricket, but what a lot of storming recommendations, from Julian Evans's declaration that "there is no end to understanding Flaubert" to fre034's praise for Jean Echenoz's "dry wit, sometimes surreal plots, and technically perfect crafting of the French language", adding that he's "often compared stylistically to Flaubert". As we found in Germany, the classics made a strong showing - Voltaire, Dumas et al - but you'll also find contemporary French literature in all its glory, from AggieH's suggestion of Marie Darrieussecq's "witty, insightful, clever, well-written, original" Pig Tales, to daifullpelt saluting Philippe Delerm's skill in making the "putting out of rubbish a really vibrant experience". Thanks one and all.Back in the discussion we found gavinscottw's ringing call of "Balzac! Balzac! Balzac!", alongside msmlee's demand that Simone de Beauvoir join Virginia Woolf as "a must-read for people of all genders". And it seems that my own indifference to Huysmans's À rebours goes a little against the grain …But it seems to me that we're really getting into the swing of things here. And this week we're heading to the birthplace of the novel, yes, definitely the birthplace of the novel: Spain.What we're after are the books - fiction, non-fiction, plays and poetry - which sum up the land of El Cid, whether written by Spanish authors or not. This rules the vast richness of Spanish letters across the ocean - from Colombia to Argentina - out of bounds, but also rules in Orwell's Homage to Catalonia, or Hemingway's Fiesta, and opens up an interesting question of its own. How does the portrait of Spain which emerges from Castilian match up with that carved out of Catalan?You may already be familiar with those technological boxes down below, which manufacture, by some brilliant technological wheeze, a spreadsheet of collective know-how - just like the one we made for France. As before, we'll need a country - er, Spain - a title, an author, perhaps a translator, and an explanation of why it's such a great book. I'm adding Javier Marías's monumental Your Face Tomorrow, and a book which is in many ways its exact opposite, Maria Barbal's flinty fragment, Stone in a Landslide. Oh, and the book I've been saying is the best book I've read in the last five years, for, oh, about five years now: Javier Cercas's magnificent Soldiers of Salamis. But perhaps you'd care to disagree ...