I am drinking cañas – glasses of beer – at my friend Paco’s holiday home in Mazagón, on the Atlantic coast of Andalucía. He is telling me about a childhood holiday that still lives in his heart.It was more than 50 years ago, when his father, a brigadier general, and the family were based in Seville. There were few roads then south of Seville; getting to the coast was an odyssey itself. “First we drove in cars to the end of the tarmac road”, Paco reminisces, “then we continued in vans with special tyres that could drive on sand. After this it was tractors and trailers. Finally, mules to cross the desert dunes of the Coto Doñana.”Holiday homes made of reeds awaited them on the empty beach at Matalascañas. “We stayed there for three months”, Paco tells me. “For a seven-year-old it was like heaven.”Above us the sky is as blue as an Andaluz tile. We look through a frieze of green stone pines at the white beach below. Groups of Sevillanos, down for the weekend, are fishing for bream with beach rods. Beyond is the darker blue of the Atlantic Ocean.It was just up the river at Rábida over 500 years before that a middle-aged Genoan weighed anchor in search of El Nuevo Mundo. A statue of Cristóbal Colón (Christopher Columbus) towers above the tributary of the Rio Tinto to commemorate where his three caravels set sail into the unknown.The 500th anniversary of his discovery of the New World – the 1992 Seville Expo – transformed this stretch of the Andalucían coast. Motorways and roads were constructed to connect Seville to its hinterlands; the coast was developed. Paco’s paradise at Matalascañas was transformed into a new town of ersatz villas and nouveau palacios.On a drive along the coast Paco points out a line of crumbling watchtowers, like something out of The Lord of the Rings, dotted at regular intervals along the littoral. For hundreds of years Andalucíans had to maintain a constant vigil against raids by Barbary pirates. When the distinctive galleys were sighted, fires were lit to warn the locals to flee inland.But geography, like history, has moved on. Today the watchtowers that once stood on the sandy cliffs of Mazagón and Matalascañas are lapped by the waves of the Atlantic Ocean.Guardian Weekly regularly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions. Send them to: weekly.letters@theguardian.com