The year he turned 40, Fernando Mora lost the only job he had ever had. It was 2009 and the financial crisis had wiped out the carpentry job he had held since he was 18. As Spain entered its deepest recession in half a century, his wife lost her job in senior care a short time later, while their daughters, both in their 20s, struggled to find jobs.By 2013, everyone in the family had exhausted their government unemployment benefits. “We’re without any benefits or compensation, nothing at all,” Mora explained in the short documentary No Job Land. “I owe money to everyone.”In a country where one in four people are unemployed, Mora’s story stood out. His family had become one of the more than 700,000 households in Spain with no stable source of income.On Monday the government paved the way towards tackling the issue. Starting in mid-January, a new benefit of up to €426 (£338) a month will be made available to unemployed families who have exhausted all other forms of income. The benefit can be claimed for six months.The prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, said that in many respects the crisis was over. “But its sequels aren’t over yet,” he said. “The economic recovery won’t be complete until it reaches every household, every Spaniard who is without a job, and until it is felt in the pockets of every single Spaniard.” About 450,000 people are expected to qualify for the new benefit.In order to be eligible, claimants must have been unemployed for more than a year, have dependents, and must have exhausted all other possible benefits. Recipients must agree to work with public officials to design a personalised job plan to help them find work.While the International Monetary Fund has said it expects the unemployment rate in Spain to remain above 20% for at least another four years, Rajoy’s People’s party government is relying on the country’s economic growth to create jobs. “It’s not the same to talk about an economy that’s contracting as one that’s expected to grow by 2% in the next year,” Rajoy said.Spain’s labour unions, who negotiated the benefit with the government, noted that only 64% of Spain’s unemployed were currently eligible for any kind of government aid. “To come out of the crisis we need to recoup the standard of living we had before, and for this to happen we still have a long way to go,” said Ignacio Fernández Toxo, of the Workers’ Commissions union. Toxo called on the government to do more to help the more than three million Spaniards living in extreme poverty, suggesting the creation of a guaranteed minimum income for the unemployed and a rise in the minimum wage.Álvaro Anchuelo, of the centrist Union, Progress and Democracy party, called the benefit a step in the right direction but said it was “too short a step. It’s far too little to meet the social necessities of the country.”Spain is gearing up for municipal, regional and potentially general elections in 2015. On Monday, Spanish media pointed to the rising popularity of the leftwing Podemos and the easing of austerity measures to explain the government’s increasing interest in social issues.