Spain’s embattled prime minister will meet political rivals in the coming weeks in an attempt to gather enough support to form a government that can lead the country’s new, deeply fragmented parliament.“The People’s party won the election, which requires that we be the ones to lead the formation of a government,” Mariano Rajoy, the current prime minister, said on Monday. “The PP has a responsibility and a mandate to launch a process of dialogue and explore the viability of a stable government.” Related: Spain needs broad consensus to go forward after messy election result His party won 123 seats in the election and 29% of the vote, leaving it far from a majority in the 350-seat legislature and with few possibilities for forming a secure government.Rajoy said he would only reach out to parties that promised to defend the unity of Spain, suggesting that Podemos and Catalan separatist parties, who won 17 seats in the election, would be left out of the talks.On Sunday, millions of Spaniards turned their backs on the decades-long dominance of the PP and the Socialists and instead supported national newcomers Podemos and centre-right Ciudadanos, yielding an ambiguous result that has set the stage for weeks – if not months – of political wrangling. If parties fail to form a new government from the election result, new elections could be called in the spring.  Related: 'We are in uncharted waters': readers react to the Spanish general election The Socialists came second in the election, earning 90 seats and 22% of the vote. Podemos won 69 seats and 21% of the vote, while Ciudadanos won 40 seats and 14% of the vote. The political fragmentation looming over the country’s next legislature had to be overcome, said Rajoy. “Spain cannot afford a period of political uncertainty that would backtrack on the progress achieved during these years.”His remarks came after the Socialists and Podemos both stated they would not back any attempt by Rajoy to lead a PP government, increasing the likelihood of a new government forged out of parties on the left. On Monday, Rajoy said the PP would flex its majority in the country’s senate to stymie any attempts to change the country’s constitution, making it clear that a Socialist-led government would not be able fulfil its promise of reforming the constitution to address the push for independence in Catalonia. “One will not be able to modify the constitution without the support of the PP, which is very comforting for all Spaniards,” said Rajoy.  Related: Podemos: how Europe’s political centre is being eaten by the radical left and nationalist right The PP’s promise of dialogue came just as José María Aznar, a former prime minister and current honorary president of the PP, raised the spectre of a party congress in the new year to review Rajoy’s leadership.His suggestion echoed the many analysts who have pointed out that the PP might have a better chance of reaching agreement with other parties if it changed leadership. “This is a difficult time for Spain and for the PP,” said Aznar, alluding to the general election result that left the PP with a third fewer seats than after the previous election in 2011. “Nobody can doubt that the evolution of the party requires profound reflection,” he added.