Why go?Spanish airline Air Nostrum launches direct flights between Luton and Vigo next month (airnostrum.es). Sprawling and industrial, this sea-facing city is not a place to fall in love with at first sight. But beneath the occasionally gritty facade beats the heart of one of Spain’s most energetic and forward-looking towns. It has a vibrant nightlife and restaurant scene, as well as some of Galicia’s most glorious beaches on its doorstep.What to doGet your bearings by climbing to the Castro hill fort for far-reaching views across the city and harbour. Explore the plazas and medieval streets of the Casco Vello – the rapidly gentrifiying old town which is now home to cool bars, coffee shops and galleries. Learn about Vigo’s long seafaring history at the Museo do Mar (museodomar.xunta/es) or catch an avant-garde exhibition in Marco, the Museum of Contemporary Art (marcovigo.com). Escape the city by catching a ferry to the unspoiled Islas Cíes – a 45-minute ride away – for lazy picnics on white-sand beaches and peacful hikes through the forest.Where to stayThe Hotel Puerta Gamboa is a family-run hotel with plenty of character in the old town. There are just 11 rooms all of which have either a small balcony or terrace (from £53 a night, hotelpuertagamboa.com).Where to eatVigo’s A Pedra market is famous for its oysters, which you can enjoy with a glass of Albariño at the Casa Vella restaurant (restaurantecasavellavigo.com). For creative, high-quality tapas try the Othilio Bar (theothiliobar.blogspot.ie), which opened last year.Insider tipSean O’Rourke, co-founder of EATour Specialist (eatourspecialist.com), which runs culinary tours of Vigo and beyond, recommends taking the ferry to the seaside village of Cangas. “It’s a pleasant 20-minute ride across the harbour and you get to see the city from the sea. Spend the day on the beach, then watch the sun set from the Monte O Facho in Donon, with a panoramic view of the whole of Vigo Bay.”Home: Posh camping in Rutland Glamping specialist Lantern and Larks has opened a new site in a walled garden in the grounds of Exton Park, Rutland. The stately home’s former orchard and kitchen garden will be home to five colonial-style luxury tents. There are 14 miles of bridleways to explore and Rutland Water, the UK’s largest manmade lake, is a short ride away. A two-night break in June costs £297.50 for a family of four (lanternandlarks.co.uk).Away: Visit Moominworld in Finland The Finnish resort of Naantali Spa has launched a Moomin-themed break to coincide with the release of the Moomins on the Riviera movie. Naantali is the home of Moomin creator Tove Jansson and the Moominworld theme park. Packages cost £652 for a family of four, including three nights’ B&B in a Moomin-themed room and tickets and train transfers to the theme park. Flights are extra (naantalispa.fi).