Vicente del Bosque defended his Spain players after the European champions suffered their first qualifying defeat in eight years away to Slovakia on Thursday night.Jural Kucka’s long-range free-kick gave Slovakia an early lead in the Group C game after Iker Cassilas misjudged the flight of the ball. Spain substitute Paco Alcácer drew level with eight minutes remaining before Miroslav Stoch scored an 87th-minute winner.“We did not expect this,” Del Bosque said. “It is our first defeat in 28 qualifying games. It is more good by them than bad by us. They made it difficult for us. We had patience to move the ball around, but we were not accurate in front of goal and their keeper played well.“Nobody likes to lose, but nobody can say we lacked effort or attitude. We lost due to circumstances of football. The counterattack for the second goal was very good. We have to say they played some good football.”Del Bosque was particularly keen to defend Casillas following his blunder for Slovakia’s opening goal – suggesting the ball’s movement deceived the Real Madrid goalkeeper.“Casillas had saved a good chance from Slovakia in the previous move,” he said. “I could not see clearly from the bench, but the ball seemed to move strangely in the air and Iker was deceived.”Spain also struggled in attack with Diego Costa unable to replicate the form he has shown for Chelsea.“We lacked depth in our attacks,” Del Bosque said. “We made changes to freshen things up. They [Slovakia] had practically given up on attacking.”“Costa is very enthusiastic, putting in the effort. As well as his performance we are happy with his behaviour and his commitment.”Spain face Luxembourg on Sunday but Del Bosque played down the impact of Thursday’s defeat. “There are just two games played, nothing is clear yet,” Del Bosque said. “Slovakia have six points, and top the classification, but there are games left to turn that around. The first game we won easily with five goals. We deserved a draw today at least I believe. I do not believe we are now in a negative dynamic.”