Bar El Tigre is a wonderful, fun and very traditional Spanish tapas bar in the centre of Alhama de Granada, about 50km from Granada. The boss Antonio is a very lively, friendly host. He prepares simple but exquisite food – jamon iberico is a must, as are his tostadas – toasted bread with tasty toppings: tomato, anchovy and jamon, all with lashings of olive oil and black pepper. There is a wonderful aromoa of coffee and red wine as you enter the bar. Feel the warm friendly atmosphere as you sit by the bar or find your seat on the large terrace and watch the locals meander around this dreamy little town .• Plaza de la Constitución WolfeeIf you are looking for the classic combination of tapas and flamenco in Seville (without being surrounded by hoards of tourists), then head to Peña Pies Plombo. Food is authentically Andulacian – we tried the chorizo, potaje (the chickpea-based stew), pringá (a meat feast for pork lovers), plus the seasonal potao dish, papas aliñas, which even has its own song. Only open to the public in the evenings, there is a small stage for live flamenco performances; photographs of Spanish greats Cameron and Paco de Lucía cover the walls. The bar is hosted by enthusiastic Loli, who is always keen to start dancing, especially when accompanied by her husband, Paco. Reassuringly, his Spanish guitar playing is more convincing than his wig. • Calle Dársena 22A OtumbaThis is a great little tapas bar/restaurant within a cool walled garden perched at the top of the hill in the Albaicín in Granada. It is quite difficult to find, tucked away in a little side street, but is well worth it if you can find it. Fantastic tapas free with every drink, and eating off the menu looked pretty good as well. • Albaicín alto, Calle Horno de Hoyo, granadainfo.com/higuera/english.htm SteveMcCannWonderful and well presented local tapas for the connoisseur. Opens at 8.30pm, it's small and perhaps you'll have to queue up – it's difficult to find too. • Calle General Ricardos 11 panosxPizara Café was the best value tapas and wine we had in the Asturias. Try the montaditos – slices of freshly cooked pork on bread, delicious. The sausages are also very good and go with the glasses of dry white wine. Just ask the bartender for a recommendation and you wont be disappointed. • Plaza de la Catedral 3, pizarracafe.com SintraIt's a bit on the tiny side – only 12 people can squeeze in to sit on high chairs around the narrow and high table. The sense of exclusivity is quickly confirmed when food and wine arrives. The tasting menu has so many small courses that I lost count; the wines are from small producers and excellent matches for the food. Courses are "announced" on the discreet flat screens at either end of the table. The price is around €40 per person all included, which must count as one of the great bargains in this city.• Rúa das Ameas, +33 (0) 981 576 145, abastosdouspuntocero.esyork137This charming restaurant in a rustic alley, conveniently placed for a break from sightseeing in the Alcazaba and the Teatro Romano, serves vegan and vegetarian meals. We had the vegan plate: an appetising and generous selection of vegan finger food and salads. The decor is cheerful and quirky, with comments from previous customers written on the walls, mobiles of tin jugs and colourful mirrors. • Calle Pozo del Rey 5, +34 (0) 952 214 858HappyyetpoorHere you can choose from a range of sit-down meals and enjoy a fantastic view of the surrounding slopes. If it is a bit nippy, warm up with sopa de Grazalema (Grazalema soup, a broth with chorizo and pieces of bread). Next, my favourite paté de perdiz (partridge paté), and then if you really want a feast a revuelto (scrambled egg) with seasonal veg (mushroom, asparagus, etc) and a meat of your choice (we opted for the leg of lamb, which could feed an army, not just two people).• Avenida Juan de la Rosa, +34 (0) 6 6650 2957, eltajo.comBecomingSevillanaIn the heart of the trendy neighbourhood of El Born, just minutes away from the chaos of Las Ramblas, is a great pizzeria run by a group of young friendly Argentinians. The offering consists of a wide variety of delicious crusty deep-base pizza by the slice made with quality ingredients. I recommend the pineapple, bacon, anchovy and tomato. They also have savoury tarts and empanadas. Each item costs a very reasonable €1.80. If you feel like something sweet, they have a range of typical Argentinian desserts that are worth a try. The place is quite small, catering mainly to locals, and is usually packed – a good thing because it means the pizza is always fresh.• Paseo del Born 22, +34 (0) 933 106 246, lapizzadelborn.comCoolandBrightOne of the few remaining traditional family restaurants where you can see three generations sitting down to Sunday lunch. They serve traditional Catalan food, the prices are reasonable and the décor classic. Expect to pay about €35 per head.• Carrer d'Enric Granados 89, +34 (0) 934 531 037WilfredbcnA top-quality restaurant in the heart of Puerto de la Cruz. Serves a range of fantastic food, including lots of Canarian cooking. The steaks are particularly good and reasonably priced. I'd recommend their queso asado (toasted goat's cheese with Canarian sauces); the house steak with bacon, apple and onion; papas arrugadas con mojo (small potatoes boiled and wrinkled in sea salt with local garlic and chilli sauce); and half a litre of local wine.• Calle El Peñón, Puerto de la Cruz, +34 (0) 922 370 133FarolitaIf you've never had migas, this is the place to be! Migas, an original Spanish dish of breadcrumbs fried with chorizo and olive oil, etc, is served with various toppings, including grapes. Another dish to try here is callos, but I will let you find out what it is. Accompany your meal with Viña Urbezo 2009 red wine which Luis the friendly proprietor – a former tax officer – will surely suggest, and you are bound to have a delicious traditional dinner in this family-run restaurant.• Calle de los Estébanes 4, +34 (0) 976 200 736PanosxA small, family-run hotel in the heart of Seville. It's a 17th-century house that was sensitively restored by an Anglo-Spanish family, maintaining all the beauty of the original ruin, complete with a small but impressive contemporary art collection. There are great breakfast and tapas, and a plunge pool on the roof if you feel like a break from exploring the incredible Barrio Alfalfa its set in. • Corral del Rey 12, +34 (0) 954 227 116corraldelrey.com. Doubles from €280florenceknightingaleLa Seguiriya is a delightful little guesthouse owned (and run with considerable warmth) by flamenco singer Paco Moyano and his wife. Six comfortable, well-appointed rooms are dotted around an 18th-century townhouse. Downstairs, there's a lounge area/bar and an excellent restaurant. Best of all, though, is the extensive terrace area out the back, which boasts stunning views of the town's famous gorge.• Calle Las Peñas 12, +34 (0) 958 360 801, laseguiriya.comthebackpackerA beautiful rustic hotel a few minutes drive from lively Sitges – you can't fail to have a relaxing stay here. Ian and Neil, the owners, are perfect hosts who offer great suggestions on places to visit and provide evening meals Monday to Saturday and lovely continental breakfast every day. The setting is delightful and it's not far from the sea, vineyards and quaint villages to visit. And the beds are incredibly comfortable.Carretera de Vilafranca, +34 (0) 938 962 061, sumidors.com. Doubles from €75YVA123Finca al-Manzil is a wonderful place to stay in the Sierra de Montánchez of Extremadura, the most undiscovered region of Spain. It's near three world heritage towns, Trujillo, Mérida and Cáceres. The finca is set in beautiful scenery with great walking, birdwatching and sightseeing possibilities. Very comfortable, with a great atmosphere. I stayed in the barn, which is self-catering, a lovely space with views over the olive groves, no neighbours, just peace and beauty. Spring was spectacular.• +34 (0) 670 743 296, finca-al-manzil.com. Minimum four-night stay at €110 a day.indigo100Tucked down one of the many narrow streets in the Santa Cruz district is this jawdropping 16th-century palace built by an Indian viceroy. The vast baths are vaulted, with stuccoed Mudéjars, antique lanterns and Roman seating. Float around in the incense-filled chambers - it's a truly magical experience. All this and fragrant tea!Calle Aire 15, +34 (0) 955 010 025, airedesevilla.comMrsfiftiesIn Madrid's biggest and budget-priced food market you can find stands with exotic, sun-ripened fruits and veg, also fresh fish from Spain's coasts and spices for every combination of ingredients. It makes cooking for every occasion a pleasure!Calle Bravo Murillo 122KathabelThe hammam in Málaga is the antithesis of the Costa del Sol. Calm, dimly lit, it is as authentic as I have found outside of Turkey. You can have a steam – no time limit - or book a massage as part of a package. The massage takes place either in the hammam itself on a marble slab, or (for more privacy) in a separate room. Afterward you can rest on the outside terrace with herbal tea. One of the most memorable moments in Málaga for me, apart from the Picasso Museum which is close by.• Calle Tomás de Cózar 13, +34 (0) 952 212 327, elhammam.comkateduignanThis tranquil sanctuary with signed paths, a shop and picnic tables is home to around 100 rescued donkeys. Some were taken in injured, some had been mistreated or simply abandoned, and others were exhausted after a life as taxi donkeys or rescued from poorly managed zoos. The spacious sanctuary covers several acres and the donkeys look so happy. An ideal day out for children who can adopt a donkey (but not take it home, of course) for as little as €20. • Apartado 25, 29520 Fuente De Piedra, +34 (0) 952 735 077, elrefugiodelburrito.comhispanofileAmong Barcelona's many museums, the most entertaining one is Cosmocaixa. The science museum has a lot of things to experiment with – very impressive. • Isaac Newton 26 , +34 (0) 932 126 050, fundacio.lacaixa.esTrobfrGenuine flamenco at Casa de la Memoria - great guitar playing, dancing and singing, all without the touristy food and drink. As a family, we thoroughly enjoyed the experience and it's a must if you visit this fantastic city.• Calle Ximenez de Enciso, 28, Santa Cruz district, +34 (0) 954 560 670, www.casadelamemoria.esSintraA Moorish festival held over the first two weekends of September in Guaro in Málaga province. The streetlights are turned off and the beautiful village is lit by 20,000 candles. It's incredible. The streets are lined with North African inspired stalls selling everything from incense to spices to trinkets. Lots of street-side bars and food stalls stay open until the early hours, and there's music as well as other performances. It's really popular with the Spanish who come from far and wide, but not many tourists seem to know about it. I'd recommend staying in the village to avoid the transport chaos.• lunamora.org/intro.phpiheartholidays