Western Sahara's best-known human rights activist has ended a 32-day hunger strike in Spain and returned home after Morocco reversed its expulsion order against her.Aminatou Haidar, a 43-year-old single mother, was denied entry to Laayoune, capital of the contested territory, by Morocco last month when she returned from a trip to the US. Flown to the Canary Islands, she refused to leave Lanzarote airport, sparking a diplomatic wrangle between Spain and Morocco, the former and present occupying powers in Western Sahara.As Haidar's health deteriorated – she was hospitalised on Wednesday after drinking only sugar water for more than a month – the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, intervened, asking Morocco to return Haidar's confiscated passport. Accompanied by her personal doctor, she was flown home by charter plane early this morning."This is a triumph for international law, for human rights, for international justice and for the cause [of Western Sahara]" Haidar told reporters before leaving Lanzarote. "The first thing I am going to do when I arrive will be to kiss my mother and my two children."The dispute over Western Sahara, a desert territory south of Morocco, is one of the world's last remaining decolonisation issues. As Spain prepared to withdraw in 1975, the native Sahrawi people were promised a vote of self-determination in line with UN custom. But Morocco annexed the territory, despite a ruling in the international court of justice that rejected its claim of historical sovereignty.A 16-year-war with the Sahrawi nationalist Polisario Front ensued, ending with a ceasefire and an agreement to hold a UN-sponsored referendum on independence. But Morocco has never allowed the vote to take place, and now says that autonomy is the best available option. About 100,000 Sahrawi refugees remain in limbo in Polisario-administered camps in south-western Algeria.Within Western Sahara, talk of independence is completely taboo and even mention of Sahrawi identity invites trouble. Haidar, who spent nearly four years as a "disappeared" prisoner from the age of 20 and last year won the Robert F Kennedy human rights award for her work, was expelled after refusing to acknowledge her nationality as Moroccan on the airport arrival form on 14 November.In Lanzarote she rejected the offer of Spanish citizenship or political asylum, and her cause was taken up by an array of Spanish celebrities, including the filmmaker Pedro Almodóvar and the actor Javier Bardem, who said José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, the prime minister, would be to blame if Haidar died on Spain's soil.Morocco had initially taken a hard line, saying Haidar would only be permitted to return to Western Sahara if she swore allegiance to King Mohammed VI. While terms of the deal to end the stalemate remain unclear, the Moroccan government said today that it had agreed to a request from "friendly countries and partners" to allow Haidar home.