 Uber has been banned in Spain and Thailand, adding to a week of woes for the US-based taxi service that has also seen bans in India and the Netherlands and a lawsuit from the city authorities in Portland, Oregon.In Spain a judge upheld a claim by the Madrid Taxi Association that Uber’s drivers were not authorised to provide the service, which amounted to unfair competition. In his ruling the judge said that by not adhering to the norms governing the taxi service market Uber drivers were competing unfairly with licensed cabs.In Thailand the government said Uber drivers were neither registered nor insured to drive commercial vehicles. It added that its credit card system didn’t comply with regulations. Meanwhile the City of Portland moved on Monday to shut down the service only days after it launched there.The latest troubles for the US tech company come after the Indian government stopped web-based, unregistered taxi companies from operating after a female passenger claimed that she was raped by an Uber driver in New Delhi.The driver, who has confessed, allegedly already faced rape charges but had a forged character reference signed by a police officer.This week a Dutch court banned the cheaper UberPop service, warning drivers they could face fines of €10,000 (£8,000) if they violate the ban. The premium UberBlack and UberLux services remain in operation in Amsterdam. Uber said it would fight the ban.The Spanish service began in Barcelona where the regional government has said it will ban it from 2015, threatening drivers with €6,000 fines. That has now been overridden by the judge’s ruling which will also cover Valencia, the other Spanish city where Uber operates.“We believe we are offering a service within the spirit of the law. We will continue to offer safe, competitive, quality services to consumers,” Uber spokesman Thomas van Oortmerssen said.“The law is out of date and that means the technological service we offer had not yet been invented,” he added. “The law needs to be changed to make it possible and it is now up to the politicians to do that.”The San Francisco-based service has faced opposition almost everywhere it has set up shop but has taken an aggressive stance against a sector that is almost universally heavily regulated and deeply protectionist.It is operating in 200 cities and 51 countries. Sensing public support in cities such as London, where the famous black taxis charge exorbitant rates, the company has been willing to wage legal battles in exchange for the publicity it gives them.In spite of this bumpy ride, investors have been throwing money at the company which has raised $2.9bn since it was established in 2009.Only last week it was valued at $40bn in a $1.2bn fundraising, making it on paper worth four times the room-sharing app Airbnb and not far behind General Motors valued at $53bn.The heady valuation comes barely six months since it was thought to be worth $18bn – a figure derided by some market observers at the time as absurd.