This place is a cool, swanky eaterie by day and a trendy bar/club by night. Decked out in a fusion of oriental and Mediterranean decor, it's a great place for lunch after a stroll or swim. During the day we took in the sunshine and relaxed on the huge loungers. The food was great and elegantly presented. It's a bit pricey but you're paying for the ambience. Music ranges from chart to dance to hip-hop. Passeig Marítim 32, +34 93 224 0470, cdlcbarcelona.com KittyKrisPlaya de Torimbia barA one-track train, the Feve, runs along the coast of Asturias. From a base in Llanes you can ride it west to Villahormes and ramble back east, mostly on a coast path. Biscay's waves chew the feet of the Picos mountains, leaving bite-mark coves. On a coastline of best beaches, Playa de Torimbia is the best of all. It's a half-mile curve of gold held by sheer cliffs; skinny-dipping normal but not compulsory; the only building is a simple bar with paella, raciones and beer.Niembro is the nearest village. There is a car park on the cliff at the eastern end of the bay. The bar is at the western endrmjiLa GaviotaThis is the place we come to first when we visit Spain. The food is always the same, which makes it a local favourite, and everything is so Spanish. Gambas pil pil, calamares and simple grilled meat and fish, all packed full of flavour. The setting is magnificent, in a small cove next to Cerro Gordo on a two-mile beach. Best bit – an early evening tinto de verano (summer wine) watching the sun go down over the headland. Paseo de Andres Segovia, +34 958 827550Temple1La SonrisaFor stunning views of seven kilometres of unspoilt, golden sand and sparkling blue sea, look no further than this family-run bar with real Spanish atmosphere and a great selection of meat and fresh fish from the barbecue. Grilled and split lobsters in season are great value and an absolute must, and there's a terrific selection of tapas served from about noon onward. Elevated slightly from the beach, and with a partially glassed-in area to protect from sea breezes, it provides a perfect area to relax over a cerveza or the excellent house wine. Late evening it's buzzing, often to the accompaniment of live music.Playa de Punta del Moral, +34 66 915 9117, lasonrisa.euPaulineRendallPlaya de Canyamel beach barsThere are two beach bars here, completely different in style. One is very modern, with moulded chairs and tables, lobster evenings, and food and (sometimes live) music until late. The other is more traditional, serving simple snacks, such as chicken and chips, and beers. Both overlook this secluded bay beneath the Caves of Arta and Cap Vermell and have the feel of old Mallorca about them.JantayEl ChiringuitoSkip the ever-popular Salinas beach and head further across to Es Cavallet beach (part-nudist) to discover this shimmering all-white beach house, more hip and swanky than the rest. Chow down on light, crispy calamari dunked in aioli and the freshest fish you can eat. Then sink back on huge day beds with a bottle of fizz and let the Balearic beats take over. Book ahead or arrive early to secure one of the sought-after sunloungers in front of the bar.elchiringuitoibiza.comMonikasaysSol Beach BarThis bar lies on the resort's stunning Levante beach. It's spacious and deservedly popular. Whether you want a milkshake with the family on the large terrace or the football match on one of seven television screens inside, this place should suit.Avenida de Madrid 25, Playa de Levante, +34 96 586 1800, solbeachbar.comMason1Gunlao beach barA short stroll along the beach, heading away from the town centre, leads to the most charming of Spanish beach bars, Gunlao. It has views of the north African coastline to the left, Paloma Baja sand dunes to the right, with the Atlantic Ocean sprawling out in between. It is the perfect place to step out of the breeze (Tarifa attracts windsports junkies from all over the world) and watch the colourful array of windsurfers and kite surfers, dancing across and above the sea. The windswept sand is kept at bay by the short, clear glass walls surrounding the bar. There is relaxed music, reasonably priced food and drinks, together with friendly staff and customers, gives this bar an unassuming and unpretentious feel.dunethat