This is a busy time of year for families and workers in olive producing regions of the northern hemisphere. They'll have been out - or, depending on exactly where they are, face the prospect of going out - whatever the weather, for the annual harvest, carefully collecting olives at exactly the moment of ripeness. We unleashed Tim Hayward upon one such family - the Valentinos in Tuscany - armed with a treeshaker and boundless enthusiasm in relentless rain; you can see a video of their olive oil operation here, a simple but effective process that likely hasn't changed in decades. Watching it took me back to an olive harvest I attended last season in Andalucia, a gentler affair where everything is done painstakingly by hand. The olives being picked were destined for the table, and so far no-one has come up with a mechanical system that doesn't bruise the fruit; less of a problem, presumably, for olives that are headed for crushers and bottles.Just outside Seville, in one of the many groves that populate the region, we joined lines of workers on their knees, placing plump green gordals and manzanillas into esparto grass baskets. While this is an appealing image for marketeers and gourmet store botherers, the manual, time-consuming nature of the labour is an expensive problem for Spanish growers, who are keen to sell more of the 500,000 tonnes of olives they produce annually to the likes of you and me.As far as I'm concerned, if they keep stuffing them with anchovies and shipping them over here, I'll keep eating them, though I was told as a nation we're more avid consumers of capsicum-stuffed olives than other types. At a factory in Seville where the stuffing and bottling takes place, long tape-like strips of pimento paste stream into millions of manzanillas. Others take garlic, almonds, cornichons, jalapeño, cheese, capers, or salmon; with over 50 varieties of filling, it seems we all love a stuffed olive, and have since the practice began in the 18th century.Before stuffing, the fruit spends three months fermenting in brine to remove the bitterness and break down the sugar, a technique favoured over dry curing in salt, or the oil- or water-based methods used elsewhere (if you're lucky enough to have access to a productive olive tree, you could always have a go at curing your own). And then there were green olives undergoing oxidation to turn them black, a technique apparently invented for aesthetic reasons in California where they fancied the look of them on their pizzas. This process, to my mind, adds nothing to the olive's flavour and the product is not to be confused with stronger, ripe black olives such as the Greek kalamata.The Spanish eat around 40% of their olive crop themselves and desperately need to increase the amount they export. But while Spain is the world's leading table olive producer, industry insiders worry that the rest of the world has no idea of this prolific production. Why is this? "We're not Italians" one producer said to me, by way of explanation, referring to the confidence with which the Italians effectively promote their foods and way of life.I wonder if he's right. It's certainly true that a large proportion of the jarred, canned olives bought in supermarkets in the UK originate in Spain, but I'm not sure how much thought the average shopper gives to provenance. Preparation and presentation is all-important, not only the crucial question of the stuffing, but the accompanying herbs and spices, whether they're sitting in brine, marinated in oil, with stones or pitted, whether they come jarred, canned, in small packets or in tubs from a deli counter. (The latter is the best way to taste them, not only because the quality tends to be higher and you can make sure you're buying undamaged fruit with firm flesh, but you can usually ask to try a few different types before you buy.)I buy fresh olives with the stones still in for greater flavour, but I also like to have a standby jar I can graze on for months, like these beauties from Olives Et Al dressed in oil and lemon. I've since noticed they do come from Spain, but it wasn't a deciding factor when I bought them. How about you? Do you seek out small tender manzanillas, fleshy queens stuffed with a favourite filling, or do you favour the Greek kalamata, the strong flavour of a salt-cured Italian Gaeta or meaty Cerignola? And what do the majority of us buy them for? For me, cooking with olives used to be limited to pizza toppings and salads, but as well as throwing together a simple tapenade these days I often use them in cooking. One of my standby week night dishes is based on a fish parcel recipe from the fantastic Leon cookbook, featuring fennel, mushrooms and tarragon. Black olives are what really make this dish fly. And chef, Jose Pizarro, the ambassador for Olives from Spain, has given us a couple of recipes featuring the versatile fruit - sea bass with a fennel and olive salad, and one for lamb chops with an olive and anchovy marinade that I'm particularly keen to try. Olives do seem to pair particularly well with fish dishes. Any other suggestions?