Almost a century has passed since Spanish intellectuals rallied to fight back against the "black legend" (la leyenda negra), but, as recent off-the-field events at the Olympics have shown, it is still casting a dark shadow over Europe. Only defined in 1914 by Julián Juderías, the "black legend" refers to the centuries-old idea of Spain possessing an intolerance and lust for blood unparalleled within Europe. Supported by the worst excesses of the Inquisition and the conquistadores, art, history and literature from the Enlightenment to Hemingway have presented the Spaniards as, at best romantic and simple folk, and at worst morally degenerate with unique sanguinary propensities. As with all legends, the notion that Spain is, uniquely "ignorant, fanatical and inclined toward violent repression" has some grounding in historical fact, but it was nevertheless fundamentally born out of the imperialistic propaganda of the 16th century.  Despite this, the image of Spain as a backward "fragment of Africa, soldered so cruelly to inventive Europe", as WH Auden put it, has endured to this day. Germany included, it is unlikely that any other country would be subjected to such allegations of inherent racism among its people on the back of a couple of ill-judged photos. Spain is, and always has been, "different".  Of course, it was only right that the Spanish athletes and sports officials should be condemned for their decision to make slit-eyed gestures prior to setting off for Beijing, particularly when Madrid is looking to host the Olympics within the next decade. Likewise, whether brought about by genuine racism or an ignorance of cultural considerations, it is pertinent that references to the abuse targeted at black players in La Liga or seen on the country's grand prix circuits were once again brought up. In terms of tackling racism in sport, Spain is indeed dragging its heels and needs to get its house in order.  However, the reactions of the past few days have more than occasionally gone beyond criticising the behaviour of individuals and those within the sporting arena and into the realms of national temperament, and yes, even race.  Media commentators and sports fans alike have put the incident down to unique backwardness of the Spanish people, of whom no more is to be expected. Spain is simply the Duke of Edinburgh of western Europe, to be simultaneously condemned and patronised. Writing in the Times, Rod Liddle observed that "suddenly confronted with foreigners, the Spanish become unreconstructedly PC or magnificently obnoxious," with the country "still last in the PC stakes". Going further, Dom Joly in the Independent took this as an opportunity to roll out the usual stereotypes, alluding to Spaniards "hurling donkeys off a church tower while laughing heinously". Even in the Guardian, while Mark Tran argued that "there is no point getting too worked up over this foolishness", which he made sure to refer to only within the context of sporting events, a significant proportion of comments clearly concurred with Alexander Dumas's oft-quoted put-down that "Africa begins in the Pyrenees", though without the excuse of historical relativism.  "Spain is not as advanced as Britain in its attitude to race sensitivity", one reader noted, backed up by claims that "many Spanish people are incredibly racist", and that "Spain is remarkably backward in this respect", while there were also calls for a special diversity programme to be rolled out to "help Spaniards control their racism".  Such a reliance on sweeping generalisations is hardly likely to solve the problem that does exist and, in a week when the BNP enjoyed its annual jolly to the countryside and a London teenager died in an apparently racist stabbing, it may even prompt some Spaniards to dismiss genuine concerns as mere hypocrisy.  As the Spanish revisionist historian Pía Moa once said:Going down this path, we might define England as the homeland of piracy and slave trafficking, which weighed so heavily in the nation's formation and prosperity.Just as it has been for hundreds of years, the idea of Spain being uniquely intolerant and backward may well be supported by individual examples of shortcomings, but is fundamentally unjustified. It has been argued that the drive to create a morally inferior "other" in the 16th century arose partly from the need to justify the shortcomings of the English, Dutch, and then the French empires. Should this still be the case, the endurance of the "black legend" looks all but guaranteed for the some time yet.