My sister phones from Chippenham. "Do you know where they are exactly?" When I name some far-flung place with a strong anti-western stance, she pauses for a moment, then says: "Do you think they're going to be all right? How long are they going for this time"?I give all the information I can and make soothing noises. We are not talking about a team of war correspondents or adventurous and irresponsible teenagers on their gap-year. We're talking about my parents and step-parents (my mother and father both have long and successful second marriages), all in their early 70s. They are better at giving us their itineraries now, but a couple of times in the past they forgot to say that they were even going away.None of them seem particularly interested in what I would consider to be more age-appropriate tours through the chateaus of the Loire, the hilltop towns of Tuscany or the monasteries of northern Spain. And I can confidently say that they would all rather be dead then go on any sort of cruise. In the last couple of years, they have seemed to be racing against each other to fit in as many interesting, obscure and possibly dangerous destinations as they can before their health declines or money runs out. In the last two years, my father and stepmother have travelled to Armenia, South Africa, Peru, and Costa Rica, and are planning a trip to Ethiopia in the New Year. But it's my mother who has the most chronic wanderlust – a restlessness and curiosity that seems insatiable.It seems to us, her grown-up children and her pretty grown-up grandchildren, that she is always either packing or unpacking the little blue suitcase that lies ready for action on the sofa in her bedroom. Each fascinating place only gives her a greater appetite to see the next ancient and hard-to-reach location, accompanied either by my geologist stepfather or her great friend Annette. In the last few years she has visited Georgia, Uzbekistan, Syria and south-east Asia.Her trip to Algeria was the most worrying for my brother who was worried about terrorist bomb attacks, whereas I had a gnawing anxiety the whole time she was in Iran, fearing she would be kidnapped. An Iranian friend of mine once asked: "Why on earth does your mother want to go there?" Not long ago, I heard her say how interested she would be to see the sites in Iraq. She is off to Burma next: the trip was organised as soon as Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest.She knows that we are proud of her, and not resentful of her time away because when she is home she is such an attentive mother and grandparent, but apart from telling her off when she forgot to tell us she was going, we haven't really mentioned, till recently, how we feel about her adventurous travel. She seems quite surprised when I tell her that we all worry about her choice of destinations. Paul and Rachel Chandler, the couple who were recently released after months being held captive by Somali pirates, were – like my mother – intrepid, experienced travellers. They got into trouble despite hanging around in port for months before being told the sea was "too rough for pirates" and that it would be safe for them to set sail.My mother says that the Chandlers' situation did get her thinking – perhaps for the first time – how it might be for the family back home if something happened to her. But she says that for herself she never feels nervous about possible danger "except in the Villarica volcano in Chile a couple of years ago where I went ice climbing and lost my nerve when I saw that other people had fallen. Then I thought what an earth are you doing you silly old bat?" She thinks that being in her 70s has decreased, rather than increased, the risk of something happening, and has made her much more able to cope with bad situations. "You become less visible as you get older as a woman. I am harassed far, far less than I was when I was young, and I think you probably are much less panicky and experienced in dealing with people as you reach my age."She doesn't like to go in organised groups but arranges everything herself – accommodation, guide and route. "You discover so much more about the way people live and the culture when you are not being herded around by some travel company," as she puts it. "I wouldn't want to be lumped with lots of older people either because they would really slow you down."She accepts that some places, such as the north and south poles, can only be visited in a group. Not surprisingly, it is to my mother that my 20-year-old son went for advice about mosquito nets, vaccinations, outdoor and sub-zero gear and how to keep out of trouble when he went around South America. For herself, she says she has absolutely no fear of what might happen to her because she would much rather "die chained to a radiator somewhere fascinating than die in an old people's home in Bournemouth".I try to persuade her that there is a middle ground between those two fates but I can tell she is not convinced. My mother has been interested in travel since she was a girl in Ayrshire, and her grandmother, who had been a friend of Captain Scott's wife, gave her books about Antarctica – a place my mother plans to see in the next year or so. Although most of her family was not interested even in going across the border to England, she devoured a children's book series about different explorers called Travels With …The first big trip she went on with my father was in a Volkswagen across Turkey, Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan in their early 20s. "Looking back, that does seem mad," she agrees. "I remember a particularly hairy time on a mountain top in Afghanistan where we were surrounded by hostile, bearded men."After she married my geologist stepfather she sometimes went on digs with him to Qatar, and we all travelled together round Mexico and Turkey in a Land Rover, long before it became popular with tourists. I remember being mobbed and stoned a couple of times by children who were startled by our blond hair and western clothes. In the years that followed, looking after us and holding down a job as a teacher thwarted her wilder yearning for travel, and although she did go to Russia with my godmother when I was in my last year at primary school, most of our holidays were spent in Scotland, Suffolk and France. It has only been since she retired that she has really taken off again."I'll keep all the low-key, easy travelling stuff for when I'm really doddery," she says. Interestingly, my mother's devil-may-care outlook doesn't extend to her children. In my gap year, she forbade me to go to India because, "For pretty girls, it is an absolute nightmare." So while friends went to Sri Lanka, South Korea and Thailand, I studied Italian in Florence. When I raise this, she says she still thinks it was a bad idea. "I'd have been so worried about you, darling. Aren't you glad you didn't go? It would have been terrible at that age. You wouldn't have been allowed to move."I regret obeying her, but the truth is that although I like visiting places I don't have Mum's fearlessness and explorative spirit. Compared with her, I am a bit of a travel lightweight. Of course I don't have the time or the means to travel as she does just now, but I am not sure if I will ever be as brave as she is. When I did go further afield and took my family to Sri Lanka, we got caught up in the 2005 tsunami. This has fuelled her feeling that although she is immune to danger, we shouldn't go much further from London than Cornwall. In fact, even Cornwall is a bit far. She sighs and looks worried when I tell her that the children are going surfing again. "I know it's hypocritical," she says, "but I would really prefer it if you and the children went to Dorset every summer."