Twenty years ago, when first I encountered the lady, her arms were raised in silent supplication towards a brooding Glasgow sky and I was surprised because I hadn't known she was here and, in any case, I had not expected to see her so far away from home. And then I read the words underneath written by an appreciative city that knows a little about warriors and sacrifice and I looked again and realised that this was no supplicant. For she was in mid-stride and she was calling out to a city to come to the aid of her people.From all parts of Scotland, more than 500 heeded her call to arms in 1936 to fight for equality and democracy against an implacable fascist despot in the Spanish Civil War. Her name is Dolores Ibárruri Gómez, Basque daughter of republican Spain known as La Pasionara, whose siren entreaties led 53 Glaswegians alone to shed their blood for a sacred cause.For 30 years now, she has been cast in bronze watching over the river but tucked away at the foot of a railway bridge out of sight of the grandchildren of those who followed her. And last week, modern Spain finally invited the last surviving British and Irish volunteers to her cause to become citizens of the country for whose freedom and democracy they had risked all.No other country gave proportionately more of her sons and daughters than Scotland to the International Brigades that fought to protect Spain's democratic popular republic from the malign forces of Franco's nationalists.They emerged from all parts of the country; from the coalfields of Fife and the grimy back streets of Dundee to the slum dwellings of Shettleston, among them five men from three neighbouring streets. Some were members of the Communist party and were bound by duty to join with their Spanish brethren against fascism. Others were simply drawn to a struggle that they felt would define their role and the role of their children in the latter part of the 20th century.And from Glasgow a group of volunteers could not resist the opportunity of administering a right good kicking to a Catholic tyrant and his papish hordes. Was this the International Bridgeton Loyal Brigade which had been captivated by La Pasionara's cry of "No Pasarán", which in Glasgow/Ulster usage loosely translates as "No Surrender"?There were 30,000 citizens of more than 20 countries in the International Brigades, but there has always been puzzlement as to why the fires of a distant republic burned so fiercely in the souls of so many poor and disenfranchised Scots. Many were still pock-marked with the recent scars of a real depression when few had a job and welfare depended on the whim of Westminster's privileged few. Surely these people had their own troubles to dispute without seeking other people's?Yet the very yoke of their deprivation gave them the liberty to fight for Spain, for there was nothing to keep them at home and little to hope for in the future. Somehow, they all knew that the forces of oppression, aristocratic privilege and unreformed hierarchy had to be resisted, even in the face of defeat. For if not, the seeds of equality taking root in an unfair world would be trampled by many more militaristic rascals in a white uniform and a general's hat.And how had a supposedly uneducated and surly underclass obtained the knowledge and political sophistication to understand a war of ideas occurring in another world and in a fairy-tale language? Again though, their poverty was their opportunity. For every man who bought solace at the bottom of a glass of stout in a Gallowgate drinking hole, there was another who sought deliverance by political discourse and agitation.In John MacLean, Manny Shinwell, John Wheatley, Willie Gallacher and James Maxton, they had visionary political leaders who channelled their anger and showed them the possibility of a world where a man might be educated, work and contribute to government and the law.Winston Churchill knew this too and this was why his tanks pitched up on George Square in 1919. Poor old Winnie must have thought that a new Soviet Republic was under construction in the second city of an empire built by his class alone and for his class alone. So when Dolores Ibárruri Gómez drew her line in the soil of Spain and issued her clarion call there was a readymade and motivated working-class battalion prepared to join her in a war whose importance resonated far, far beyond Spain.The immediate implications of this first great ideological struggle were soon overshadowed by Adolf Hitler and the Third Reich, but Picasso and Hemingway knew that they had to bear witness to Spain for the rest of the world.And so did 500 Scottish men and women who knew that they had, at last, come into their time.