What with the global financial crisis and the collapse of the property market, it has been a lean year in Spain. But for those lucky enough to win a share of the massive lottery prize known as El Gordo, or The Fat One, Christmas started with a sudden dose of cheer yesterday.The Fat One showered €2.15bn (£2.02bn) in prize money across the country. It brought tears of relief to some winners and champagne-soaked pledges to pay off mortgages and meet debts from others.The world's biggest lottery payout has ushered in the Spanish Christmas season for almost two centuries since it was first drawn in 1812. Rarely has the prize money, spread among tens of thousands of people, been so eagerly welcomed. "Everybody says they are going to use it to get themselves out of problems," said Madrid lottery seller Rosario Rueda.Her shop in the working-class Embajadores district of Madrid was just one place where the pavements were sticky with champagne yesterday as clients and staff celebrated their good fortune. From small villages in north-western Galicia and southern Andalucia to the centre of Barcelona, the sudden arrival of prize money was being celebrated with both glee and relief.In Barcelona, where much of the prize money fell, Pakistani immigrant Shalim Ahmed was proudly waving a savings bank book where the balance had jumped from €17 to €300,017."To hell with the crisis," said another winner in Barcelona, Juan Fernández, who shaved the winning number - 32365 - into his hair. "I lost my job recently," he said. "I'm going out tonight and I'll blow the rest on doing up my car and buying a flat.""I'll be paying off my daughter's debts first," said winner Manuel Gascó. "She's got a large mortgage."Isabel Moliner, whose shop in Barcelona's Las Ramblas boulevarde sold many of the winning tickets, said some had gone to tourists attracted to the world's most famous lottery. Police had to divert traffic around her shop yesterday as crowds gathered to celebrate the prizes.Spaniards are among the most fervent gamblers in Europe. This year they spent €60 each on El Gordo tickets. For the first time in many years, however, there was a fall in the overall amount of money they spent, which nevertheless was estimated at more than €2.8bn.The complex system of individual prizes means that these are measured in thousands, or hundreds of thousands, of euros rather than in millions. For some two thousand holders of a décimo, as a €20 stake in a lottery number is called, yesterday's winning number was worth €300,000.Part of that money was showered on to the small central Spanish city of Soria where hundreds of winning decimos were sold. Barman Ricardo Jiménez said he had won more than a million euros after spending more than 300 euros on different lottery numbers. He had also sold many tickets to friends and clients."This changes everything," said one of the clients at Bar Gary, which sold many winning tickets in Soria.The city's mayor, Carlos Martínez, said the money would make a dramatic difference to Soria. "This will be spent in shops, helps business and will buy flats," said Martínez, whose parents and brothers were among the winners. "It should see us through the crisis next year."The El Gordo draw, which lasts all morning, was broadcast live on television yesterday as Spaniards waited anxiously to find out if they would get lucky this Christmas. With some 70% of the money played being returned in prizes, most hoped that, at the least, they would get their money back. The winning number was finally pulled at midday from a basket of balls by children from Madrid's San Ildefonso school - a tradition that dates back to the origins of Spain's national lottery system in the 18th century. El Gordo tickets are sold around the world, with several lottery shops selling them over the internet. These end up as far away as Japan.The biggest winner yesterday was the Spanish exchequer. It kept the 30% of money not handed back to lottery players as prizes, more than €800m, part of which will cover the cost of running the nation's lottery.