When abroad, it's not unusual for a Spaniard to be mistaken for a Greek. At a distance, the accent in both languages sound so strikingly similar that, sometimes, Greek is not "all Greek to us" but we actually take it for Spanish. And yet, when it comes to the economy, Spaniards would react almost angrily at any comparison between our finances and those of our Greek friends.It's nothing personal, and in fact Spain is strongly supportive of aiding Athens. But Spain is definitively not Greece. Not even as Standard & Poor's chose to announce its slight downgrading of the Spanish debt the very day after doing a severe downgrading of Greece's. The result: a loss of almost 3% in the Madrid stock exchange, which was momentarily hit, yes, by that most Greek-sounding word, "panic".That was Wednesday. On Thursday, things looked much better. But among many Spaniards there is now a growing sense of being unfairly treated by the markets. The overuse of student-related cliches for the current crisis, like "doing our homework", "learn the lesson" or "pass the exam" have given the world economy the air of a Victorian boarding school. Well, Spain sometimes feels she is been bullied. The lumping together of Portugal, Ireland, Greece and Spain in the tasteless acronym "Pigs", like graffiti scrawled on a door, only adds to this schoolboy style of harassment. Besides, it's not true.Spain does have a serious problem with its economy, no one denies that. But it's not a problem of debt, it's unemployment, which last Friday passed the 20% mark. Almost everybody agrees that this masks an oversized underground economy (not a feat to boast about), but the numbers are staggering nonetheless. This high unemployment rate indeed affects the public debt, since the current Socialist government has expanded its protection for the unemployed. But that is not only a clear social demand; it's also a necessity if we want people to have money to spend.It's true that Spain's prime minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, has had a slow-motion approach to this crisis (and he has taken flack for that reason, even from friendly quarters). But no less true is that he is facing a Conservative opposition less interested in helping the government than in defeating it (well, that's politics). The almighty employers organization, the CEOE, on their part see the current situation as an opportunity to advance their own agenda on employment reform. Which sort of reform they mean is not clear. Hardly reassuring, though, is the fact that the CEOE is currently headed by a bankrupt businessman who owes his employees many months' worth of wages. No wonder the trade unions are sceptical.But "homework" is being done: a new austerity plan has just been announced and the government is planning to go ahead with labour reform with or without the trade unions and the CEOE. Whether that is sufficient remains to be seen. However, as far as the national debt is concerned, even Standard & Poor's admits that there isn't the slightest risk of default and that, if necessary, Spain could easily borrow the money needed to cover this year's deficit.What's the problem, then? The problem is that S&P thinks Spain should change its fiscal model and increase productivity if it expects to hit the 3% target deficit set for 2013. All well and good, but it's precisely this tweak of the ears now that is going to make it more difficult for Spain to "pass the exam" then. Exactly the same thing happened in 2009, when another downgrading of our debt by S&P caused rather than prevented a downturn. Which takes us to the argument many are making in Spain this days: the excessive power still enjoyed by the big rating agencies.When the financial crises broke, there was considerable consensus that some of their reckless practices were to blame. After all, was it not Standard & Poor's who gave Lehman Brothers their best rating days before its collapse? The G20 promised to regulate them further, but not much happened. Everybody makes mistakes, sure, but that is why not everybody makes prophecies. The other two main rating agencies still give Spain's debt their highest marks, but the fact is that our debt is now more expensive and our troubles bigger. That's the sort of prophecy you can always bank on: the self-fulfilling prophecy.