I felt more like Gil Grissom from CSI than Indiana Jones when I finally managed to cup my hands round Curly's smashed-in skull and lift it out of his hastily dug grave in one piece. It had taken four hours and a lot of patience, bent over in the 30C Spanish heat, to finally free the skull from the concrete-like grasp of the 1,700-year-old dirt. One slip and his bones would have crumbled to dust. Curly - named after the third Marx brother by the volunteer who discovered him - was the last of 30 skeletons discovered unexpectedly in shallow graves back stage of the largest theatre in Roman Spain at Clunia. Three hours drive north-west of Madrid and an hour from the nearest supermarket, the theatre is now the gateway from the medieval village of Peñalba de Castro to the beautiful mosaics and massive foundations of the ruined Roman city.Thirty people had been buried in a rush, and the only clue so far as to who they were, or why they died, was a single arrow head found in one of the graves.Working on an archaeological dig is not many people's dream holiday, but I had decided to spend a week at Clunia to find out why it is growing in popularity. Clunia's sun, location and all inclusive package of accommodation, food and excursions, seemed more appealing than the bring-your-own-tent-and-food approach of a soggy dig in Britain.According to Lisa Westcott, editor of Current Archaeology, this will have been the biggest summer yet for archaeological volunteering, with more than 300 digs in the UK alone. "Volunteering is really taking off because it is a great alternative for recession-hit Britain," she says. "Volunteers who don't have to have any previous experience of archaeology can spend two weeks away for almost nothing."Go further afield, as I did, and it may not be so cheap but the limited numbers of archaeologists on many excavations gives volunteers the chance to be involved in every aspect of the dig. Mysteries swirl around the largely unexcavated ruins of Clunia, one of the most important cities in Roman Spain. Built by the Romans on the massive 3,360ft Alto de Castro plateau soon after they had conquered the area in 55BC, the city was given a monumental makeover in the first century AD, which included the construction of a huge, 9,000-seat theatre. By the end of the second century AD the theatre's stage and one third of the seats had been torn out to make way for a circus arena. Barely 100 years later, both the city and theatre had largely been abandoned.I arrived at the site to find Mike Elkin, the American archaeologist in charge of the volunteers, already having lunch at a long table with 30 archaeologists, Spanish students and volunteers. The vest tops at the table were distinctly tighter and the tans deeper than on Channel 4's Time Team, and the rapid fire Spanish of the archaeologists a challenge for my Spanglish. Mike gave up a high-flying financial career at Bloombergs in Madrid to pursue his first love of archaeology, which he had studied at university. He explained that each summer he brings seven volunteers to the dig, which is run by the universities of Barcelona, Valladolid and Burgos. Many - like me - have no previous experience of archaeology. I would be staying in one of two shared and rather basic flats in the local village of Peñalba de Castro. The working day began at 7am and finished at 3pm. After that there was a big sit down lunch, followed by dinner at 9.30pm. In between the hours were our own; sometimes there were excursions to explore the region. The first day I felt a tingle of excitement when we crossed the "PROHIBIDO EL PASO" cordon at the entrance to the site and turned from visitors to archaeologists. And there was something magical when professor Francesc Tuest started spraying the patch of dirt we were digging with water to reveal the edges of a pit that had been filled with rubble almost 2,000 years ago. Francesc explained that archaeology was like removing the flesh of an orange while leaving the skin intact, his way of reminding us that rather than just the brute force of "pico, pico, pico" - the Spanish for pick axe - we had to find the edge of the pit, identify layers and watch out for artefacts.Then, a eureka moment - I saw something pale and grooved in the dirt. Bending down I realised I had found a fragment of Roman pottery. While the professionals just shrugged and threw it into the finds tray, to me it was special and deeply satisfying that I had only previously seen in a museum display case.Although there was rarely a chance to shower before lunch, there was always time for a Mahon - the regional beer. At 3pm we headed to Restaurant Los Cuatro Bolos in nearby Huerta de Rey for a three-course lunch: rustic dishes such as oreja de cardo (fried pig's ear) and never-ending glasses of tinto de verano (rough local red wine mixed with sweet tonic water), which helped both to break down barriers and turn the meals into Spanish lessons. In the afternoon it was too hot to work so we would explore the countryside by taking one of the shepherd trails lined with sunflowers that spread out from the village, or better still, by jumping into Mike's Land Rover to kick up dust along the back roads and through villages where dogs chased the wheels of passing cars.One such trip took us to the ruins of the Roman city of Tiermes. Hidden among pine forests and limestone cliffs, it looked more like the wild west than modern Spain, with houses, gateways and aqueducts that had been carved into a large limestone outcrop. One of Tiermes' aqueducts plunged us into the total darkness of an 80m underground tunnel; we stumbled along it before being thrown out into the blinking daylight and thyme-scented air of a ruined hilltop mansion.Another trip took us to a mass grave from the Spanish civil war of the 1930s. It had been discovered only three days before. The Republican flag still flew proudly over a black canopy that hid the skeletons of the 46 victims of the Nationalist death squads buried in two trenches. The local mayor was sitting on his knees as he helped to scrape the dirt from the bones, as if in an act of penance. The gold filings still shone from the bullet-holed skulls.Back at Clunia I was told, at last, that I could take my turn excavating Curly. I was even more surprised when that night I was asked by one of the archaeologists in Spanish whether I would like to come back next year, and I answered "Si!".ArchaeoSpain (+1 866 932 0003) is a US-based non-profit organisation that provides opportunities for volunteers to take part in archaeological excavations in Spain and Italy. The Clunia dig costs €1,850 for four weeks, including three meals a day and wine, accommodation (at most two sharing), excursions, transfers and insurance. The dates for 2010 are July 1-July 30. Ryanair flies Stansted-Valladolid. Car hire from Valladolid airport with Avis (0844 581 8181) from around £264 for one week in September.Mark Piesing