When Joanna Murray-Smith opens the door to her North Fitzroy townhouse, it’s to a corridor filled with boxes – filled, it turns out, with bookshelves. Shelves ready for the impending arrival of 10,000 books – Murray-Smith’s share of her late parents’ library.She apologises for the mess, but the apology is unnecessary. This was pretty much what I was expecting from the Melbourne playwright’s home, the same kind of world of letters conjured up by her plays. Upstairs, her house guest, the British film actress Caroline Goodall, is working out on a Pilates machine. She’s in town to film The Dressmaker, a new Australian feature starring Kate Winslet. The two women got all dressed up last night for the Jean Paul Gaultier party at NGV. “Did you go?” Murray-Smith asks me. “It was wild! That Melbourne arty set – when they really want to turn it on – do a very good job.”As does Murray-Smith. We’re chatting today because the playwright is closing out 2014 with not one but two main-house premieres of her work: Sydney Theatre Company’s Switzerland, a thriller about the US crime writer Patricia Highsmith, and at Melbourne Theatre Company, Pennsylvania Avenue, a sequel of sorts to the hugely successful Songs For Nobodies, once again starring Bernadette Robinson.Switzerland, in particular, seems to have caught people’s imaginations, with critics calling it her best play in years and Sydney Opera House audiences giving it appreciative ovations. But as we sit down to talk a fortnight before its opening, Murray-Smith is in reflective mood. And no wonder. Professional successes aside, it has, she says matter-of-factly, been “a terrible couple of years”.First, she and her husband lost their close Melbourne friends Liam and Frankie Davison in the MH17 crash over Ukraine. And then Murray-Smith’s mother, Nita, died at the age of 86, leaving her eldest daughter with 10,000 books – and a sense of loss the writer is still trying to articulate.“Her death definitely invoked a sense of crisis in me,” she says. “You know, just that terrible awakening that – um – the emphasis has to be put on the now.” If this sounds like a mindfulness mantra, Murray-Smith knows it. “But actually, this has been quite a revelation to me this year.” There is more to life than her next play.By any standards, Murray-Smith is a prolific playwright, with more than 20 plays to her name, the most popular of which, Honour, has been performed in more than 30 languages. They’ve not all been well received – as Murray-Smith reminds me, the Guardian savaged her 2006 effort, Female of the Species. And she also says regretfully: “I’m one of only three [Australian] playwrights to make a living and whose work is done overseas.”Switzerland was commissioned by the Geffen Playhouse in LA, making its Sydney run the “ultimate out-of-town try-out”. Murray-Smith first discovered Highsmith’s novels in the hands of her mother on family holidays. When she later picked them up herself, she found the author as compelling as her characters: “She was a horrible person, incredibly difficult, misanthropic, nasty, vitriolic, full of resentment, paranoid, miserly. She was a really twisted psyche. But she was also very charismatic and very witty, very intelligent, very well read – with this amazing psychological insight.”This play is only Murray-Smith’s second biographical work since her PhD thesis (loosely based on the Angry Penguins group her father, the Australian intellectual Stephen Murray-Smith, belonged to). What started out as a faithfully researched piece about Highsmith, played in early readings by Annette Benning, has became both a more fictionalised and more universal piece about “how writers fall in love with their own characters … about writers writing in part, in some cases a large part, because writing is a way of controlling experience.”I get the sense it was therapeutic to write. “Well some people have psychiatrists, and some are writers,” says Murray-Smith. “Some have both!” So is this a play about Murray-Smith as much as it is Highsmith? “Oh yeah, absolutely. Every play is about you even if there’s no obvious connection. And often you don’t know how until years later.”She cites her 2011 play The Gift, about a bohemian couple struggling between artistic pursuits and their role as parents. It was only sitting in the audience on opening night, says Murray-Smith – herself a mother of two sons – that she realised how close to home it was. “And that was so shocking for me that I had to go to bed for two weeks. I couldn’t even function, I was so appalled I’d written that play.”The Gift was political as well as personal, she insists. “My feeling is that all plays are political.” This from a writer often criticised for sticking to her own bourgois milieu. “I don’t think that you can make a writer respond responsible for political comment if that’s not their voice,” she counters. “If Brett [Sheeley, MTC artistic director] came to me and said I want you to write a play about refugees, I would love to write the play but I can’t write that play. I don’t know how to write that play.”To talk about responsibility is to use the wrong word, she says. “An artist’s responsibility is to be true to who they are as an artist. If I tried to write a play about refugees it would end up being a really appalling piece of polemic.” That’s not to say she doesn’t feel keenly political. Murray-Smith spends a lot of time teaching and doing outreach, with a belief that going into the community is the best way to develop and diversify the arts. “There is no theatre company that would not want to be engaging with artists who came from those worlds.”That theatres do not put on a wider range of plays comes down to two things, says Murray-Smith. One, that the Australian audience will always be a small one. Two (and this is not unrelated) that the arts are not elevated by government because, politically, they are of no use: “Arts are at the bottom of the barrel. It drives me insane.”When the words Abbott administration come up, Murray-Smith lets out an involuntary sigh of disgust. “The government, particular the Liberal government (but I have to say that the Labor government has not been great either) are just incredibly short-sighted and see no votes in culture. Probably since Gough Whitlam, or perhaps Paul Keating, there has not been a strong sense of importance of Australian culture in political life.” she says. “And how sophisticated it is.”Creatively, she says, Australia punches above its weight in pretty much every art form. “I’m constantly meeting people I didn’t know in Melbourne building incredible buildings in China or doing concerts in Istanbul, people who are sought out across the world because they have a particular idiosyncratic talent. And there is really almost no political awareness of it.”Arguably this makes the Australian artist’s life a more solitary one. Good writers – “or true writers” she corrects herself – have to be pretty brutal with themselves. “And that can be incredibly distressing when you say: was it worth it? Is it worth it? And not just was it worth my time, but was it worth the actors, the theatre company, the artistic director, the builders of the set, the audience’s not insubstantial out of pocket contributions – was it worth all of that? Maybe it wasn’t.”Ultimately, however, Murray-Smith only has one answer for the way she has chosen to spend her life: “I can’t do anything else. I am a driven personality. I’m a bit demented. I’m an insomniac, thinking at all hours.” And writing keeps the mental wolf from the door. “Although the act of writing is profoundly irrational, there is a kind of self-preservation aspect too. There is no question, writing has saved my life. I’ve had lots of emotionally difficult periods and writing is a way of not just organising experience but of making sense of it. And of being able to use the most difficult aspect of your life for a productive end.”Sydney Theatre Company’s Switzerland is on at the Sydney Opera House Drama Theatre until 20 December. Melbourne Theatre Company’s Pennsylvania Avenue is on at Southbank Theatre, The Sumner, until 23 December.