As soon as Alistair Darling revealed the 50% income tax rate for those earning over £150,000 on Wednesday, he was accused of saving the wrong economy. Rather than filling the Treasury's empty coffers, the move would benefit fiscally lenient countries such as Switzerland, said some commentators. One thinktank estimated that around 25,000 high-end taxpayers would shift tax regimes, with the low-tax cantons of Switzerland the biggest beneficiaries.At least one relocation company has already seen a spike in inquiries about living the Alpine life since the budget. "In the 24 hours afterwards, we saw a 41% increase in people in the UK searching for Switzerland, compared to Monday," said Anne Wright of estate agents Prime Location International.It's one thing doing an idle internet search, another entirely for Britain's highest earners to actually swap the bright lights of the City for the sedate charms of Zürich or Zermatt. After all, the exodus predicted last time the bank balances of the super-rich were supposedly under threat - when the government moved to change the laws around "non-doms" - never materialised. And, to paraphrase Orson Welles in The Third Man, what does Switzerland really have to offer the masters of the universe beyond longevous brotherly love and cuckoo clocks?The answer, as Lewis Hamilton, Tina Turner, David Bowie and all of the other megarich celebrities who relocated there will no doubt be too coy to admit, is: the lowest taxes in Europe."How much tax you pay in Switzerland depends on whether you are single, married or have children, how much you earn and where you live," said Gema Ricart of the Swiss government's finance department. A study by BAK Basle Economic says high earners would pay the lowest taxes in Switzerland by moving to Zug, in the middle of the country. There, a single, highly qualified person earning €100,000 a year would pay just 22%, compared with 38.2% in the UK.For the really rich, the Swiss have cooked up a rather nice deal they call the taxe à forfait. This lump sum tax politely ignores the money you actually make and simply assesses your annual consumption, typically by multiplying the deemed or actual rental income on your home in Switzerland. This figure is multiplied by five and then taxed at normal Swiss tax rates. So even if you're lording it up in a luxury chalet in Zug costing £100,000 a year, you will pay no more than £62,500 in taxes. If you're Bernie Ecclestone with an estimated £2.4bn fortune, the attractions are obvious.But so are the drawbacks. Jonathan Ivinson, head of European tax at Hogan & Hartson, spends most of his time in Geneva. "It is a very different pace of life to London," he said. "If you want to have a choice of more than three things to do in an evening, it's probably not for you. One major British company looked at relocating to Switzerland, but when the directors went to have a look there, they realised there was absolutely no way. It just seemed too tedious for them. But with this 50% tax, you can imagine more people giving it serious consideration, especially those with software or IT businesses, which aren't tied to a location."Lewis Tonkinson, director of Pinnacle Marketing Communications, said: "I have considered it. My company brings in £2m each year from abroad in fees. What is the point in working 12-hour days to give it to the government?"But many Swiss are fed up of their country being known primarily as a tax haven. "It is a pity we are known first as a low-tax country," said Patrick Djizmedjian from OSEC, which promotes the country abroad as a potential business location. "We don't just want to be known for that. Switzerland is an attractive location for many other reasons: we have very good infrastructure, a good transport system where workers hardly ever strike, and we are based in the heart of Europe."Switzerland might also not be a low tax mecca for ever. "In Zürich recently, people voted to abolish the lump sum tax in a referendum," said Ricart. "So Tina Turner might be moving."