Switzerland's renown as a tax oasis for the world's rich will come under threat this weekend with a proposal to impose minimal income levies on the ultra wealthy.Business leaders have warned that the plan by the centre-left Social Democrats (SP), which the Swiss will vote on in a referendum on Sunday, will prompt an exodus of rich residents and leave a gaping hole in the nation's economy.But SP argues it will merely bring Switzerland into line with other countries' tax regimes and create more fairness within the country.Switzerland's cantons, or states, attempt to attract the rich by undercutting each other on tax rates. It has made parts of the country magnets for the super rich, including business people, royals and about 5,000 celebrities.They include the singer Tina Turner, supermodel Karolina Kurkova and more recently the new Formula One champion Sebastian Vettel, who, as well as very low tax rates, typically enjoy high-end lifestyles in lakeside villas with spectacular mountain views and guaranteed privacy.Under SP's "tax initiative", incomes of 250,000 Swiss francs (£159,000) would incur minimum levies of 22% while assets of more than two million francs (£1.27m) would be liable to 0.5%. If passed, the rule would apply to cantons across the country. At stake for cantons such as Schwyz, Zug and Obwalden are their special statuses as tax oases that cosset the rich like hardly any other nation.Residents of Zurich with an income of 350,000 francs pay around 110,000 of it to the taxman, while in Schwyz the rate is just half that.But public support for the plan, whose campaigners have tapped into anger over bankers' bonuses and political management of the financial crisis, has dropped from 58% to 46% in recent weeks, with Swiss business representatives warning it could drive thousands of executives and their businesses out of the country.A leading voice of the opponents is Alfred Schindler, the billionaire owner of the Schindler lift and escalator company, who has argued his personal tax rate will rise to a prohibitive 70% to 80% based on his earnings last year of 7.4 million francs (£4.7m) and his assets."Switzerland is becoming a socialist land," Schindler said. "While it means a lot to me, my tax rate would rise to over 70%, which is nothing less than expropriation and is not tolerable". He has repeatedly threatened he will leave the country if the referendum is passed. "I can be out of here before you know it," he told a newspaper.In reaction, SP's youth wing, Juso, sent the businessman a one-way ticket to Bulgaria, arguing that is the only other country in Europe where his taxes would be lower than at present."Let him emigrate," said David Roth, president of Juso in Lucerne, who disputes Schindler's claim that his tax rate would rise to 70 to 80%. "He's deliberately miscalculated it," he said.Rudolf Strahm, a former federal price regulator and supporter of the initiative, said he doubted the rich would carry out their threats to leave as nowhere would be as comfortable for them as Switzerland. "Where do these super rich think they're going to go? " he said. "Basically their options are Singapore and eastern Europe." He said the initiative had coincided with a growing swell of resentment towards Switzerland's "tax tourism", which "the normal earners of this country reject and find loathsome".Estate agents have also entered the fray, arguing that the move would have a chaotic effect on the country's property prices. "It would mean a huge devaluation of house prices in communities where taxes are lower," said Donato Scognamiglio, the head IAZI, a property consultancy in Zurich .If the initiative is passed, Roger Federer, the tennis star and Swiss native who resides in the tax-friendly town of Wollerau in Schwyz, can expect the value of his luxury villa to fall by as much as 27%.