The hottest hot chocolateChez Dany. This restaurant is on the ski route from Les Ruinettes down to Médran. It's on a nice, sunny plateau surrounded by forest, with a breathtaking view over the 4,314m Combins Massiv and the Bagnes valley. Having a hot chocolate on its terrace, in the sun, makes you feel like you're in heaven. The ultimate lunch spotCabane Mont-Fort. This genuine mountain hut (it's part of the Swiss Alpine Club) is on the run from Col des Gentianes to La Chaux. From its sunny terrace you have a great view over the Combins Massiv. The traditional food (fondue, croute au fromage, macaronis gratins and salades) is excellent. And the atmosphere is super relaxed. Après beer time Le Carrefour. On the way down to Verbier, head to the right handside. You will notice the terrace with different levels. Even the sun likes to stay longer at this place, which is right above the resort. And there are no worries about making your way home. The free shuttle bus stops just a few meters away from the terrace. And if you want to stay longer, Carrefour is also serves nice food (meat grilled on a hot stone or rösti) in a chalet ambiance. Top of the slopesIf you like carving head to Les Attelas early in the morning and enjoy the wide open runs down to Les Ruinettes and Verbier. Perfectly groomed, they allow you to express your talent in big turns. Think you're an expert? Tortin or Mont-Fort will sort the men from the boys. Steepness, moguls, level difference: these slopes have it all. My word of adviceMake the most of the afternoon sun by ensuring your after lunch runs are based in the La Chaux area. With its slopes facing south with the Combins Massiv as a background it couldn't be more perfect to top up your goggle mark tan. And if the weather closes in the Savoleyres or Bruson slopes will still offer good visibility.EasyJet flies to Geneva from £65.98 return. from Geneva airport, the train takes 2 hours 12 mins to Le Châble below Verbier, from where you can catch a bus.By train, Eurostar to Paris, TGV from Paris to Geneva (3hrs 22 mins), Geneva to Lausanne (3 hrs 54 mins).Where to stay: Verbier can be an eye-wateringly expensive resort to stay in, but has some of the best partially regulated off-piste descents in the world. An affordable option is The Bunker, a converted nuclear bunker beneath the sports centre offering dorm beds from £14 a night. Igluski can arrange apartments in Nendaz, a small hamlet near Verbier. Read David Rose's account in the Observer on how to do Verbier on a budget. More information: Verbier Tourist Office