Lawyers for a man with locked-in syndrome, who says his life is intolerable and wants help to die, are to take his case to the appeal court within weeks and are then prepared to go to the highest court in the land, the supreme court, if necessary.Martin, as he wishes to be called to protect his privacy, had his original case rejected in August by the high court alongside that of Tony Nicklinson, who was also paralysed by a stroke and unable to speak.Nicklinson, 58, died just six days later, after refusing food and water and contracting pneumonia. But Martin, his wife told the Guardian, will battle on for the right to die."He is adamant – he has been since he had his stroke," said his wife, who asked to be called Felicity. "What he wants has never changed."Martin, 47, spends his days lying on a specially adapted bed in the converted garage of the house they share. He can communicate only by picking out letters on a computer screen with his eyes, which a disembodied voice turns into words and phrases. He watches videos of Cornish lighthouses, remembering the helicopter trip of a lifetime he once made to Wolf Rock off Land's End. The rest of the time he watches rugby, steam trains and action films. "He is just into RoboCop," said his wife. "He used to be an action man. He was always up and ready to go."In an interview with the Guardian last year, prior to the high court case, Martin described his life as "garbage". Asked what he wanted, he replied "death".Martin wants to be able to go to Dignitas in Switzerland, where he could legally be given a lethal cocktail of drugs to end his life. But Felicity, a nurse by training, says she will not and cannot help him.The case prepared by Leigh Day, Martin's lawyers, asked the court to rule that professional people – lawyers, doctors and carers – should be allowed to help him make his final journey. In the case brought in 2009 by Debbie Purdy, who has multiple sclerosis, the director of public prosecutions, Keir Starmer, gave an assurance that her husband, Omar Puente, was unlikely to face prosecution if he helped her travel to Dignitas. But Starmer's concession on family members does not extend to paid professional helpers, the court decided in Martin's case.Rosa Curling of Leigh Day said they would argue in the appeal that the lower court was wrong. "If you are a professional who helps somebody like Martin, there is a real risk you will be prosecuted. That can't be right," she said.The case is different from that brought by Nicklinson, whose widow Jane also says she wishes to appeal. Nicklinson's lawyers argued that a doctor who gave him a lethal drug in the UK should not be prosecuted for murder. The judges said that was an issue for parliament and not the courts.There was one positive element in the judgment. The court ruled that if Martin were to refuse food and drink, he could legally be given pain relief and sedatives by doctors. That, said Felicity, "has given him some sort of peace. He hasn't changed, but there is a calmness in him now, knowing that he could stop eating and drinking. But it is not the nicest way to end your life for the family or for Martin. It is quite a long-winded and horrible thing."She accepts there are some people with locked-in syndrome who would not want to die. "But for some people it is intolerable to live the life that you hate," she said. "You don't have control over what you do; you can't even scratch an itch. I don't think people realise the devastating effects it has on the person and the family. It is unimaginable."When she talks about the impact of the strain and the distress on the family, Felicity begins to cry. Martin has to have 24-hour care, which means sharing their home and their lives with strangers, she says. She has to go out to work part-time to pay the bills. Martin, a proud man, has been stripped of his dignity. He has mood swings and can be angry and then tearful. "Crying is something he never used to do. He was quite a butch man before, but he can get so frustrated," she said. He is not the man she used to know – that man died four years ago, she says, when he had his massive brainstem stroke.But she does not want to lose him. "I don't want him to die, but I have to respect his wishes," she said.