France and Switzerland have more exposure to Greek debt than any other countries in the world, and more than twice as much as Germany – perhaps adding fuel to the hesitance of the Germans to help bail out the troubled country.France and Switzerland have $79bn (£50bn) each of exposure to Greece, according to American-sourced data from the Bank for International Settlements analysed by the Swiss bank UBS. Germany's exposure is $43bn.Germany is thought to be reluctant to commit itself to bailing out Greece even though EU leaders said that they were committed to trying to help shore up the country's finances. Greece needs to raise about €53bn (£47bn) this year, which would take its debts to €290bn, nearly 120% of gross domestic product.Bank share prices were weak across continental Europe on the back of uncertainty about the solution for Greece. Germany's Deutsche Bank and BNP Paribas of France were both down 1.3%.Analysts said banks did not usually disclose their exposure to individual countries but dismissed as misplaced concerns that Greek banks might be holding all the €300bn of debt in issuance. "Greek banks own around €40bn of the total … implying most Greek debt is sitting on the balance sheets of non-domestic banks," said Jagdeep Kalsi, an analyst at Credit Suisse.The French bank Crédit Agricole was singled out by analysts at the research firm ­CreditSights as being particularly exposed. "It owns Emporiki Bank in Greece, which has been floundering away, and has about €23bn in loans there," Credit­Sights ­analysts said.While Greece has no immediate problem in funding its debt position, there is a concern that unless a solution is found for its budget deficit, contagion could spread among other indebted countries in the eurozone. CreditSights notes that the next major financing for Greece is due in April or May, when €20bn needs to be refinanced.If the crisis spreads to the so-called "Pigs" – Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece and Spain – the UK is most exposed with $3.7bn of debt, according to the BIS data used by UBS, closely followed by France and Germany. "The collective exposure of the banking systems to the Pigs is $2.9tn. The bulk of that exposure is located in the banks of France, Germany and the UK," the UBS analysts said. "The exposure is particularly concentrated in the French and German banks, which have 24% and 21% of their foreign total claims harboured in these countries. This is one reason why France and German are so quickly mentioned as countries likely to support or participate in a bailout."One concern for the banks holding Greek debt is that it will be downgraded by the credit rating agencies. Kalsi said that banks holding large amounts of Greek debt could be affected if the country's rating is downgraded below BBB-, two notches below where it is now, as this would mean the bonds could no longer be used as collateral at the European Central Bank.The ECB had relaxed the criteria for bonds that it would accept during the credit crisis but will go back to being more stringent about bond ratings by the end of 2010. Gary Jenkins, head of fixed-income research at the stockbroker Evo Securities, thinks the ECB might be encouraged to delay reverting to its previous requirements for bonds while the uncertainty over Greece continues, even though the ECB president, Jean-Claude Trichet, said last month that the bank would not change its collateral framework for any country. "No government, no state, can expect special treatment," Trichet said.French bankers were trying to allay fears of the impact of a default by Greece on the French banking system earlier today. "It's not a particular issue at all for the French banks," Baudouin Prot, chief executive of BNP Paribas, said.