1. In 2010 Paloma Faith turned up on the Pyramid stage with a pair of huge helium-filled blimps attached to her leotard. Hopefully, this year a third will be added, allowing Paloma to perform 50m above the crowd before being shot down with a crossbow during her final song for the ultimate festival stagedive moment. 2. The Cambodian Space Project have 1,087 friends on MySpace.3. Mark Ronson is expected to pull a crowd of several thousand, potentially outnumbering the number of people now credited with having written Uptown Funk.4. Motörhead stunner Lemmy was fired from Hawkwind for being caught with drugs, which is a bit like Florence getting her marching orders from the Machine for standing near a harp. 5. Florence herself has recently been performing live despite a seriously injured leg, which is more than can be said for a certain Foo Fighters frontman by the name of David Eric Grohl.6. At the start of this year, Olly from Years & Years declared that the band celebrated winning the BBC Sound of 2105 poll by having what he described as “a circle wank”. Precise details are mercifully scarce, but for health and safety reasons, if the band’s set goes down well you’d be well-advised to avoid the Stone Circle.7. Leftfield are not playing on the Left Field stage. 8. Lionel Richie is one of the world’s most famous Lionels. Other notable Lionels include footballer Lionel Messi and high-haired former clue-giver Lionel Blair, neither of whom are appearing at Glastonbury. Earlier this week, Lionel Richie tweeted a picture of himself getting into the festival spirit, sitting near a tent and camping stove. 9. Deadmau5 and Kanye West are the only members of the notorious “Tidal 18” to be appearing at this year’s Glastonbury.10. Jamie XX and Charli XCX each boast a Scrabble score of 30 (excluding bonus squares, and assuming you could get a set with more than one X), but even combined, they are no match for King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard, who notch up an impressive 81. Unlike Charli XCX, however, King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard have not recorded hits with Icona Pop or Iggy Azalea, so think on.  Related: Glastonbury 2015: Friday daytime liveblog, and the music begins 11. Much to the chagrin of Reading & Leeds organisers, the Dalai Lama will be putting in an appearance at Glastonbury this weekend. His hobbies include meditating, which you’d kind of take as read, as well as gardening and repairing watches. He’ll be able to add “queueing for a portable toilet while holding some loo roll meaning that everyone knows you need a poo” to that list by the end of Sunday. 12. Franz Ferdinand and Sparks’ combo project FFS is the most high-profile supergroup on this year’s bill, after McBusted were unable to confirm their proposed slot on Bez’s Acid House stage. 13. At the time of writing Pharrell’s Happy is at No 18 in Switzerland – down five places from last week. 14. In 2012, Mary J Blige was embroiled in a furore after appearing in a Burger King ad, in which the words to her song Don’t Mind were altered to extol the virtues of a chicken wrap. Glastonbury-goers are advised to keep an ear out for her new version of No More Drama, which pays tribute to the wares on offer at the second hog-roast stand down from the right-hand side of the Pyramid stage. No not that one, the other one. The right-hand side as you’re FACING the stage. Hello? I’m waving my hands in the air! You’re breaking up. HELLO? Look if you’re not here in 10 minutes I’ll see you back at the tent.15. Paul Weller is playing a solo set on the Pyramid stage, which is good news. Jam fans, meanwhile, might wish to keep their eyes out for something rather special happening elsewhere on the site over the course of the weekend. (Kate Moss will be flogging pots of conserve on-site, for £30 a pop.)16. Mumford & Sons will sadly not be appearing at Glastonbury this year, but fans will be able to make do with one of their chums: Idris Elba, who directed and starred in their Lover of the Light video, will be on the Sonic stage on Saturday evening. 17. Ella Eyre is the only performer this year to be named after a line from Rihanna’s Umbrella.18. Professor Stephen Hawking is due on site over the course of the weekend. He obtained a first in natural science from University College Oxford, holds numerous honorary degrees, was awarded the CBE in 1982, is a lifetime member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, and in America received the Presidential medal of freedom. Jessie Ware, who’s also performing, has a degree in English literature from the University of Sussex.19. Hozier is due to play for 45 minutes on Sunday afternoon. Whichever way you look at it, that’s an extremely long version of his song. 20. Grandmaster Flash was born on the exact day that the European Economic Community – quite literally more commonly known as the common market – started. Coincidence? You decide.21. Finally, Taylor Swift, who’s performing in Hyde Park in London on Saturday night, is the final addition to this year’s Glastonbury bill. She organised for the entire festival to be relocated to the other end of Hyde Park during the course of Saturday afternoon and to be pointed at her existing show, so she can headline Glastonbury as well as Hyde Park, after writing Emily Eavis a heartfelt letter on Tumblr. [1][1] This may not be strictly true.