Be careful what you wish for, even though the sceptics in Tory backrooms seem to have it all figured out. No euro, no zone, no ever greater union? No worries – as the alternative swills from chat to chat. We can become (key phrase) "the Switzerland of outer Europe". It's that globally alluring Swiss riff again. If you don't like where you are or what you are, think Basel and Bern. If you're stuck in a valley of black despair, look up at the Eiger. If you're not sure where you're going, try munching a pippin with William Tell.Long ago, in Dhaka, I sat with a triumphant Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as he described the young, free country he hoped to build. "Bangladesh will be the Switzerland of Asia," he buoyantly declared. But then a bunch of army officers murdered him. And so riff moved on.Not, alas, to the nation once memorably designated by the New York Times as the emerging Switzerland of the region: ah! Afghanistan. Nor to another much mentioned contender, Nepal. No: the current Asian champion of peace and stability is Singapore, of course, duly sanctified by HSBC. The stock exchanges, and a soothingly sedated sort of society, have it.But only in Asia. Poor battered Lebanon used to be called "the Switzerland of the Middle East". Guinea, Lesotho and Swaziland all aspire to be known as "the Switzerland of Africa". Costa Rica relishes its title as the "Switzerland of Central America". And now the backbenchers of Britain, too, want to play that game. You can, apparently, live at the heart of Europe without being part of it. You can let the lorries of the free market use your toll roads and cream off a nice dividend. You can keep a highly inflated currency but allow your banks to take deposits from all comers (and scrabble to keep your haven status).It's all very democratic, of course, a country run by anonymous politicians that lets the technocrats steer its ferry boats, a nation of different tongues and communities that graciously allows outsiders in to sweep its roads and bake its pizzas, but gives them only the most reduced of rights. You want change and constant referendums? Learn here that referendums mean no change. It's a placid, complacent place. Switzerland has eternal peace and convenient neutrality. Switzerland defines its own national self-interest every day.But is this the future we see for Britain (or, more accurately, for England, since that's where the wish-fulfillers live)? Even as the question's asked, you can find the delusionists moving on. If not Switzerland, then somewhere bigger, more bustling and dynamic, on the peripheries of Europe? Yes, of course! Ankara boasts a growth rate of 9.6% this year so far. We can become "the Turkey of Europe".Turkey cold, or Turkey hot – on the borders of Iraqi Kurdistan and Syria? Turkey armed, with generals who need shuffling away to keep elected politicians safe from coups? Turkey looking to Brussels for a future – or Turkey rejected, beginning to swagger in the Middle East? Turkey, secular or Muslim?Somehow, put that way, the quest to be something else doesn't sound so alluring. We can all the play the transmogrification game: I sometimes think Britain would be best as the new Canada, with enough prosperity and shrunken profile to suit every taste. But the harsh truth in this zone of dreams is escapism, not remote reality. We can become the England of outer Europe if we want. We can stand alone, tall and proud – or shivering. But why, then, this pile of old Geneva, this load of Istanbul?We are what we are, no matter what we wish for.• This article was amended on 2 January 2011. For the avoidance of confusion, a reference to Mont Blanc was changed to the Eiger, as the latter is not only visible from Switzerland but lies within it.