I've studied ethics as a branch of philosophy – it's fun. The theory, that is. But it is also vacuous. Worthwhile ethics can only be done with real people in front of you. You only know you've got it right when you would be happy to apply your theory to those you love.Notionally, I was convinced that a loving and compassionate God would not demand of a person extreme and prolonged suffering in order to authenticate his ultimate control. God invites us to collaborate in the adventure of living, and we are free to make life-or-death choices in many ways. Some choose to smoke or drink. Even to drive or cross the road presupposes a degree of autonomy over our mortality. It has always seemed to me perverse to deny that autonomy at the very point when we need it most.These thoughts were abstract until last year. My uncle was a well-known psychotherapist, specialising in anger management for teenagers, and had a private practice in Zurich. A millionaire, he lived a simple life with an almost Buddhist outlook. His values and his spirituality were admirable. He did not have a Protestant God's opinion as a reference point, but he had great care for human relationships and held life very precious.After a terminal diagnosis he decided not to have treatment and he and his family made all the legal and medical arrangements to enable him to choose the moment of his death. The next three years were lived to the full and he was only bedridden for two weeks. During those three years the whole family found great comfort in the fact that he did not dread pain and disability getting out of control at the end. He travelled to England to see his sister, my mother, and they said goodbye. Together the family eventually made the decision that the time had come, they gathered around him with good wine, great music – a fine and dignified death. I spoke to his widow at my own mother's funeral a few months later and she is so grateful that because they lived in Switzerland they had the freedom to make the choices they did.I've had a little time to digest this. My uncle would have been dead by now either way. His choice feels life-affirming, dignified and measured. Also, very importantly, it was loving towards his family.We need to reframe this debate. The question is not around the choice to live or die. That bit is sorted. The choice is about the manner of our death. I sit with bereaved families every week. Mostly they speak of care and kindness, of effective pain relief and a gentle slipping away. But it's not that rare to hear about difficult final days that have a nightmarish quality about them. It might be disturbingly vivid, but people do say to me "you would never let your dog suffer like that". I cannot believe in a God who demands that of us.Maybe we have confused the right to live one's life to the very end with a moral obligation to do so.The Catholic theologian Hans Küng gets it right in his aid-in-dying propositions. The patient will call it "surrender of life"; when the time of dying has come and the patient has been prepared for it, he may encounter it in submission, thankfulness and hopeful expectation. He will return his life into the hand of his creator, who is a God of mercy and not a cruel tyrant who would strive to see man in the hell of pain and helplessness as long as possible.Recent research has shown that more than 70% of people in this country would welcome a change in the law, but there are genuine fears that it could prove impossible to get the safeguards right. Doctors feel insecure, even though of course they have been easing patients' death for centuries. There is also the fear that vulnerable elderly folk will feel pressure not to be a burden on their families.The Swiss experience shows that these fears are unfounded. Since the 1940s it has been legal, within very tightly controlled rules, to help someone who wishes to die. It has not become normalised, far less expected. The numbers are low, and many more people explore the possibility and use it as an emotional safeguard, than choose to end their lives in that way.The advent of the hospice movement was the sign of a more compassionate and humane society. Well-constructed legislation which gave those few who felt the need, the opportunity to make a choice about the manner and time of their death would be another such sign.