At the beginning of last December, the Northern League – having left the majority that supported the government – convened in Vicenza for what it called "the Northern parliament". Its leader, Umberto Bossi, then announced its new political policy. Its aim is no less than to alter the geography of Europe.Bossi unveiled a great map, coloured in by his son Renzo, that signalled the birth of a new state composed of so-called Padania (that is, the regions of Northern Italy), Switzerland, Austria, Bavaria and Savoy. Soon afterwards, to confirm the "seriousness" of the programme, the former minister Roberto Calderoli said that, from now on, all members of the Northern League, when they renewed their party membership, would have to swear solemnly to fight for the secession of Padania.It is not the first time, of course, that the League has spoken of secession: this has, in fact, always been its final objective, or at least its dream. However, never before has it spoken of changing not only the borders of Italy, but also of other states such as France, Germany, Austria and Switzerland.The move might sound pan-European, but the league's members are about as far as you can get from European integrationists. They have made much of their Euroscepticism over the years, and are finding now they are at the vanguard of a growing movement that encompasses much of the centre right in Italy. Italian Euroscepticism has been boosted by gathering hostility towards the single currency, which is considered to be responsible for the economic crisis; and it is particularly resentful of the most powerful European states, who are believed to be the real rulers of a union in which Italy plays the part of poor relation or even colony.In support of his new policy, Bossi explained that a war had been fought in Europe – monetary and non-military, but nevertheless a war – and Italy had lost. And when wars end, he added, treaties are written and borders are changed.How credible is a policy of this nature? In Italy, it is considered a farce, and it is possible that reactions from abroad have been even harsher: come on, just imagine how the Germans, the French, the Swiss and the Austrians would react to news that a man going by the name of Umberto Bossi wants to take over their countries.Nevertheless, putting this to one side, it would be a mistake to dismiss it all as a mere pipe-dream. The League may be full of big talk, but it knows it can take advantage of the deeply rooted opinions of a substantial proportion of the population of northern Italy. The sacrifices Mario Monti's government has asked Italians to make for the sake of stability are certainly strengthening this intolerance towards the EU.