Even for those who've never been there, Switzerland wears an aura of exquisite, if slightly boring, perfection. It is a country known mostly for mountains, chocolate, anonymous bank accounts, an exemplary public transport system and finishing schools. But even though it may not be home to cutting-edge music or avant-garde artists, it has been achieving great heights, and not just in its famously pointed topography. Over the last decade or so Switzerland has been undergoing, quietly of course, a style revolution.Some of the world's greatest architecture is now Swiss-made, and some of the world's greatest architects call Switzerland their home. The country that brought us one of the most influential architects of our times, Le Corbusier, is also the birthplace of Herzog and de Meuron (of the Tate Modern). Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava is based here, and Norman Foster, who recently renovated the sprawling Dolder Grand hotel near Zurich, has set up home in a chateau outside Geneva. Boutique hotels and modern alpine spas have sprouted, and in the centres of Lucerne, Geneva, Basel and Zurich new design shops and stylish bars abound. Swiss towns still offer enough gingerbread buildings, flower baskets and cuckoo clocks to keep the fairytale alive, but the 21st-century modern movement is emerging in its Swiss perfect way and attracting a new generation of visitors.ZurichIf you really want to see the best of the new Swiss style, you have to go to Zurich, named by Wallpaper magazine as 'Europe's trendiest and most popular city'. Once known as mainly a financial centre, Zurich has experienced a creative explosion. That image got a huge boost when Google chose to establish its European engineering centre here last year, and as one Google employee put it, 'Zurich has all the sophistication of a big city without the dirt and the crime'. Now there is something for everyone: plenty of old-time charm as well as stylish new elements for the design-conscious urban nomad. Elegant traditional hotels and restaurants mix with high-style design hotels and a zingy nightlife in a city named the 'Gay Capital of Switzerland'.Many travellers' first taste of Zurich's design aesthetic starts as soon as they touch down at Zurich-Kloten airport, with its grand glass arrivals lounge and hi-tech new terminal building. Contemporary architecture groupies shouldn't miss Santiago Calatrava's Stadelhofen train station, an early example of the dramatic sweeping forms that have become his trademark in buildings like the City of Arts and Sciences in Valencia. In Zurich you will also find Le Corbusier's last building, the Heidi Weber House in the Zurichhorn Park. Originally built as a private house, it is now an art gallery and home to the Centre Le Corbusier. In town, head for the stylish and stylishly expensive Widder (www.widderhotel.ch), a minimalist boutique hotel with furniture by Adolf Loos, Charles Eames, Le Corbusier and Josef Hoffmann. Or try the ultra-trendy Sorell Hotel Zurichberg (www.zuerichberg.ch), located slightly out of the way on a mountain slope and offering views over the city. The most talked-about hotel of recent months is the Dolder Grand (www.thedoldergrand.com) originally a turreted castle, which has had its grandeur restored and two new energy-efficient wings added along with full spa facilities. For dining it has to be the modern gourmet fare of the Blaue Ente (Seefeldstrasse 223), located inside a revamped turbine hall in a redeveloped industrial area. Afterwards, head to another, edgier, regenerated neighbourhood, Zuri West, where trendy bars and clubs in former factory buildings abound. Club 0815 (Lintheschergasse 23) is a cool modern cafe and bar that hosts an electronic club at night. Also try the popular Labor-bar (Schiffbaustrasse 3), and one of the newest design creations, the Hive (Geroldstrasse 5), which retains the aura of Zurich's famous 'illegal' clubs (ad hoc bars that sprang up around the city without proper licences and are generally known by word of mouth). For retail therapy, visit the Freitag flagship store (Geroldstrasse 17) for something by the Zurich-born brothers known for making bags and accessories from recycled bicycle inner-tubes and seatbelt straps (with designs now in the New York's MoMA). And don't miss a visit to a sauna in a floating pavilion at the Seebad Enge (www.tonttu.ch), probably the coolest of Zurich's lakeside spa/cafe/lounges. Open even in winter, it offers a view of stunning mountain peaks in between a spell in the sauna and a jump into the icy lake. (It's also open for cocktails at night.) BaselThe dark-clothed duo, Herzog and de Meuron, who were responsible for the Beijing Olympic stadium and Tate Modern's transformation from derelict power station to art destination, have their headquarters in Basel. Local projects include the St Jakob 'experience park', a monumental sports stadium that was enlarged further for Euro 2008. The firm is leaving its imprimatur on other aspects of the city with its design for the Fondation Herzog, a museum of the history of photography (Oslo Strasse 8).Basel is also home to one of the world's biggest art fairs, Art Basel, dubbed 'the Olympics of the Art World', which takes place in June. For a more subdued artistic experience, visit the Fondation Beyeler, a collection of modern art housed in a building by architect Renzo Piano (Baselstrasse 101). Basel is a good base for visiting Frank Gehry's Vitra Design Museum, just over the border in Weil am Rhein, Germany (Charles-Eames-Strasse 1), and easy to reach by bus or train. The Vitra Fire Station, designed by Zaha Hadid, is also nearby. Hotels in Basel still tend toward the traditional or the very basic contemporary but the Royal (www.royal-hotel.ch) offers stylish modern rooms arranged according to the principles of feng shui.The mountainsFor centuries the Swiss Alps have been a destination for skiing and spa-ing, but gone are the days when a mountain holiday meant stomping around beneath cuckoo clocks and dried flower arrangements. The building that started Switzerland's rise to high style is the now-famous Therme Vals spa and hotel (www.therme-vals.ch), about 200km outside Zurich in a small mountain town. Vals was a homegrown enterprise that quickly gained a reputation as one of the most elegant creations of the late 20th century. Designed by Peter Zumthor, the buildings are like blocks of sculpture in grey-green quartzite stone set in glorious alpine countryside. The grand spaces are beautifully spare, with not an unnecessary ornament in sight, just stone, water and the occasional piece of glass . A more vibrant atmosphere abounds elsewhere: even the stalwart village of Zermatt has modern boutique hotels and a rousing nightlife. A new four-star hotel, the Matterhorn Focus (www.matterhorn-focus.ch) opened in June and will see its first winter guests this year. Its modern angular form hugs the hillside so that the guest rooms, with wide glass walls, have unimpeded views of the Matterhorn. While the glamour pistes of Gstaad and St Moritz still crawl with fashionistas as well as families, other somewhat less familiar spots like Verbier, with its sleek Nevaï hotel (www.nevai.ch), and Arosa with the newly renovated Tschuggen Grand (www.tschuggen.ch), are attracting a new wave of style devotees. The Tschuggen features a brand new spa designed by Mario Botta and is marked out by its distinctive triangular glass dormer windows. It is now open during the summer months to host growing numbers of people coming for cycling and walking holidays.