 Related: Bread, coffee and wine are the toast of the Melbourne food and wine festival Richmond, the former centre of Melbourne’s rag trade, filled with old warehouses and tiny workers cottages, wasn’t always a dining destination. Good eating in Richmond tended to be thin on the ground with the exception of a few stalwarts like legendary gastro pub The Grand. But a swathe of new apartments, led by the redevelopment of the former Dimmey’s building, are bringing a new generation of diners to Richmond.The discount clothes stores are shutting up shop and moving to suburban factory outlets making space for a culinary reinvention. For restaurant owners, rents are cheaper than the CBD while the suburb is still close to the city and well served by public transport. It helps that Richmond has always been the Switzerland of Melbourne. Those who live south side and refuse to travel too far north to eat will happily head to a restaurant in what is considered Melbourne’s neutral territory. If you’re north of the river Richmond isn’t too far by fixie. Here are the five top new restaurants that are part of Richmond’s restaurant renaissance.Japanophiles in Melbourne are smitten with the unassuming Minamishima which opened late last year. In the small and minimalist dining room you can order the omakase (chef’s choice) of chef and owner Koichi Minamishima. It doesn’t come cheaply at $150 a head for the 15 course menu but it’s worth it – particularly when you’re eating one of the world’s more unusual looking shell fishes, the geoduck and delectably fatty aburi otoro. It’s all about the quality of the seafood and the skilled knife work of Minamishima. The best seats are at the bar where you can watch Minamishima’s brilliance up close and personal. Minamishima, 4 Lord Street, RichmondFusion food can be a dirty word but not in the hands of owner-chef Thi Le who’s serving up modern Asian Australian food at this Bridge Road restaurant. Le has a storied pedigree having worked at Cumulus and The Town Mouse and she’s hit the ground running at her first solo venture. Le’s food is fun and adventurous. Her Vietnamese-style blood pudding has already achieved the status of a cult dish with critics raving about the dense meaty treat which comes wrapped in cosberg lettuce and laced with pickled ginger and fresh herbs. Anchovy, 338 Bridge Rd, RichmondChef and owner Ryan Flaherty is putting the mod back into Oz at Mister Jennings. Named after his favourite children’s author (Paul Jennings), Mister Jennings showcases Flaherty’s serious cooking skills honed via stints at The Fat Duck and more recently as the former co-owner of the Estelle. Flaherty’s food is experimental and brave but not fussy. Case in point is Mister Jenning’s signature frozen kangaroo. It’s made of spiced icy shavings of kangaroo that melt in your mouth changing temperature and texture at the same time. The roo is teamed with a wasabi and avocado puree for added kick and a glistening veal and red wine jelly. It’s a little like eating a science experiment, but a tasty one. Mister Jennings, 142 Bridge Road, RichmondSerial restauranteur Chris Lucas has an uncanny ability to know exactly what’s on trend and Kong ticks all the boxes. Kong is loud and constantly packed but still manages to serve up damn tasty Korean BBQ. Go for the kimchi which chef Benjamin Cooper makes in huge vats which ferment away for a year. You’ll also want to try the spicy pork belly enveloped in soft doughy buns with some slivers of pickled cucumber and a dousing of chilli. It’s no bookings so get in early or be prepared to wait.Kong, 599 Church Street, CremorneThe newest addition to Richmond’s dining scene is a bistro from the team behind CBD veteran Punch Lane. The name plays homage to the patron saint of wine but there’s also beer on tap and a neat list of cocktails on offer. The food here is designed to go well with drinking. Think pork trotter croquettes with a crisp exterior, oozing as you bite into them and a classic Wagyu bavette. Saint Urban, 213 Swan Street, Richmond