William Hague's bags were packed ahead of his departure , on Tuesday afternoon, for the Geneva II peace talks on Syria, negotiations between intractable and bitterly divided parties that he anticipated would be "tortuous". So he took a few moments to get some practice in with foreign affairs questions.They started with the easy stuff: the persecution of religious minorities in the Middle East, the Kashmir question, the oppression of LGBT people in Russia. Then Tory backbencher Christopher Pincher cut to the chase. How was the foreign secretary getting on with reforming the principle of free movement in the EU, specifically the "broken system" that allowed "mass population movement" around Europe?Obviously, Hague said, he had stressed to his EU colleagues that the "long-term sustainability" of the free movement principle demanded reforms of welfare rules. In fact the government had recently secured an "important negotiating success" in giving national governments more say over fisheries policy.That brought Labour's Ben Bradshaw to his feet. "The right honourable gentleman will have noticed that fish swim around and are no respecters of national boundaries," he said. This was clearly an important and underexplored aspect of European population movement. They come here by the shoal, gobble up our plankton, before swimming off without a glug of thanks to be scooped up by a French trawler …Didn't that suggest, said Bradshaw, getting to his point, that easy international cooperation, rather than a "chaotic" series of bilateral arrangements, was the way to deal with our neighbours?"The observation that fish swim around is not among the most devastating revelations to be heard in the House of Commons recently," said Hague, but he took the point.Conservative Anne McIntosh raised the obvious next question. "Is the foreign secretary, like me, a fan of The Bridge, the Danish/Swedish drama currently on BBC4 on Saturday evening?" The Danish/Swedish model, she explained, was at the heart of fishery reform. "What other models might he alight on in that regard?""Well, so many Danish/Swedish models on a Saturday evening must be very enjoyable," said Hague, "but I cannot say that I have been watching that programme." (Hang on – how does the foreign secretary know about the enjoyability or otherwise of Scandinavian models? Does Ffion Hague know about this? We must earnestly hope he has resisted the urge to alight on any models, Danish/Swedish or otherwise.)For now Hague's thoughts, and those of the other MPs, were tending towards Geneva – a little unfortunate, perhaps, since Wednesday's opening sessions of the peace conference are to be held 60 miles away in Montreux (does it say something troubling about the UN's negotiating abilities that it couldn't manage to secure enough hotel rooms in the Swiss city thanks to a luxury watch fair?).What, asked Douglas Alexander, the shadow foreign secretary, were the government's "realistic ambitions" for the conference? Confidence measures such as prisoner releases and local ceasefires "would assist enormously", said Hague, with no little understatement.One MP asked if the government would ensure that the voices of Christians and other religious minorities were heard during the talks. It was important not to neglect relations with Iran, despite the "debacle" of their disinvitation to the negotiations, stressed another.And how was he getting on securing that comprehensive agreement with Iran over its nuclear programme, wondered a third. Achieving that, said the foreign secretary, would be "formidably difficult".First, peace in Syria.