Pure Mountains offers biking holidays in the stunning Parque Natural de Sierra Nevada. The riding is fantastic with loads of swooping single tracks past flower-filled meadows, the scent of wild herbs in the air. The guiding is excellent, with well thought out routes tailored to the group's abilities. Tim and Jenny's patience is second to none and thanks to them I can now do switch backs! Not forgetting the luxury accommodation - their remote cortijo sits at 1,700m offering stunning views of the villages and valleys of the Alpujarras - great, hearty meals, Land Rover support, picnics en route and an amazing location. The combination of biking, accommodation, food and guiding is the best I have come across. And, at the end of the day, their sunny terrace is the perfect place for a much-deserved beer. Tim and Jenny look after you so well in every aspect of the holiday. • puremountains.com. Andrew56Le Refuge, ChamonixA little-known haven just outside the centre of town in a protected national park. Once a farmhouse and then a French ambassador's hideaway, it is now a chic chalet. The deck and floor-to-ceiling windows offer a great view of the Mont Blanc massif. • From £1,450 per week for up to 6 people. 07786 983789, le-refuge.co.uk.JamesWallmanActivity holidays, ChâtelIn a wonderful resort called Châtel, high up in the French Alps, we went on guided walks, did some mountain biking on scary downhill courses, got soaked whitewater rafting and still had time to relax and do some wine tasting. Our hosts, Mountain Air Holidays, also cooked wonderful meals.Chalets sleep from four to 13 from €495pp per week, mountainairholidays.co.uk.AdamC33La Barme, CogneYou don't need a car to get deep into the Alps during summer. Getting to Aosta from any of the airports in northern Italy is a doddle on the train (trenitalia.com), and there's a great bus service that will take you up to Cogne (savda.it/orari_tariffe.htm). From there, walk or get the local bus to Valnontey for a great base for spectacular single or multi-day walks, stay at La Barme (hotellabarme.com) for hearty, traditional evening meals. The guide book Walking in Italy's Gran Paradiso by Gillian Price (Cicerone) has loads of great walks. CityGirlCountryLassColletts Mountain Holidays, the DolomitesColletts specialises in activity holidays to the Dolomites, operating in Arabba near Ortisei and also in Pedraces. You can go in summer for walking (and now in winter for skiing, snowshoeing and other activities, too). The frontline staff are mostly young and enthusiastic and nothing is too much trouble. We arrived at 2.30am after a horrendous journey over the mountain passes, and there was a member of staff to greet us with a platter of food, hot drinks and a smile. This is a chalet holiday where you can dip in and out of activities as you like. • 01763 289660, colletts.co.uk.anniescotlandSolis Cambrian Hotel, AdelbodenThis glorious spa hotel in the heart of the Swiss Alps was almost empty when we were there in early June, meaning we had the entire spa - featuring an infinity pool falling away into a valley panorama with snow-capped mountains in the distance - all to ourselves. We had booked a room without a view but were upgraded to one with a breathtaking view. Considering it's unlikely to be fully booked in the summer, I'd recommend doing the same - and paying for an upgrade if it's not provided. Not exorbitantly priced - our bill came to just over £200 for the night, including decent supper and bar tab. One other tip: while the map makes it look like the journey from Lake Geneva is a jaunt, it is actually up and down some perilous mountains - the motorway via Berne is far quicker.• 0041 33 673 8383, solisadelboden.com. From CHF225 (£112) per night for two people.DamianP