Do we care about the origins of the universe? The sight of geeks in pyjamas is all very amusing but has little potential benefit for society. And it's our tax money being spent. In a world rich in spin, the purpose of blowing an amazing £5bn blasting a few particles round the equivalent of London Underground's Circle Line has not been explained. To say it could lead to the development of yet another electronic gizmo is just not good enough. The commonest cause of death on this planet is not cancer, heart disease or Aids but diarrhoea in young children. Saving one life costs just £5. Why are we sanctioning this nonsense?· Karol Sikora is a cancer specialistIt's a shame Stephen Hawking's voice simulator doesn't have an electronic chuckle. Surely he would have laughed out loud at the Today programme's question to him about the likely end of the world? Yet if it hadn't been for the supposed voracious black hole that might devour the universe, I doubt the Cern project would have generated much popular interest. I love the language - wimps, Higgs boson, dark matter - but find it astonishing we can almost recreate the birth of the universe but still not make carbon capture sufficiently economically viable to ensure our survival within it.· Barbara Gunnell is associate editor of the New StatesmanOooh, yes! If they raised £5bn they must be frightfully clever. But haven't they already proved something? The Bang wasn't the Beginning. The universe must have existed, in sub-particle form, before it banged. They've also proved the most important point of all: that it was all down to brains. Those particles in Geneva won't collide by their own volition. Someone has put them up to it. When the scientists' work is over, we'll be amazed at what they did. In the meantime we're amazed at what He did. But if He'd done it in a tunnel, would the fallout have produced Richard Dawkins?· Donald Macleod is principal of the Free Church School, EdinburghEnthusiastic physicists, whether they are A-level students or professors, make me feel that nothing can be so important as to find out what the universe really is and how it began. It's a common enterprise that has been going on for centuries, throughout the civilised world. Cern is an expression of this, uniquely human, shared curiosity. To say that the money would be better spent on the health service or the transport system is like saying that the only point of universities is so that students can contribute to the economy. It is philistinism attempting to murder the imagination.· Mary Warnock is a philosopher