If Ipsa's recommendations go ahead, British MPs' incomes will rise to £74,000 by 2015. But how do those salaries compare to those received by legislators elsewhere? Based on 2012 earnings, the annual basic salary of MPs in Westminster is considerably higher than that of representatives in devolved legislatures. Those who sit in the Scottish parliament earn £57,520 a year while those in the Northern Ireland assembly earn a third less at just £43,101.But looking beyond the British Isles, MPs may feel differently about their pay packets. Japanese legislators earn two and a half times what those in the UK do, and those in Australia earn almost double.The parliamentary authority only drew comparisons between other developed, mostly western countries in their October consultation. But that doesn't mean that representatives in the world's poorest countries receive small sums - far from it. Last month, Kenyan MPs finally bowed to pressure about a pay cut from $120,000 a year to $75,000 (as well as a one-off $59,000 grant to buy a vehicle). For many, the moral legitimacy of earnings is closely tied to national wealth. The average salary in Kenya is $1,700 a year (£1,116), making public officials appear extremely divorced from the experiences of their electorate.So, to really give context to the MPs' earnings, indicators like GDP per capita are crucial. On this score, the UK edges up the list, with MPs earning 3.1x the average wealth per individual - a ratio similar to those found in Canada, Germany and Ireland.Although it doesn't take into account the cost of living in a country, some of these figures are quite striking. Japanese policymakers earn 6.6 times the national GDP per capita - in Italy, it's 9.3 times more.Do these figures suggest how fair our MPs' salaries are or is this an unfair basis of comparison? Share your views by posting a comment below.• DATA: download the full spreadsheet• Email us at data@guardian.co.uk• Follow us on Twitter• Like us on Facebook• Post a comment belowData journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian