People call Kayseri the Mecca of the Justice and Development party (AKP). The president [Abdullah Gul] is from here and the party provides six of the city's eight MPs. Kayseri has always been conservative, not just in a religious sense, but also in a nationalist sense. You can also call it opportunist – I wouldn't be surprised if in 10 years' time the city turns out to be social democratic.I came here in 1992 and since then it has become more conservative. The ladies dress more conservatively, although they do so fashionably. The headscarf may be Armani, along with short jackets and long skirts. When I first came here it was less common to see women wearing the headscarf. Once in a while my father comes from Istanbul to visit us. He says that 10 years ago he would go for a walk and find a meyhane [tavern] somewhere. Now those places are no longer there. You have to drive 12km out to Duvenonu or Kecikapi, or go to a four- or five-star hotel, if you want to drink. I think the dressing and behaviour is just down to the Turks finding their identity. They have decided that they can live without alcohol. When you come from Europe you think it's modern to consume alcohol, but it isn't necessarily so. What is bad is that if you want a glass of wine you have to go in search of it. At least in Kayseri, there are Migros and Carrefour [international supermarket chains], which sell alcohol.Here in the industrial zone you would be surprised to see how many people in the past three or four years have found the "true path". They all go to Mecca on the hajj, and also on the umray pilgrimage [also to Mecca, but not obligatory]. I'm not a hajji. I would like to go, but don't believe there is any such thing as being a better Muslim just because you go on the hajj. I have been around the industrial zone to other factories – all owned by hajjis – and they have fewer people on social security than I have. So who is the better Muslim? I was born and raised in Stuttgart and I have a German passport. I am used to not exactly belonging. But I would not say that people here don't accept me. I am not excommunicated. If you do your business correctly they accept you perfectly. What really counts in Kayseri is money. I have raised three children here; I cannot imagine raising three children in Istanbul. Once you are used to this place it's good. If I had a second chance to do business, I would still choose to do it in Kayseri.But there are unwritten rules that you need to watch. When you work in a conservative male-dominated area you can't come in wearing a short skirt or a top with no sleeves. But, on the other hand, I don't get bad looks because I'm not wearing a headscarf. Many of the men here do not shake hands with me. I don't even offer my hand any more – I am tired of holding it out just for it to be refused. But that's not a big problem. I don't particularly want to shake their hands in any case.In Germany, we were taught at school to be tolerant, so I am tolerant towards conservative people. I don't care what political views they have or how they dress; I just care that they work well. If they want to pray to Mecca five times a day they can, as long as they ask for permission. But I don't have facilities for a prayer room.I provide for my workers, including food for lunch. I make sure no one talks about anyone else if they are not fasting, especially during Ramadan. The majority of the places (in the industrial zone) stop serving lunch during Ramadan. We have heard from other places that the employees have to take care that they are not caught eating then. It's not seen to be appropriate.I am a secular woman. But my complaint about many of these secular young people is that the only thing they do is worry. They don't actually do anything positive. They believe in laicism (secularism) or Ataturk, but what are they doing for society? They just say "boo"; they don't try to convince others to be secular. Do you know what these pro-Islamist people in Turkey did right? They spread the wealth for the people. The secular and pro-Ataturk people just keep it for themselves and the rich. They need to spread the idea that what Ataturk did for this society was right. They need to say: "Yes, be a good Muslim but still believe in the things that Ataturk stood for."What I cannot forgive the AKP for is having a lot of popular support and spending it all on an issue like the headscarf, something that wasn't really necessary. On my factory floor I have 50 workers: 10 aren't wearing headscarves; the rest are. The government's reform [allowing female university students to wear the headscarf on campus] happened at the same time as a new social security law was being passed. My workers said to me, "We really don't care about people being allowed to wear headscarves at university. We are more concerned about the social security law, which might mean we don't get severance pay or can be paid off more easily."What people care about is terrorism, unemployment and poverty. The headscarf is such an artificial agenda. The more you talk about it, the more the people who wear it think they are important – and they are not.