Last summer, sitting on the shore of majestic Lake Van in eastern Turkey, I gazed out at an island dominated by the stately Akhtamar Church, which for 10 centuries was a centre of Armenian religious life. The church is newly restored after decades of neglect. By paying for this restoration, the Turkish government signalled its desire to rebuild relations with Armenia. That desire has now led to a breakthrough.Months of secret talks in Switzerland have produced an accord under which the two sides agreed on a "road map" aimed at ending their long hostility. A Turkish diplomat said the talks produced "tangible progress and mutual understanding".President Barack Obama was among those who cheered. This accord took him out of a tight spot. During his campaign, Obama promised to recognise the killing of Ottoman Armenians in 1915 as genocide. Once in office, and especially after his visit to Turkey, he realised that doing so would upset US-Turkish relations. Last week's accord gave him political cover to back away from his promise. Why, after all, endanger a blossoming friendship with harsh words?This accord will be good for almost everyone. It did not, however, go as far as some had hoped. The outlines of a much more ambitious agreement had already taken shape. Under its provisions, the land border between Turkey and Armenia, which has been closed since 1993, would have been reopened; the two countries would have resumed diplomatic relations; and troublesome questions about the fate of Ottoman Armenians would be entrusted to a committee of scholars.This deal would benefit Armenia, a poor, military-dominated backwater that has been geographically and diplomatically isolated since Armenian forces seized the Nagorno-Karabakh region from Azerbaijan in 1993. Good ties to Turkey would help Armenia return to the global mainstream. Trade would flourish, and Turkish businesses would invest badly needed cash in Armenia. Turkey is Armenia's logical bridge to the world. Turkey would benefit politically as well as economically. In recent years Turkey has taken on a highly positive role as regional peacemaker. To burnish its credentials for this role, it has proclaimed a policy of "zero problems with neighbours". Already it has deftly rebuilt ties with Iran, Iraq, Syria and Greece. Armenia is the last piece of this puzzle, the last neighbour with which it is on less than friendly terms.A deal with Armenia would strengthen Turkey's diplomatic position, not only because it would be a sign of Turkey's flexibility but also because it would help push the genocide question off the international agenda, thereby removing another obstacle from the path of Turkey's geopolitical rise. This would, in turn, increase pressure on the European Union to look more positively on Turkey's application to join – something Obama urged during his recent trip to Europe.If the shape of this larger deal is already clear, and if it would benefit both parties, why was only a more modest accord signed last week? Because of unexpectedly strong push-back from Azerbaijan, which saw itself as the big loser.Azerbaijan fears that once Armenia has a bridge to the world through Turkey, it will feel no more pressure to negotiate over Nagorno-Karanakh. Determined not to allow Armenia this escape, leaders in Baku not only howled in protest but took out their geopolitical ace: oil. If Turkey insisted on making a separate deal with Armenia, they warned, they might decide to start exporting their oil through Russia, instead of using a new pipeline the is to be built across Turkey.Pipeline politics is a powerful force in this part of the world, and the Turks decided not to push ahead with a final agreement. Their foreign minister, however, said he now wished to negotiate an even broader deal, one that would include Azerbaijan as well as Armenia and Turkey. A three-country deal would necessarily include a settlement for Nagorno-Karabakh. If last week's half-failure pushes diplomats toward resolving this frozen conflict, it will certainly be seen in retrospect as a success.Turkey and Armenia have come this far by following a time-tested diplomatic principle: leave emotion behind and be guided by self-interest. Nonetheless, last week's breakthrough has an emotional component. Turks and Armenians lived side by side for much of modern history before the cruel 20th century tore them apart. As young generations in both countries are discovering to their delight, they eat the same food, laugh at the same jokes, dance to the same music. This is a "back-to-the-future" accord, one that seeks not to invent a new relationship but to rebuild one that thrived for a thousand years.