Diane Kruger is sitting on the terrace of the Carlton hotel in Cannes, where she is having a "friggingtastic" time. "It's been a great year. Things are coming my way. Opportunities I've never had before." Her sunglasses gleam. Her skin is scrubbed, her body pneumatic, her vast white teeth dazzling in the sunshine. Meeting Kruger is, in fact, an almost entirely predictable experience. She is pleasant and pretty and punctual. "I'm on time even when I try not to be," she says. "I'm German. I'm responsible. I'm neat. I iron my tablecloths." Personally? "I find it therapeutic."One thing, though, with the benefit of hindsight: remembered after the fact, the whole encounter feels shot though with impending doom, a sinking dread, a horrible ominousness. As we talk, a huge poster looms above us: Kruger herself, revolver cocked, mink wrap immaculate, wry smile, killer heels. She is about to open as the leading lady in the most eagerly anticipated movie - Quentin Tarantino's Inglourious Basterds - in the biggest film festival in the world. She says she is thrilled. "You'd have to be fucking crazy not to think this was great!"But one thing is making her nervous: like the rest of the cast, she hasn't actually seen the film yet. "I am like, literally, shitting my pants. It's scary enough to see a movie for the first time with an audience. It's a whole other bottle of wax to see it in frigging Cannes, y'know?"What is she worried about? "Everything! That it's not good, or it's not what I thought, or I'm not good, or everyone else is not good. My hope, of course, is that it's the best thing ever."Forty hours later, she saw the movie, and so did a good chunk of the world's critics. Though my recent inquiries after her verdict have politely been rebutted, she must be aware of the general consensus: that Inglourious Basterds is not the best thing ever. That, in fact, it was considered by some to be the prize turkey of the festival: an enormous disappointment, soundtracked by sighs and tuts and the odd snore.It must be galling. The role of Bridget von Hammersmark, a double-agent German movie star who teams up with Brad Pitt's troupe of Jewish soldiers to bring down Hitler, was, for Kruger, something of a dream. Tough to land, too. When she went to audition, Tarantino, apparently prizing authenticity above all else, refused to believe her ancestry."He'd only seen my American films! [She has starred in Wicker Park with Josh Hartnett and National Treasure with Nicolas Cage.] It was so annoying! When I started out people were like, 'You really need to get rid of that accent ... '"Kruger bubbles over with praise for her director. Yes, she says, the film may ruffle some feathers. "A few people are pretty touchy about that part of history," she concedes, with understatement. "But it takes Tarantino's guts to tackle it." Yes, it really was only helpful that he'd sit in her eyeline and cackle along as they shot. "It was so fun! You can just see he's so excited and you want to give him your best. He's a visionary. And I know that, on set at least, I went to the other end of the road. He pushed me, he gave me wings."Kruger is fine in the film: not transcendent, but certainly well cast. She looks like a star. She walks like a star. But she doesn't have the baggage of actually being a star - at least not yet. Sure, she stars in films, and she gets papped - partly the result of living with Joshua Jackson (who played Pacey in Dawson's Creek). But she's no icon. She's the antithesis of mysterious: far too friendly and open. For a 32-year-old divorcee (for four years, she was married to the French actor/director Guillaume Canet), she seems strikingly young, talks about her mum a lot and litters her speech with the words "frigging" and "literally".She looks extraordinary on screen, but disarmingly normal face-to-face. She is not alienatingly gorgeous and blends in so effortlessly on the Carlton terrace that it is tempting to think no one has actually clocked her. That bland, malleable beauty makes her perfect for Von Hammersmark, just as it made her ideal to play Helen in Wolfgang Petersen's Troy (2004): the face that launched a thousand ships is also the ultimate vessel of head-turning emptiness. (She has mixed memories of Troy, her third film: "I was so, so green. I was like: "Oh, look, it's the frigging set of Sparta. Oh, wow, a camera. I'm doing a movie! Oh, shit ... ")You can see how that beauty would also have made her perfect as a model for glossy mags. She was pro for almost a decade; she wishes it had been less. But wasn't it good training for being an actor?She chokes on her cappuccino. "It's the opposite! With modelling, you pose. You want to look your best all the time. With acting, you have to be aware of the camera, but the more you show your imperfections, the better you're going to be."She's warming to her theme. "I was so over the photo shoots, constantly being prodded at and paraded. What's so fucked up is now I do it more than ever."Why such revulsion? Does she believe having your photo taken steals your soul? "I wish it would! That's the problem. I don't feel photographers really want to see me. They want to see what's in style that month. I'd love to see a photo which captures what I'm about. I wish people would see my soul in pictures. You see it in movies. Because then I'm stripped naked. It's raw. And it's so liberating."That's certainly what she's going for in her latest, Pour Elle (Anything for Her). It's a glossy French thriller (though the UK trailer conspicuously omits any off-putting foreign lingo) about a devoted mother, Lisa, who is wrongfully imprisoned for murder. The years go by, Lisa goes increasingly cuckoo, her son Oscar more distant. So her devoted husband Julien (Vincent Lindon) decides to stage a break-out. Kruger's scant screen time is largely devoted to washed-out scenes in the clink where she weeps over hubbie and clucks over kiddie.It wasn't a barrel of laughs to shoot. "It was tough, man. I didn't like that rejection from the boy who played my son. And it's not a huge role, so I wasn't part of that little family that creates itself when you make a film. I really felt the outsider."Her research for the role doesn't sound like a walk in the park, either: a guided tour round a male prison. She is dryly unforthcoming about the experience: "Yeah. It was not fun to be a girl."Pour Elle has a lot in common with her most personal role: Frankie (2005), a little-seen arty saga about a model who goes into psychiatric meltdown, scripted and directed by Kruger's best friend, Fabienne Berthaud. Both films are slumming-it, makeup-free, institutionalised jobbies that gave her an opportunity to flex her acting chops without relying on her looks, and to explore a keen interest: the psychological fragility of women."I feel as if sometimes women can't deal with what's going on and they have no one around who actually understands," she says. Is that an especially female trait? "I don't know, because I'm not a man. But I certainly have it; I can only imagine other women do."When I was younger - it might be a romantic idea - I always thought I might go crazy. There were times in my life when I had my heart broken so badly that I wasn't able to leave the house for weeks at a time. Your friends listen to you for a while, and then they're like, 'Stop moaning, get over it'. But sometimes you just can't. I just felt: God, what a weight on my shoulders!"She was cured by three weeks spent shooting Frankie in a real mental hospital, surrounded by bona fide patients. "When I saw real depression, I finally realised how strong I am. Yes! I'm not crazy!" Kruger certainly doesn't seem it in Cannes. She is, she says, at a terrific balancing point: famous, but not too famous, finally prepared for the stardom that seemed imminent for so long. "I'm more in control of the situation because of what I feel I have in me. Modelling was so passive, so frustrating. Now I'm ready. I want it. I can do it. It's happening."• Anything for Her is released on 5 June