the 12 June general election constitutes one of the most important milestones in the history of Turkey's democracy. For the first time since the beginning of the multiparty system in 1946, a political party has won three consecutive elections, each time increasing its vote. This shows that democracy and democratic institutions in Turkey are firmly established.In power since the 2002 election, the AK – Justice and Development – party has struck a balance between democratisation, economic progress and an active foreign policy. By giving the party 50% of the votes in the 12 June election, Turks confirmed their belief in this model of development and stability .Coming after three military coups since 1960, democratisation and civilisation have not been easy in our country. Turkish politics has been marred by the violation of basic rights and freedoms, undemocratic and illegal organisations, a parliamentary system under military tutelage, and a national security concept that considers its own citizens suspect.Turkey has now left the coup era behind. We will continue to combat forces that favour coups and have not fully embraced democracy or pluralist rule in order to reach the standards of the world's advanced democracies. The bold, decisive leadership of the AK party in this area has received the full support of Turkish citizens.The reform packages enacted for our EU membership, together with the constitutional amendments of the referendum on 12 September 2010, have played a key role in this transition. The AK party's third term is a historic opportunity for Turkey to be a constitutional state with a fully fledged advanced democracy – a prerequisite for EU membership.In order to achieve its goal, Turkey needs to write a new constitution. Our current constitution, written in the wake of the 1980 military coup and adopted in 1982, does not suit Turkey's goals for 2023, the centenary of the founding of the Turkish Republic. A constitution that protects the individual rather than the state, and promotes freedom and democracy rather than security, is a necessity for the 21st century.The AK party's priority will now be to seek the widest possible consensus for the new constitution and the rights and freedoms of all citizens – something that Tayyip Erdogan, the prime minister, other AK party officials and I have consistently made clear. We have pledged this to the people and called on the opposition parties to help. We also invite non-governmental organisations, universities, the business world, bar associations and various experts to take part in this process. We have absolute faith in all members of the nation embracing the constitution as a fundamental text.One of the unfair, and unfounded, criticisms levelled at our government concerns freedom of the press. Pointing to the journalists detained under the Ergenekon and Balyoz (Sledgehammer) cases and claiming that the government has suppressed dissident voices amount to twisting reality. People were detained as a result of these investigations not because they were discharging their duties as reporters, but under the charge of plotting a coup against the government. In this legal process, the involvement of the government is out of the question. However, we regret the long periods of detention necessitated by these cases and hope that the trials are speedily concluded.Today there are many publications in Turkey that oppose the government. For example, books full of insults directed at our president and our prime minister are sold in shops. Some claim that they are really Jewish or Armenian. Moreover hundreds of national and local newspapers and other media outlets utter every day the most violent threats towards the government every day. None of these have been banned or prosecuted.Fresh from a third mandate from the people, the AK party is open to all kinds of co-operation and reconciliation. A modern, civilian, participatory constitution will be the most important step for the new Turkey – a constitution that will guarantee the fundamental rights and freedoms of all citizens regardless of their religion, language and ethnic origin; and that will end the period of illegal, undemocratic organisations and activities.It is our pledge to the Turkish people and the world that a new constitution will usher in a new era for a fully functioning democracy in Turkey.