Where are you right now? If you are a parent, there's a decent chance you are waiting for service in a shop. Are you returning a child's duplicate Christmas present? Buying little clothes in the January sales? Maybe you have been sent out to scour the shops for yoghurt because the ones you bought had "bits" in them and a picture of the wrong tractor on the pot.Well, a brief glance at last year's headlines proves you are not unique. Average annual cost of a child rises to £8,307. A typical baby owns 56 outfits worth £327… 13 million toys in landfill every year… Infant ready-meal market growing by 23% year on year…So no, far from unique in today's Britain. But glance just a little way into the past and the shop you are in would have been substantially emptier. You don't have look back very far. That infant ready-meal market rocketing upwards each year? In 2006, it was so small it didn't even exist as an industry category.The number of self-conscious parents is also multiplying. Look at the expressions of your fellow shoppers. Stressed? Last year, a study by Ribena found one in six parents admitting to buying the latest gadgets for their children in order to "look good in front of other families". In fact, the only thing that does not appear to be growing, as we hand over plastic to buy more plastic en masse, is the happiness of our children.According to Unicef, British children are among the least happy in the developed world. And no, of course, it is not just the infant iPads and organic smoothies that are making them so. At the other end of the street there exist levels of poverty and deprivation that far outweigh their insidious effects.But the consumer culture created around children is no respecter of income levels – those who can't even consider buying the latest toy are then made to feel like bad parents. There's a nasty kind of "trickle down" effect ensuring that, whoever we are, we are becoming duped into thinking that "providing" for our children means handing out material goods.It is time to consider that, in fact, all this stuff might be doing the opposite. When you buy a new game for your iPad, are you buying a little happiness for your kid or a little more time for yourself, a little less time in which you are doing the job that really matters: interacting with your child?I know, ouch. But look, at least I'm not a hypocrite. I took a hard look at my own values at the start of the year and concluded that they weren't, all of them, pretty. So I am detoxing this year. Going cold turkey on kiddy consumerism. My new year's resolution is to spend nothing on my two-year-old son – except for essential costs like medicine and his share of the food we all eat – all year. Not a bean. Raising a child for free in today's Britain might sound like deprivation, but I'm hoping it will prove a liberation. And does teaching our kids, in the midst of a recession, that the meaning of life is maxing out credit cards sound like a better plan for raising their happiness?One thing is sure. It will be a lot harder on me than on him. No money to spend on toys – I will have to hunt them out through Freecycle and swaps. No cash to splash on clothes – I will seek out hand-me-downs in good condition. No trolleys full of baby smoothies, apple rice cakes, fish fingers – I will have to plan real meals we can all eat as a family. Haircuts, activities, music classes … all made by Mama.He meanwhile, will be wrapped up warm in pre-softened second-hands, exploring the (as yet, still free) world around him and his own (unfettered) imagination. But that's the thing about being the grown-up, isn't it? Self-control, taking responsibility, saying no every so often. And we are still the grown-ups here … aren't we?