Andrew Lansley says that any public health strategy should be "evidence based" (Jamie Oliver hits back at health secretary over school meals 'insult', 1 July). Absolutely. All of the evidence from research into the benefits of good school meals indicates improvements in pupil health, behaviour, motivation and ability to learn and achieve.Anyone familiar with the eight-year battle for good school meals can tell you that serving fresh, healthy food is by itself no magic bullet. The Food for Life Partnership has taken Jamie Oliver's school dinners campaign to more than 2,000 schools across the country. Great food is matched by food education, cooking lessons, on-site food growing and improvements to the dining area. In less than two years, meal take-up among participating schools has risen on average by 16%, with some schools reporting as much as a 25% increase.Better access to good food at school means better health and improved life chances, especially for poorer pupils. As Lansley's colleague, the under-secretary of state for education Tim Loughton, acknowledged in last week's Commons debate, school meals "often represent the only nutritious meal in some children's day". Turning the clock backwards on school meals risks condemning a generation of children to obesity – and landing us all with a NHS bill for the future we could avoid now.Roger MortlockChair, Food for Life Partnership• Andrew Lansley, the health secretary, made several surprising mistakes about a major problem – obesity – when he belittled Jamie Oliver's school meals campaign. Lansley's patronising briefing had him saying: "If we are constantly lecturing people and trying to tell them what to do, we will actually find that we undermine and are counterproductive in the results that we achieve."The health secretary's first mistake was particularly surprising as it was political in character. Secretaries of state shouldn't start a public fight with a popular chef whose efforts to improve school meals are widely respected. The second mistake was a more technical one about successful health promotion. Changing schools so that they offer nutritionally sound and attractive meals is a good example of changing the environment so that the health choices become the easy choices. To characterise associated explanations of good and bad nutrition as "lecturing" is simply verbal abuse.Dr Peter DraperLondon• Now we know why Andrew Lansley is attacking Jamie Oliver over his attempts to make school meals healthier. The answer is to be found in the Michael Pollan interview (G2, 1 July). He says, "The more food is processed, the more profitable it gets for the big food manufacturers." So Tories get into power; cue lobbying by big food business; Tory minister rubbishes leading anti-processed food campaigner; Turkey Twizzlers back on school dinner menu. Big profits all round and who cares if even more of the health budget goes on treating obesity?Steve PorterCheltenham, Gloucestershire• Death is the ultimate social exclusion, as someone once remarked, and we are presented yet again with the evidence that rhetoric about inclusion or a Big Society means nothing if we are killing people on a grand scale (Poor dying 10 years earlier than rich …, 2 July).The understanding that health is a function less of health services and more of the social determinants – of income, social position and environment – has now been around for 30 years or more, but prevention of ill-health continues to be portrayed as either one for the NHS or on the other hand a matter of "lifestyle". Research has demonstrated that inequality is bad for people and bad for the economy. The coalition indulges in the same rhetoric – it's all about prevention. However, Andrew Lansley has already made it clear, in his utterances on Jamie's school dinners, that for him it's a matter of personal responsibility. Everything else the government has done so far will exacerbate inequality, and the inevitable result will be that the gap identified in this National Audit Office report will pale into insignificance. Neil BlackshawDunmow, Essex