“Pork belly prices have been dropping all morning ... which means that people are saying, ‘we’re losing all our damn money, and Christmas is around the corner, and I ain’t gonna have no money to buy my son the GI Joe with the kung-fu grip! And my wife ain’t gonna f – my wife ain’t gonna make love to me if I got no money!’ So they’re panicking right now, they’re screaming ‘SELL! SELL!’ to get out ... They’re panicking, I can feel it.”That was (roughly) how Eddie Murphy’s character Billy Ray Valentine explained the workings of the financial markets in the run up to Christmas, during the 1983 film Trading Places, a movie that somehow manages to be both funny and thoughtful. It explains markets from a behaviourist view, including investors acting as members of a herd, not rational individuals.In that herd vein, consider this: in the past five years during the fortnight prior to Christmas, the FTSE 100 has mimicked its own performance over the year. So in 2013, where the FTSE added 14%, the two weeks before Christmas saw the index tick up by 3%. In 2012, an annual 6% rise was helped by a pre-Yuletide 0.5% gain. In 2011 the FTSE shed 6%, including losing 0.3% just before the big day, while the pattern was maintained in 2010 (+9%, +3%) and 2009 (+22%, + 3%). The FTSE has lost about 4% in 2014. You may sense some panic this week.There’s an old City joke that begins with the question: what is the difference between a retail analyst and a supermarket trolley? Answer: the trolley has a mind of its own.Still, in defence of the timid number-crunchers, it’s easy to see why they might recoil from original thought. Take Bernstein’s Bruno Monteyne, who last month broke away from the pack and mused how there was little embattled Tesco “can do wrong in the next two years that isn’t in [the share] price”. He then told the Times: “The discussion now is whether we’ll merely see Tesco stabilise or whether this is the start of a major recovery”.Those sentiments might now apply to Bruno himself, seeing as that final line appeared in Tuesday morning’s paper, the same day that the grocer unveiled its latest massive profits warning, which prompted another slump in the shares. Still, he’ll have some facts to insert into his spreadsheet this week with the latest market share figures from researcher Kantar Worldpanel, which will be scrutinised for clues about how the struggling majors are handling the buoyant discounters. Just don’t expect any inventive analysis.This time of year is full of – how shall we put this? – grey areas when it comes to the facts. There’s that jolly fella we lead some to believe necks gallons of sherry before assuming control of a flying sleigh; the probable myth around that football match supposedly played during the 1914 truce; plus those fantastical tales involving urgent afternoon off-site meetings, where crucial corporate negotiations seem to drag on past clocking-off time.Which brings us to this week’s Treasury select committee hearing seeking evidence from two directors of the Financial Conduct Authority: Clive Adamson, director of supervision, and Zitah McMillan, director of communications. They will participate in a Christmas quiz about how they allowed the regulator to brief the Daily Telegraph, triggered an inaccurate story that caused insurance shares to crash, and then took hours to react to the mess they’d created. There is some fogginess surrounding the details, and McMillan is sure to be asked for her take.Law firm Clifford Chance’s report into the farce records McMillan’s claims to have no knowledge of the briefing, but adds that two of her employees “told us that she did know” – proving that there are at least two sides to every Christmas yarn.