Family-owned Aral Holiday Farm is part working vineyard, part island getaway. Located on Bozcaada, an island in the northern Aegean that was off-limits to foreigners until the 1990s, this verdant enclave is composed of lovingly renovated stone barns and newer rooms (sleeping four) facing the vegetable garden. The 14,000 square-metre farm has tons of space for little ones to roam, as well as animals, including chickens, peacocks, geese and goats. There are hammocks, a ping-pong table and a treehouse perched in an almond tree. For grown-up guests, the hotel also runs yoga workshops, wine-tasting sessions and cookery courses.• +90 286 697 8357, araltatilciftligi.com, doubles from £75 including breakfast, seven-14s £12, under-sevens freeThe seaside resort of Kas sits more than 100 twisting miles from both Dalaman and Antalya airports. Oreo Hotel makes the most of Kas's splendid isolation by offering an unrivalled range of outdoor pursuits. From sea kayaking over Kekova's second-century sunken ruins (minimum age 12) to zip-lining through the nearby forest (minimum age five), the hotel organises myriad adventurous activities. On site, whitewashed guest rooms are simple, each with a bougainvillea-covered balcony. For down time, there's a swimming pool with kids' paddling area, too. Note that larger rooms don't have sea views; a family of four could instead book two adjacent rooms.• +90 242 836 2220, oreohotel.com, doubles from €68 (£55) including breakfast, half-board €45, seven-12 years half-price, under-sevens freeBill Gates may moor his superyacht in Bozburun, a sheltered bay 45km northwest of Marmaris, but this is still a traditional town, best-known for its handcrafted wooden gulet boats. South of the village centre, Hotel Aphrodite is as lovely as its namesake: 22 rooms peek out over a tangle of fig trees and grape vines. Each has its own private patio or terrace. Outdoors, it's literally a hop into the sea for kids, while plenty of parent-friendly loungers perch on the shady wooden decking. When you need a break from splashing around, Aphrodite organises boat trips, hikes into the hills and barbecues. • +90 252 456 2268, hotelaphrodite.net, half-board from €60pp (£49), seven-11s, 25% discount, aged two-sixes half-price, under-twos freeJust under 10 miles south of Turkey's most famous beach, Ölüdeniz, Turan Hill Lounge feels utterly isolated – you have to clamber into a shared 4x4 taxi for the final leg of the journey into Kabak Valley. But it's worth it. Rustic houses are decorated in colourful Turkish textiles; driftwood decks, piled high with cushions, overlook the beach below. Splash around in the pool, then indulge in the hotel's buffet (picky eaters and special diets happily catered for). Or trek through oleanders and olive trees to the nearby waterfall, stopping for a swim in the natural ponds along the way. • +90 252 642 1227, turanhilllounge.com, half-board from £40pp, under-fives free. Minimum three-night stay in July and AugustOver recent years, the tiny town of Alaçatı – all periwinkle shutters and pedestrianised alleyways – has become the Aegean's hippest (and therefore priciest) getaway. Yet the Poshor family's Incirliev ("Fig Tree House") remains a window into Turkey's traditional past. Guest rooms are dotted with stylish antiques and face the courtyard's giant fig tree. Breakfast is abundant, with fried eggs, pancakes and owner Osman's homemade jams. There's a pool table and games room downstairs. Incirliev's village-centre location makes the town ideal for teens to explore alone. The nearby marina is also one of the world's best places for windsurfing - the hotel can point kids in the right direction for lessons.• +90 232 716 0353, incirliev.com, four-person family rooms from €220 including breakfast, doubles from €145With nearly 10 miles of honey-hued sands, Patara is one of the longest beaches in Turkey, and was once the region's most important port. Ancient Roman ruins – including an amphitheatre – back the beach, and are ideal for scampering around. For eco-peekers, Patara is a protected nesting ground for loggerhead turtles, which lay their eggs on these shores on summer nights. In nearby Patara village, the Delfin Hotel has family rooms (sleeping three, with a kitchenette) and apartments (sleeping four). Free shuttle buses run to the beach, and owner Mustafa also organises canoeing on the nearby Xanthos River and barbecues by the hotel pool.• +90 242 843 51 20, pataradelfinhotel.com, family room for three €50 including breakfastThe largest of the nine Princes' Islands, Büyükada is a 90-minute ferry ride from Istanbul. Car-free roads render it the city's top spot for family fun. Base your family at Naya, a laid-back guesthouse just south of the island's main town. Rooms are eclectic, with chandeliers, wooden floors and funky furnishings. The house is surrounded by a rambling garden with plenty of places to sprawl, and has a small natural swimming pool. Büyükada is best explored by bike or by fayton, a traditional horse-drawn carriage. Hike up to Aya Yorgi monastery (a steep 30-minute trek) or simply hit one of the island's many beach clubs.• +90 216 382 4598, nayaistanbul.com, doubles from €80 including breakfast, extra child €40, under-14s freeSnoozing in a cave? Exploring "fairy chimneys" and underground cities? Watching the sunrise from a hot-air balloon? Welcome to Cappadocia, a Unesco world heritage site and one of Turkey's most enchanting regions, guaranteed to enthrall kids of all ages. Bed down in Kelebek Cave Hotel. Guest rooms here are carved out of the landscape's soft tufa rock. There's also a brand-new swimming pool and a traditional Turkish hammam (inside a cave, of course). Owner Ali Yavuz organises tours around the region, including wagon rides to his nearby farm for an organic breakfast, followed by a hike through the Valley of the Kings.• +90 384 271 2531, kelebekhotel.com, doubles from €55 including breakfast, each extra child 20%. Only larger doubles (from €84 plus 20% per child) are suitable for a family of fourSurrounded by citrus groves, the Canada Hotel makes an ideal base for Çıralı's many family adventures. Check out the bizarre Chimaera, natural flames that burst from the earth in the hills behind town. Explore the ancient Greek ruins of Olympos at the western end of Çıralı's arc-shaped beach, peeking out from under an Indiana Jones-style forest canopy. And there's plenty of play space at the hotel, too - from ping-pong and dipping in the pools (including one for kids), to hammock-lounging or pedalling around on the hotel's free bikes. The pebbly beach - like Patara a nesting ground for loggerhead turtles - is a 10-minute walk away.• +90 242 825 7233, canadahotel.net, doubles €60 including breakfast, extra child €15, under-sixes free, four-person family bungalows €90 including breakfastStrictly for families with older kids (the hotel has a no-children-under-10 policy), The Gallipoli Houses sits at the heart of Turkey's Gallipoli National Park, within easy driving distance of the Suvla, Anzac and Helles battlefields. For history students, 2015 marks the centenary of one of the first world war's seminal battles. Belgian-Turkish owners Eric and Ozlem are a wealth of knowledge regarding the battlefields. Knapsack lunches can be prepared for guests picnicking while touring the area. All rooms have their own terrace or balcony, and the hotel offers towels, umbrellas and coolers for beach time after you've seen the battlefields. Previous guests include former Australian prime minister Julia Gillard. • +90 286 814 2650, thegallipolihouses.com, doubles from €70 including breakfast, triples from €90 including breakfast, rooms can't accommodate extra beds, four-course dinner €15pp• All prices valid for high season mid July - late August