When a group of farmers' wives in a remote village in Turkey staged Hamlet earlier this month, it was the sheer exoticism that attracted the local media. With no Time Out to turn to, the women used the loudspeakers from the local mosque to advertise their performance. The Prince of Denmark appeared on stage in the baggy shalwar of an Anatolian peasant. Gravediggers launched into bawdy Turkish traditional songs. "Hamlet becomes Hamit", ran the headlines.Fair enough. But it's this slightly patronising approach that drove the members of the Arslanköy Women's Theatre Group on to the stage in the first place. "We're uneducated, we're women, we're villagers and so we don't count: that's the general view", says Ümmiye Koçak, the 52-year old who abridged the play, directed it and played the eponymous lead. A mother of three who left school when she was 12, Koçak took up acting eight years ago after seeing Shakespeare performed at the local primary school. By 2006, she graduated to writing her own material; plays on the themes of poverty and domestic violence, based on stories she had heard from neighbours. Inhabited mainly by the descendants of Turkmen nomads known for their relaxed take on Islam, Arslanköy has always been a pretty progressive place. But life up in the mountains is tough. Among men, alcoholism is a problem; among women, suicide. But what Koçak likes about theatre is that it is both a tribune and a distancing device: a public means of discussing sensitive issues while dressed up as somebody else.It's a grassroots practise that would have been close to the heart of late director Augustus Boal, embodying as it does the spirit of his movement the "Theatre of the Oppressed". Members of the group say acting has done wonders for their self-belief. One 62-year old, whose son died four years ago of leukaemia, says it was theatre that held her together. Another found her husband looking at her differently, appreciating her in a new light.The tiny collective, headed by Koçak, has also attracted an audience far broader than the 400-plus villagers who heeded the call from the mosque earlier this month – a Turkish documentary about the group won prizes in the US, France and Italy in 2006. The notion of theatre being able to function as a tool for social change isn't new, neither is the belief that the Bard's works hold a universal and timeless appeal. Yet, seeing Hamlet performed with such gusto on a small school stage, to an enraptured audience, and in the most unlikely of places is still deeply affecting. While the actors of Arslanköy will complain about what Hamlet called "the insolence of office" – petty-minded local officials who obstruct the women's work and then leap in to take credit whenever success is scored – Koçak is clear about her objective. For her, and the women working with her, theatre has become a platform to confirm they exist. "They say women are responsible for educating the next generation", she says. "But women can only educate their children if they are educated themselves. That is what I have been trying to do, in my small way."