The sale of reindeer steaks – "Rudolph steaks" according to one tabloid – is a quick way for animal rights campaigners and supermarkets to grab a headline. Lidl this week incurred the wrath of vegetarian campaigners Viva! for stocking 350g steaks of Siberian reindeer at a bargain £5.99.But are steaks from this Arctic and sub-Arctic species of deer, which may be able to fly and distribute presents from Father Christmas around the globe, really cruel? And if so, are they more unethical than less exotic, factory-farmed meats?"Lidl is destroying the magic of Christmas," squeals Viva!, claiming that Siberian reindeer are cruelly herded by snowbikes "and perhaps even by helicopters" and "may be" slaughtered in a cruel way.According to Lidl, its reindeer are not herded by snowbikes or helicopters and are slaughtered in EU-approved abattoirs. Lidl's spokeswoman paints an idyllic picture of the reindeer living in their natural habitat, tended by indigenous people of the Siberian tundra and fed on "local aromatic herbs and grass".In Arctic nations in general, the herding of wild and semi-tame reindeer has become more intensive – and more stressful – for the animals. In Sweden, food hygiene standards have led to the closure of local abattoirs and the transportation of live reindeer by lorry over long distances.But Viva! cites as cruel a claim that 70% of slaughtered reindeer are calves and may never have seen snow, as if to frolic in cold white sludge is their birthright.You may not want to eat meat imported from Siberia but it is reasonable to assume that wild reindeer have a happier life than those millions of battery turkeys being reared for our Christmas dinners.Make a basic stew by frying lardons of bacon with onions and garlic for five minutes and adding cubed or thinly sliced (frozen) reindeer meat, with salt and pepper and thyme. You can also add mushrooms, turnips and beer or wine. Extras include crushed juniper berries, sour cream and goats cheese for a creamy sauce, while Gordon Ramsay recommends throwing in cloudberries, blueberries and a handful of snow. Cook for 20-30 minutes.