Despite having lived in the States for five years and been married to an American for 10, I still struggle with Thanksgiving. It's a confusing feast and I need it explained.Firstly I'm still a little puzzled as to what we're giving thanks for. We're told that the first Thanksgiving celebrated the safe arrival of the Pilgrim Fathers and their survival of their first harsh winter or maybe their first friendly sit-down meal with the locals - either of which would in itself seem a reasonable cause for a knees up. Of course they didn't have turkeys back then, or potatoes, there's every chance that Jerusalem artichokes and clams featured high on the menu but let's not split hairs. Then there's the date. I can get my head around 'the fourth Thursday in November' a lot better than the Nicean necromancy that gives us the date for Easter (the Sunday following the ecclesiastical full moon that falls on or after the vernal equinox - I mean, that's just plain stupid) but the Canadians also have something they call Thanksgiving which takes place on the second Monday in October and, with a degree more clarity than the US version, celebrates the harvest. We Brits of course, at least those of us with small children, sensibly celebrate the harvest with the time-honoured and entirely logical tradition of piling tinned food around the nearest altar and mumbling a hymn like members of a middle-class cargo cult.Then, of course, there's the food. Pumpkin pie I can see as winner in the category of most imaginative use of biomass in a dessert but it's still something I'm going to need guidance on. And perhaps we should draw a discreet veil over the whole business of sweet potatoes dotted with tiny marshmallows and cinnamon. A little Googling around has also thrown up, and I use that term advisedly, the phenomenon of the deep-fried turkey. Perhaps the explanation here should be simply whether it's intended as a collective slap in the face to cardiologists or an elaborate excuse for a bonfire. Perhaps the most baffling part of Thanksgiving for a Brit is the whole idea of having a festival as big, complicated and frankly bloody tiresome to organise as Christmas a mere month before the big day. I'm not sure if that can ever be adequately explained. If we really have to travel across the country to spend days of bilious excess and bitter recrimination with our families, surely once a year is more than enough - and there should be presents.In fact, it seems that Thanksgiving has gained a momentum which outstrips logic and history and is today entirely secular holiday - barring the occasional well-intentioned grace. A generalised and random giving of thanks for pretty much everything. An idea which actually rather appeals.So, transatlantic chums. We wish you the happiest of Thanksgivings but please, help us out here, take a moment to explain to us benighted Brits what it's all about, how the food works, what you're doing to celebrate and how anyone can eat turkey twice in a month.