I have roasted our Christmas turkey in this way for years, draping the bird in butter-soaked muslin to create a better texture and added moisture. The key thing to realise about turkey is that, however good a bird it is, it needs added taste, so make a full-flavoured and aromatic stuffing with powerful ingredients. This year, I’m eschewing stodgy ingredients such as sausage meat and breadcrumbs and making mushroom and chestnut stuffing with lime pickle and cashews (see online for recipe). Related: Christmas dessert recipes The gravy can be transformed into a delicious sauce by adding creme fraiche to the pan juices, as in this recipe.Serves 4-61 large whole turkey180g unsalted butterJuice of 1 orange1 large glass dry vermouthFor the gravy250ml-300ml creme fraicheJuice of 1 lemonA pinch of dried tarragonSalt and black pepper1 Prepare your turkey the day before. Spoon your stuffing into the neck cavity of the bird. Cut a piece of muslin big enough to drape over the bird in a double layer. Melt the butter in a largish pan. Remove from the heat and dip the muslin in the butter until it has all been absorbed. Cool slightly, then put the bird in a roasting pan and lay a double layer of the butter-soaked muslin over it – but keep it well above the bottom of the pan. Leave it in a cool place until the next day.2 Preheat the oven to 170C/340F/gas mark 3½. Roast the turkey on a low shelf for 3-3 ¾ hours for a 3.5–6.5kg bird or 3 ¾-4 ½ hours for a 6.5–8kg bird.3 Around 45 minutes before the turkey is ready, remove the muslin, so the breast can brown more deeply, and pour a large glass of dry vermouth and the juice of one orange into the roasting pan. Discard the muslin.4 Transfer the turkey to a carving board, making sure every bit of juice goes back into the pan. Let the turkey rest for at least 10 minutes before carving.5 To make the sauce/gravy, simply stir 250–300ml creme fraiche, the juice of 1 lemon and some fresh or dried tarragon into the pan juices and bubble it up on top of the stove, stirring for about 2 minutes until it has thickened slightly. Season, if needed, with salt and black pepper. Pour into a gravy jug.A Christmas turkey version of shepherd’s pie, and rather simpler to make as the turkey will already be cooked. As with shepherd’s pie, all the family, from the very young to the ancient, should enjoy it.Serves 6-8500g potatoes500g sweet potatoes250ml creme fraiche80g strong cheddar cheese, grated¼-½ whole nutmeg2 red onionsAbout 1kg skinless cooked turkey meat500g fresh tomatoes3 tbsp rapeseed oil2 tsp ground cinnamon2-3 tsp dried oregano25g butterSalt and black pepper1 Peel the potatoes and sweet potatoes. Cut up roughly – the sweet potatoes should be in slightly larger pieces. Steam or boil together until both are soft, then put into a bowl, add the creme fraiche and about two-thirds of the grated cheddar. Grate in the nutmeg. Mash everything together thoroughly, then season with salt and pepper to taste.2 Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Peel the onions and chop them fairly small. Cut the turkey into small pieces, either very briefly in a food processor or by hand. Put the tomatoes in a bowl, pour boiling water over them and leave for a minute or so, then drain, peel and cut up roughly.3 Put the rapeseed oil in a large, deep frying pan over a fairly high heat. Add the onions and stir around until they begin to brown. Stir in the cinnamon, remove from the heat and tip it into a large bowl.4 Add the chopped turkey and tomatoes with the oregano and a good seasoning of ground black pepper and sea salt. Mix well together and spoon into a large, fairly shallow ovenproof dish.5 Spread the potato mixture over the top and dot with the butter and remaining grated cheese. Cook in the centre of the oven for 45-55 minutes until richly browned.Turkey meat is perfect for curries, and this recipe uses curry paste and quick-cook veg, so it takes no time at all to prepare and serve. Serve with a steaming mound of basmati rice.Serves 6-8900g-1kg skinless cooked turkey meat500g courgettes250g mini plum or cherry tomatoes25g butter2 tbsp rapeseed oil3-5 tsp tikka paste or mild curry paste400ml tin coconut milkA handful of fresh coriander leaves1 Cut the cooked turkey meat into smallish pieces. Top and tail the courgettes and slice across fairly thinly. Slice the tomatoes in half lengthways.2 Combine the butter and oil in a large, deep pan over a medium-to-high heat. When the butter has melted, add the sliced courgettes and tomatoes and stir around for 2-3 minutes, until the courgettes are beginning to soften, but haven’t lost their bite.3 Next, add the curry paste and the sliced turkey. Stir around over the heat for another minute or so.4 Lastly, pour in the coconut milk, stir and bring just up to bubbling. Remove from the heat, add salt, if needed, and more curry paste if you want a hotter curry. Before serving, roughly chop the coriander leaves and throw them into the curry.As well as leftover turkey at Christmas, there’s nearly always too much stilton. Normally, I prefer St Agur when cooking with blue cheese, but this recipe is perfect for using up stilton or any other leftover cheese. Another thing that hangs around after Christmas are walnuts, which combine deliciously here, as does the dash of brandy.Serves 6-81kg skinless cooked turkey meat100g walnut pieces50g butter2 tbsp gram flour750ml whole milk½ small glass brandy180g stilton, or other blue cheese, crumbled 2 large garlic cloves, finely chopped50g hard goat’s cheese1 Preheat the oven to 170C/340F/gas mark 3½. Cut the turkey into pieces and arrange in a large, fairly shallow ovenproof dish. Scatter the walnuts among the turkey.2 Melt the butter in a fairly large saucepan, then remove from the heat, sift in the gram flour and stir in with a wooden spoon. Gradually stir in the milk and return to the heat. Bring up to bubbling, stirring all the time until the sauce is thick and smooth.3 Still stirring, let it simmer gently for another 2-3 minutes. Then stir in the brandy, the crumbled stilton and the chopped garlic. Stir until the cheese has melted. Remove from the heat and add salt and pepper, to taste.4 Pour the sauce over the turkey and walnuts. Coarsely grate the goat’s cheese and scatter it over the top. Cook in the centre of the oven for 35‑40 minutes, until it has turned a nice, golden brown.Here’s an escape from stodgy stuffing with sausage meat and breadcrumbs which will add real flavour and more character to the turkey and it’s cooking juices. You can vary the ingredients if you like. Keep the juice of the orange to add to the pan juices when roasting the turkey.Serves 4-620g dried mushrooms250-300g fresh brown cap mushrooms1-2 pointed red peppers (about 150g)250g leeks2 cox’s or other good desert apples50g butter2 tbsp olive oilPeel of 1 large orange, coarsely grated1 tbsp mild lime pickle475g tin whole peeled chestnuts - drained50g unsalted cashew nuts1 Put the dried mushrooms into a bowl, pour 150ml very hot water over them and leave to soak for at least an hour. Then slice the mushrooms fairly thinly. Slice the red peppers lengthways, discard the seeds and stem, then chop the flesh into small pieces. Top and tail the leeks and slice thinly across. Cut the apples in half, cut out core and pips and, without peeling, cut the flesh up into small pieces. Related: Josceline Dimbleby’s final meal | Last bites 2 Melt the butter with the oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat. Add the prepared fresh mushrooms, red peppers and leeks. Stir around until the ingredients have just softened. Then add the chopped apples, the grated orange peel and the soaked mushrooms, with their soaking water. 3 Increase the heat to high and bubble up for a minute or two, until the liquid has almost, but not quite, evaporated. Remove from the heat and stir in the lime pickle, cashew nuts and drained chestnuts. If necessary, season to taste with black pepper and sea salt. 4 When the stuffing is cold, spoon it into the neck end of the turkey, pull the neck skin over it and secure with a skewer if it needs one. Tip: For scraps of leftover turkey, spoon some mayonnaise into a bowl and stir in a small clove of garlic (pounded to a puree with a little sea salt), freshly ground black pepper and some chopped fresh coriander leaves, tarragon or other herbs. Add the turkey scraps to the mayonnaise and use the mixture to fill baked potatoes, sandwiches or wraps. 