 Nokia's leap into the arms of Microsoft's Windows Phone 7 (WP7) platform was confirmed by a tweet from Vic Gundotra, Google's vice-president of engineering: "Two turkeys do not make an eagle," he noted, a reference to the same quote by a former Nokia executive about an ill-fated tie-up between two other rivals in 2005. Clearly, Google was blowing a raspberry at the forthcoming decision.On paper, it looks like a simple win: the world's biggest handset maker joins the world's most profitable software maker, which dominates the PC platform. Why shouldn't it be an open goal on mobiles? The problem is nobody thinks of Nokia or Microsoft when buying a "smartphone" because that means "apps", for which everyone thinks of Apple (330,000 third-party apps) or, increasingly, Google's Android (200,000 third-party apps). Developers know they can make money on either platform if they have a hit like Angry Birds or some other app, and companies know apps can drive commerce to their business.By contrast, Windows Phone 7 offers fewer than 8,000 apps. And instead of courting developers, Nokia and Microsoft have undermined them: Microsoft by abandoning Windows Mobile a year ago, by unveiling Windows Phone 7; and Nokia abruptly announcing on Friday that its best-selling Symbian platform was in effect dead and would not be used in future smartphones. Symbian developers will probably retool to write for Apple or Android rather than Nokia. Without developers, you don't have apps, and without apps you don't have a reason for people to buy your platform over another. Open goal? More like closed doors."They're like the two people left at the end of the disco who think 'oh, you'll do', said one industry observer.True, Windows Phone 7 is miles better to use than Symbian; but it's less good than either of its two big rivals – while RIM entices teenagers with its free BlackBerry Messenger service, and enterprises with its encrypted email. Add to that the problem of recapturing the crucial US market – where Nokia is invisible – and you have a huge uphill struggle. Gundotra may have the last laugh.