We have been through a lot together, Christmas lunch and I. The first time I cooked it, when the torch was passed from mother to son, all I was trying to do was replicate somebody else's meal and so it had to be turkey for that was what was always served in my childhood home. No matter that I was no longer a child and no longer in that house. Christmas lunch might have been a geographically movable feast but it was not allowed to change unduly in transit.Ah, but we have matured haven't we. There have been a variety of stages, from turkey as default, through turkey-is-evil-let's-find-an-alternative to turkey-is-fine-you-just-have-to-find-a-good-one, which is more or less where we now reside. We wear our Bronzes likes medals, tell each other that really the turkey is a game bird and therefore far more noble than some mere chicken, far more deserving of our respect.Well, I really am an adult now and I finally feel past all that. When I think about turkey a Woody Allen gag comes to mind, the one that says sex is like pizza: even when it's bad it's great. The reverse is true of turkey. Even when it's good is still a disappointment. It's not even the inevitable dryness which, whatever anybody tells you, is bound to haunt your lunch table. It's that cloying sweetness. I think you can tell the true nature of a bird by the stock it produces, and turkey stock is not a thing of beauty. There's almost none of the big umami savouriness that you get with chicken, beef or veal.All that said even I know I am missing the point. If the Christmas lunch was merely a killer dinner party, this discussion would be irrelevant. We would just be arguing over who was the best, most imaginative cook. But it's not. It is a true feast, a festival dripping with ritual and carrying its own aesthetic code. Why do we favour turkeys? Because they have breasts big enough to make even Jordan swoon. Because at Christmas lunch our job is to feed as many people as possible and the turkey does a seriously good job of that. When I was a child my mother had a habit of taking in waifs and strays, a motley collection of people who for good or ill had contrived not to have families to go to and needed access to ours. One year 28 of us sat down to lunch, and short of a baby camel I cannot imagine what else was going to feed that number successfully other than a turkey. Sometimes – whisper it – matters of taste and gastronomy have to take a back seat to those of practicality.Let us, however, consider the alternatives. A huge beef rib is one. Nothing not to like there save that it has other cultural associations. You'll be serving Sunday lunch for Christmas. The only way round this – putting bacon rolls, bread sauce and stuffing around the beef to remind everyone why you're there – is just plain desperate.There is of course goose, and I yield to no one in my admiration for this queen among birds. The flesh is staggeringly rich and, properly roasted and seasoned, the oven-fresh crisped skin is an almost pornographic joy (or it is if, like me, most of your pleasures are taken orally). But goose has downsides. First, cooking them is not an unmitigated pleasure. For days after roasting a reasonable sized one I feel like I am carrying a patina of grease on my skin and don't even start me on how much work it takes to clean the kitchen. Yes, goose fat is a marvellous thing; I just don't want to wear it as a face mask. The other problem is one of size. Even a big goose will rarely feed more than eight. For some families that's enough. For many more it simply isn't.Which leads me to the one solution which actually does work for large families and which can banish memories of dry tired old turkey and that's the three bird roast, typically a pheasant stuffed inside a chicken stuffed inside a goose, with a little sausage meat stuffing to bind the various proteins together. We know a lot about those here on Word of Mouth, after Mr Hayward's noble effort last year to teach us how to make one. What we learned from this is that it's a project for the gastro nerd, ie someone with lots of time on their hands or the ability to ignore the demands of their family. Or perhaps with no family at all. That said you can buy them ready-made – Seldom Seen Farm do marvellous ones – and they freeze very nicely if you want to sort it in advance. They rarely take more than four hours to roast, they aren't dry and tasteless and you can carve it like a loaf of bread.Downsides? No wish bone. Oh, and a good one is nose-bleedingly expensive. You may have to sell a small child to pay for it, but if you have a spare one of those knocking around it really is a good idea. And if you don't, well, there's always the dear old turkey. It isn't great but it does have a certain utilitarian appeal. Or have I missed the point? What will you be cooking as the centrepiece of your Christmas lunch? And if it is turkey what will you be doing to it to avoid the most obvious pitfalls?