In an announcement that will make Tony Abbott feel a little less ridiculous for awarding a knighthood to Prince Philip, Australia has been invited to compete in this year’s Eurovision Song Contest. In other words, some lucky Australian(s) will soon head to Vienna to experience the thrill of a lifetime: being mocked by an international audience. What a privilege. It’s also great news for Israel, who can now proudly proclaim they’re no longer the least European country in Eurovision.Not only is Australia competing, we’re straight through to the grand final. Sorry, genuine European countries, you’re going to have to earn your place. Focusing on the competition at hand, there are a few things to consider before we’re ready to go balls-deep in the Eurovision experience.Many Australians watch the contest ironically so are they ready for us to be mocked by other countries? Quick, someone order a shipment of thick skin.We can’t vote for ourselves, so who do we get behind? As we often like to tell ourselves, Australia is a multicultural society, so our votes are sure to be split. Or will we form a voting bloc with the mother country? Not if they keep sending people like Engelbert Humperdinck.Apparently Australia’s inclusion is a “one-off”, unless of course we happen to win the competition. If we want to be a permanent inclusion, then all we need to do is win every year after that ad infinitum. I think we can do it but we’re going to need our best talent to pull this off, so allow me to present some suggestions of who is best qualified to represent/embarrass us. As a fan of Eurovision, take it as a given that I know little or nothing about popular music. Hence my suggestions.Mark “Jacko” Jackson: Many countries try to capitalise on their unique cultural heritage to differentiate themselves. Turkey has the whirling Dervishes, Spain has flamenco, Australia has bogans. It’s been 30 years since former AFL star Mark ‘Jacko’ Jackson released I’m an Individual. Time for a comeback?Lorde: As a New Zealander, it’s her patriotic duty to represent Australia.Daryl Somers: Part of Eurovision’s appeal is the performers who don’t quite realise how kitsch or daggy they appear to others. Enter Daryl.Tina Arena: Australian born, of Italian descent, with a successful recording career in France to boot? Douze points!Maria Venuti: She’s got the Eurovision-style outfits. She’s got the voice. She’s got my vote.John Farnham: This might be Farnham’s last chance to crack the international market. And if Russia’s 2012 entry is anything to go by, he’s certainly not too old for it. Joel Madden: When people think of Australian music, they think of Joel Madden. He’s already won a Logie for “Most Popular New Male Talent”, the only logical next step for this Yank is to represent the country which overpays him.Stephen Bradbury: You know how this joke works. Everyone falls down, he wins.Whoever it is, I’ll be rooting for them. And with any luck, they’ll let us into Junior Eurovision too. My money’s on Bob Irwin.