Happy Thanksgiving! Happy Thanksgiving, that is, whatever that means to you. Which, rather predictably, is 'rather a lot' if you're American, home or abroad, and 'verging on bugger all' if you're not.But as someone who's never paid any notice of it at all, but who finds herself suddenly living in a country that celebrates the pants off it, I've become rather obsessed with it. It is, it seems, now mainly a holiday that celebrates family and food. And in absence of the family I miss, who are 5,000 miles away, I'm concentrating very hard on the food. And there's a lot of that. And some of it is pleasantly weird, as foodstuffs go. I can't wait.No fan of gobbling birds, I first searched food TV and recipe books, magazines and web for some other acceptable alternative that it might be okay to base the meal around. The most bizzarely attractive was Dr Pepper Ham (one ham, one litre of fizzy pop, seasoning, cook) which I'm totally making as soon as I know enough people to justify making it. There was also Beer-Butt Chicken (and you have to check out the picture on that blog, it's like they're all just hanging out in an oven, sitting on their beer cans), but perhaps that's more of a Christmas thing. I've also seen someone recommend cowboy - and hunter - favourite Sonofabitch Stew, whose recipe appears to basically be "Turn a deer inside out. Take every possible innard of deer; cube; boil. Oh, then add some chilli sauce. Eat." Which is slightly more neanderthal than I like my menu.Really though, I learnt, it can't be anything but turkey (unless you're vegetarian, of course, but the mainstream recipe guides try not to focus too hard on 'meatfree' alternatives). It's often called Turkey Day, in fact. Some people object that that takes away from the solemn tradition of the day (then do it anyway). Stuffed and roasted, cooked to perfection and placed in the middle of the table with ceremony, turkey is as turkey does. Like I'm traditionally used to at Christmas, then, but earlier.I simply haven't the capacity to deep fry a turkey, but if you happen to fancy it, just to get in the spirit of things, there are plenty of How To  guides available.And the modern dilemma seems to be 'To brine or not to brine?' (answer: do you have a small tin bath big enough for a 20lb bird completely immersed in salty water and a fridge bid enough to hold same? Well, there you have it then).But most exciting are the old and new variations on stuffings, sauces and sides - particular to region, ethnicity, status and family, there seem to be almost more variations on side dishes and sauces than there are dining tables in this country. From bread sauce, to turkey gravy, muffin stuffing (don't google that term, by the way, you'll regret it), or oyster sauce - which appears to be another Southern variation - there seems to be no end to 'fixin's' for your bird.Also common to the table seems to be some kind of green bean casserole that 'traditionally' seems to involve a can of beans, a can of condensed mushroom soup and a can of (a particular brand of) fried onions. There are a billion variations on that one too, though.Another (Southern?) favourite, as far as I can tell; sweet potatoes, mashed, cubed or roasted, (that's all well and good, yes) ... with marshmallows melted on top. No, really. To eat, I mean. Martha Stewart's slightly more classy version of twice baked potatoes, which still involves sweet potato, sour cream and 40 large marshmallows, but at least doesn't look as unpalatable as this version of sweet potato and marshmallow 'thing' - that has to be the correct name for it, I can't think of anything more fitting. And I'm making it come the weekend, I'll let you know how it goes. The American palate's apparent obsession for sweet stuff is a topic I'll move on to at length another time - and mainly that's just me being stubborn and English and savoury: but Thanksgiving has given a whole new rise to a whole bunch of vegetable + sugar + some other random ingredient style recipes flying around the internet and the food channels. I am determined to try at least some of them.I might stop short of a jello salad however. Jello. As in wobbly, fruit-flavoured, children's parties. Yes, that's the stuff.Moulded jelly is one thing, and always has its place (with ice cream, at 4-year-old birthday parties; with vodka in, at unwise student fresher's week parties), but I am not sure my curiosity rises to some of the more extreme version, particularly some of the more savoury ones. Like ones including lime jelly, horseradish, pineapple and cottage cheese. Seriously, how wrong is that? Let me count the ways. No, I just can't, I'll be here all day.But it's that kind of thing which seems to change from family to family, so you'll find variations on a recipe 45 different ways, each called by the blogger's grandmother's name for it, or whatever the children cruelly and quietly nicknamed it behind her back.Then, how much can you ever fully engage in the traditions of a new country, particular when, such as this, it's so intricately tied into family tradition. These recipes wouldn't sound weird to me if I had encountered them from an early age, of course - that's the point, When they're not your traditions - when they don't belong to your family or your childhood home or your scratched old kitchen table - then of course they might seem odd. Which is why I want to try all of them. Maybe one at a time, though. And slowly. In the meantime, I will be attending a Thanksgiving meal which, luckily for everyone else eating, someone other than me will be cooking. So they can give thanks for that.But at the weekend, I'm definitely trying out some of the crazier edges of Thanksgiving when the ingredients all suddenly hit the special offer bins. First, though, Pumpkin Pie (with pecan and bourbon) because it just sounds so magnificently American, with the crazy insistence of mixing vegetable and nuts and pastry and sugar making it surely marvellous. And also it has bourbon, so if it all goes wrong, at least I have most of a bottle of cooking-whiskey left over to console me. By the looks of this site, the meal was traditionally less sugar-laden in the past, concentrating on seafood and wild fowl surrounded by sensible things such as pumpkin, peas and lettuce. Then again, the centrepiece could be anything from swan to seal and I don't much fancy either of those, so marshmallow here we come. Let me know of any downright odd recipes I haven't stumbled across, so I can test them out and tell us if you're celebrating, at home or away, and what are you cooking?