A new diplomatic row has broken out between Israel and Turkey after the Turkish ambassador appeared to be publicly humiliated by Israeli government officials.The countries have in the past had close relations, and even military co-operation, but since the war in Gaza last year their relationship has been strained. The latest dispute came when Israel summoned the Turkish ambassador, Ahmet Çelikkol, to complain about a Turkish television drama that depicted Israeli security forces kidnapping children and shooting elderly men.Last night the ambassador was called to the Knesset office of the Israeli deputy foreign minister, Danny Ayalon. With television cameras filming, Çelikkol was seated on a low sofa before the Israeli officials who sat on higher, upright chairs. There was no handshake or refreshments, only an Israeli flag on the table between them.Ayalon turned to the Israeli television journalists and photographers and said in Hebrew: "The important thing is that people see that he's low and we're high and that there is one flag here." When journalists asked Ayalon to shake hands with the ambassador, he said: "No. That's the point." Turkey summoned the Israeli ambassador today to express its "unease" over the incident.The disagreement over the television show is the latest in a series of disputes between the countries. The Turkish prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, has been particularly critical of Israel's three-week war in Gaza a year ago, in which 13 Israelis and nearly 1,400 Palestinians were killed.The Israeli prime minister at the time, Ehud Olmert, met Erdogan in Ankara for talks in December 2008 and reportedly gave no notice of the imminent war. When the Israeli bombing began days later the Turkish government was left embarrassed and Erdogan was publicly very critical of the Israeli operation.Previous close relations, in which Turkey acted as a mediator in peace talks between Israel and Syria, quickly broke down. Erdogan walked off the stage at the World Economic Forum in Davos a year ago after an angry exchange over Gaza with the Israeli president Shimon Peres.Erdogan told a news conference in Ankara last night: "We can never remain silent in the face of Israel's attitude … it has disproportionate power and it is using that at will, while refusing to abide by UN resolutions."In Israel there was some criticism over the government's tough attitude towards the Turks, but there was also praise from some commentators in the press.Israel's foreign ministry defended its actions, and said the Turks should be the last to preach morality. Ayalon told Army Radio: "It's the Turks who need to apologise."The latest row is likely to make life awkward for Israel's defence minister, Ehud Barak, who is scheduled to visit Turkey on Sunday, a trip that was intended to repair ties between the countries.