Relations between Turkey and Israel, once an axis of stability in the Middle East, will never be the same again, warned Turkish president Abdullah Gül, after this week's killing of nine Turkish nationals in the assault on the Gaza aid flotilla. It is tempting to agree. Yesterday, at the end of a week of stormy rhetoric triggered by the attack, and with crowds in the streets of Istanbul again vowing vengeance, Turkey was still rattling its sword. Two claims against Israel through the international courts were reportedly being mulled in Ankara. Meanwhile Turkey's deputy prime minister said that economic and military ties with Israel would now be cut to a minimum, though he was careful to insist that existing defence contracts, some of which are very large, would be honoured.The week's events have accelerated a falling-out between Turkey and Israel that has been building over Gaza for at least two years. On both sides this is partly about domestic politics and partly about the substance of the issue itself. But the row bolsters wider speculation that Turkey is in the process of weakening the west-facing, secular stance it has held since the era of Kemal Atatürk and is beginning to redefine itself more as an eastern and Muslim nation. Given Turkey's pivotal role not just in the Middle East but in the diplomacy of nuclear anti-proliferation, in relations with Russia, in the evolution of the European Union and in world energy supply, this is a speculation full of possibilities, some of them threatening.It is true that Turkey's international position can no longer be taken for granted as it was when Kemalist diplomats and military leaders shaped Turkey unchallenged. But this is not something to fear. Those days have gone, though there is substantial continuity, which is sometimes overlooked in more the alarmist western commentary emphasising that Turkey is being "lost". Turkey's response to the Gaza blockade is indicative of the more autonomous and distinctive nation that elected Recep Tayyip Erdogan's moderate Islamist AKP government in 2003 and for which he continues to speak. The AKP sees Turkey as neither western nor eastern but as central to its own region, a policy sometimes dubbed neo-Ottoman, hence the engagement with states such as Iran and Syria and with movements including Hamas.The truth is that, internally and externally, Turkey is in flux. Democracy and human rights are not fully consolidated, though great strides have been made. Internationally, Turkey has its own priorities, which it pursues with some success. This is both right and realistic. Turkey is certainly changing. It has many cards in its hand. But the rest of the world should work with those changes and not fear them.