This has been a dizzying and enormously promising week for relations between the United States and Turkey. The Obama administration has recognised Turkey as a key ally, and apparently wants to make it a strategic partner in the Middle East.The sudden new momentum in this vital but troubled relationship became clear during secretary of state Hillary Clinton's recent visit to Ankara. After meeting with Turkish leaders, Clinton spoke fulsomely of the two countries' shared commitment to "democracy, a secular constitution, respect for religious freedom, belief in free markets and a sense of global responsibility". Then she made an announcement few had expected. President Obama, she said, will visit Turkey soon, probably next month. It will be the first Muslim country he has visited since taking office. Clinton said the trip would be "a symbol of the value we place on our friendship with Turkey". Later she told a television interviewer, "We support the regional and global leadership role Turkey plays in major issues." Barely 48 hours after after Clinton left Ankara, the president of Turkey, Abdullah Gul, flew to Iran. It is likely that he was carrying a message from the US to Iranian leaders. This is the first substantial sign that the Obama administration may be making a serious effort to reach out to Iran. No intermediary is as well placed to guide these enemies away from confrontation as Turkey. In recent years, Turkey has assumed the role of regional peacemaker, serving as a go-between for countries that want better relations but are not ready for direct talks, like Israel and Syria. The Obama administration, desperate for new ideas as it faces intensifying crises in the region, has decided to take advantage of Turkey's unique position. That means the US must decisively strengthen US-Turkish relations. Obama's forthcoming visit is aimed at doing just that.Helping to jump-start negotiations with Iran is only part of what the US is asking Turkey to do. The American withdrawal from Iraq is about to begin, and Pentagon planners want to bring many troops out through Turkey. This would probably require approval from the Turkish Parliament. The last time Turkey's Parliament was asked to vote on supporting US operations in Iraq was in 2003, when the US asked for permission to carry out part of its invasion by sending troops through Turkey. The Turks refused, setting off a cycle of recriminations.Neither side has forgotten that episode, but the political landscape in Washington has now changed dramatically. In 2003, Barack Obama had the same view of the looming Iraq war that most Turks had: it's a bad idea. So while the Bush administration considered Turkey an unreliable ally, the Obama team may see it as a country that, at least on matters related to Iraq, has been wiser than the US.This is not all the Americans want. They are also asking Turkey to contribute more troops and aid to the US mission in Afghanistan, and to allow the US to expand the ways it uses the sprawling military base at Incirlik on Turkey's Mediterranean coast. Now that the US is no longer able to supply troops in Afghanistan and Iraq from the base it had been using in Kyrgyzstan, the one at Incirlik has become more vital than ever. It is officially a Turkish base at which US troops and aircraft are based, so if the Americans want to use it in new ways, a friendly relationship with Turkey would be essential. Public opinion surveys suggest that pro-American feeling in Turkey dropped precipitously during the Bush years. Still, Turkey is a thriving (though not untroubled) democracy, and its people share fundamental values with Americans. They are natural allies. One potential problem in this relationship, though, is the annual attempt by Armenian-Americans to have the US Congress declare that the slaughter of Armenians in what is now Turkey 93 years ago constituted genocide. President Obama pledged during his campaign to support such a resolution. If it passes and Obama signs it, the ensuing surge of anti-American feeling in Turkey would make it difficult for Turkish leaders to cooperate with the US on more substantial matters. Obama will have to find a way out of this trap. A breakthrough in relations between Turkey and Armenia in the coming weeks, which seems at least possible, may give him a way to do so. The Turkish foreign minister, Ali Babacan, said the new warmth in Turkish-American relations marked the dawn of a "new era", and asserted that Turkey is "ready to cooperate" with the US. "The main message of Clinton's visit," he said, "was that there would be close consultations on all issues from now on". That would mark a sharp break with the past. Turkey knows the Middle East well, is respected by almost every government and faction in the region and can give the US much good advice. President Obama should go there next month ready to hear it – and act upon it.