There will probably be less turkey on the table this Christmas. October, which is typically the month with the greatest turkey production (about 1 in 3 Christmas turkeys is frozen) has continued the trend of falling British production.Turkey production was down 10% in October this year compared to October 2011 but you may be surprised by the raw numbers: 25 thousand tonnes of turkey carcase were produced in the UK in October 2012. That's equivalent in weight to 154 jumbo jets. Turkey production has almost halved since 1995 while the UK population has increased by almost 9%. There are likely to be several factors behind this trend. According to a survey by the Food Standards Agency, 3% of respondents said they were 'completely vegetarian' in 2009, compared to 2% in 2008. It is unlikely that price has played a large role in changing meat appetites. According to the Office for National Statistics (ONS) poultry prices have increased by just 40% over the past 25 years, compared to an overall price rise of around 140%.Fresh turkey steaks are one of the items on the shopping list used to calculate inflation. Since 1987 however the importance of this item has dropped, from having a weight of 7 parts per thousand to 4.More important however is the changing demand for meat. While turkey may have become far less popular since the 90s, production of 'broilers' (chickens) has increased steadily, from 1,017,000 tonnes of carcasses in 2004 to 1,298,000 tonnes in 2011. Broilers are reared for their meat rather than eggs and so tend to live in a large shed rather than in cages. This means that as chicks they have space but as they grow they rarely have the space they need before they are slaughtered at around 40 days. According to a House of Commons briefing in June 2012 "it is not really feasible for broiler hens in crowded sheds to receive veterinary attention." What's more, this data these high production numbers don't include the fact that the UK only exports around 17% of the poultry it produces, and imports 29% of what it produces to satisfy demand. Turkey in ten numbers:• 1.5-1.8 metres: average wingspan of a turkey• 34%: the amount of turkey meat in the now spurned turkey twizzler • 10 years: average lifespan for a natural turkey• 20 eggs, 1 incubator, 1 bedroom: starting point for renowned turkey producer Bernard Matthews• 7,000-10,000: Number of people thought to be employed by the UK turkey sector. • 100: number of turkeys slaughtered every minute by the UK's biggest turkey producer at peak Christmas period• 1m2: Minimum floor area recommended for male turkeys according to government regulation• £6: price of a 2-2.5kg Tesco British basted turkey• 16th Century: Date turkey was first brought to the UK from North America• 48 hours: Ideal time to eat turkey leftovers according to the NHSHere are the figures on annual poultry production, while full data including slaughters, imports and exports are available through the link below.*Denotes a 5 week month in a 53 week statistical yearSource: DEFRA• DATA: download the full spreadsheetSOURCE: DEFRA• SOURCE• Facts are Sacred: the power of data (on Kindle)Data journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian• Search the world's government data with our gateway• Search the world's global development data with our gateway• Flickr Please post your visualisations and mash-ups on our Flickr group• Contact us at data@guardian.co.uk• Get the A-Z of data• More at the Datastore directory• Follow us on Twitter• Like us on Facebook