Barack Obama will make Turkey – traditionally seen as the bridge between east and west – one of the first foreign visits of his presidency, the US secretary of state Hillary Clinton said today.The trip would mark an improvement in the relationship between two Nato allies that has been strained by the invasion of Iraq and is being seen as the president's first move in acting on his pledge to repair the image of the US in the Muslim world."We share a commitment to democracy, a secular constitution, respect for religious freedom and belief and in free market and a sense of global responsibility," Clinton said at a news conference with the Turkish foreign minister, Ali Babacan, in the capital, Ankara – the last stop in her week-long tour of five countries.Clinton said Obama intended to make his own visit in the "next month or so" in "reflection of the value we place on our friendship with Turkey".The US wants advice on the safest, most effective way for its forces to withdraw from Iraq; Turkey has already agreed to serve as an exit route for American troops. "We have to discuss what will pass, what kind of equipment," Babacan said. "We are ready to co-operate." Turkey would be the sixth foreign stop of Obama's presidency, after Canada, Britain, France, Germany and the Czech Republic.Obama swept to power promising to repair America's reputation worldwide. One element of that effort would be a speech delivered in a Muslim capital. In his inaugural address he said, "To the Muslim world, we seek a new way forward, based on mutual interest and mutual respect."Asked whether Turkey would be the venue for that speech, Clinton said: "No, we are just at the beginning of the planning. This decision was reached late yesterday in Washington. We don't even have the dates decided yet."Turkey is seen in Washington as a key ally in blocking Iran's nuclear ambitions and turning round the war in Afghanistan. The southern Incirlik air base has been used for transfer of US troops and equipment to Iraq and to Afghanistan.Clinton also said talks were underway between two US representatives and Syrian officials in Damascus. The Obama administration's decision to send Jeffrey Feltman, the top State Department envoy on the Middle East, and Daniel Shapiro to Syria was the most significant sign yet that it is ready to improve relations with the Syrian government after years of tension."We are just at the beginning of exploring the issues that we must discuss between us," Clinton said. "We have not decided on any next steps." Babacan said Turkey was willing to host more indirect talks between Syria and Israel."There have been four rounds of talks between Syria and Israel and we had suspended our mediation during Gaza war, but whenever Syria and Israel are ready and if they ask we can get involved in the process again," Babacan said.