With high-volume rapids fed by the snow melt from the Black Sea mountains, this river in north-east Turkey is one of the world's best white-water rivers. Alternatif Outdoor offers five-day guided rafting expeditions which start and finish in Erzurum and take in spectacular canyons, narrow valleys, ruined castles and the class-five rapids of the Ispir gorge. No rafting experience is required, you just need to be reasonably fit and able to swim.00 90 252 417 27 20, alternatifoutdoor.com. From €750, including camping accommodation, all meals and equipment. Flights extra.Explore the deep canyons and mesas of Cappadocia by bike with Kirkit Voyage. With camping accommodation en route, the seven-night trip takes in the Dereyamanli valley, with its multiple "fairy chimneys" (rock formations), the rocky outcrop of Uçhisar – the highest peak in the region – and the ancient ruins of Mount Golgoli.+212 518 2282, kirkit.com. From €450, including camping, luggage transfers, all meals and bike hire. Flights extra.Travel the length of the country, from Istanbul to Erzurum, by sleeper train. The 24-hour journey is offered as part of a six-night guided tour of the Georgian valleys of north-east Turkey, launched by travel writer Margaret Scully. Visit the tea gardens of Rize, bake bread with the women of Uzundere, explore cliff-hanging Sümela monastery and visit Tortum waterfall.020-3411 3359, margaretscully.com. From €895, including accommodation (one night on sleeper train), most meals and transfers. Flights extra.The best way to explore Turkey's unspoilt south coast is by traditional wooden gulet. Anatolian Sky offers a seven-night trip, from Fethiye to Marmaris, including visits to Cleopatra's bay, the ruins of Tersane island and the mud baths of Dalyan.0844 875 7681, anatoliansky.co.uk. From £599, including accommodation, all meals and transfers. Flights extra.Lake Van in eastern Anatolia is a holy grail for walkers. It is surrounded by snow-clad mountains crisscrossed with high passes, where you're likely to encounter Kurdish herders. Round off your day with a swim in the lake or a boat trip to Akdamar island, home to a 10th-century Armenian church. Hotel Asur (0432 216 8792), Van city, has doubles from £20pn, room only.