 John Tiffany, associate director at the National Theatre of Scotland, said that he had feared that Black Watch – which took the Edinburgh festival by storm in 2006, and has been almost continually on the road since – was going to be a "turkey"."When we were in rehearsals, we were really worried: we thought we had created the National Theatre of Scotland's first turkey," he said of the show, which went on to win four Olivier awards in 2009. "I'm not lying: we were shitting ourselves. Then we had the first preview, and we realised that it was going to become the audience's: it became a dialogue between the audience and those soldiers."Tiffany said that he had at first doubted whether the production of Gregory Burke's play about the Scottish regiment ought to be revived. "It came out of a particular time, when the Iraq war was ongoing and there was a mood in the British public to protest against what Tony Blair had done," he said. "But when you look back at the script you realise it is equally about Afghanistan, about every war."The show is embarking on a new tour in Scotland and to London this autumn.Addressing young directors at the Edinburgh festival fringe, Tiffany urged them to "radicalise and revolutionise" and use any means possible to attract attention to their work [see footnote].Tiffany, speaking before the National Theatre of Scotland's latest production, Caledonia by Alistair Beaton, opens at the Edinburgh festival on Saturday, said that the Olympic and Commonwealth games were going to "absorb funding and energy from the theatre" but added: "There is an opportunity from the cuts to revolutionise what theatre is so that it is not something people think they should see but something people have to see."Tiffany said that he lived by a number of rules. "No space should be safe from theatre," he said. "And 'Thou shalt not bore' is a commandment that should be at the centre of our ambitions."He likes actors who are not afraid to use their bodies: "I tell actors, 'I will give you physios, and buy you a yoga mat, but you have to agree not to go out and get pissed.' There are some actors who see a show as something to do before going out. There is a certain generation of actors who warm up before a show with 20 Marlboros."On the first day of rehearsals, he said, "we used to show the actors the set, measure their inside leg, read through the play and go to the pub. Now we do two hours of circuit training and get them to do a Sugababes dance."• This article was amended on 31 August 2010 to add the following footnote: John Tiffany was speaking at Masterclass, a free event for young theatre practitioners.