Paul Kelly is a turkey man through and through. He's been breeding free range Kelly Bronze turkeys in Essex since he was six years old, so has clocked up 44 years of turkey farming. His father was a turkey farmer before him; his children will, he hopes, become turkey farmers. Christmas day without turkey in the Kelly household is unthinkable.Now bring on the veggie roast. For thousands of stressed Christmas cooks catering for family members with a variety of demands, this vegetarian alternative is an easy fix that complements the rest of Christmas dinner. And there's more choice than ever, as producers compete for the centrepiece with substitute meat products and different takes on the traditional nut roast. But which of them are worthy of that place? Paul seemed the toughest judge we could think of to put them to the test. "Nut roasts," he said. "What are they, stuffing?" Perfect.This looked like wild and wonderful muesli when raw and did not change its appearance once cooked. The flavour was excellent, the pecan nuts shone out and it had a really nice red wine jus to pour over. This, I could eat day in and day out. It was the only one that had me going back for more.5/5A Wellington-type roast that looked great raw and even better cooked, the taste was excellent and the goat's cheese filling complemented the apricot and butternut squash. The whole eating experience was a pleasure. It did need a bit more of a flavour kick, but all in all it was very nice.4/5This looked really nice and the texture and mouth appeal were great. But the taste was disappointing. If you like red pepper then you will love this, as it was the overriding flavour.3/5The packaging and the raw product looked great. Lovely little container to bake the mix, and once cooked it looked like the perfect nut roast. The nutty flavour and texture was very evident but that was about it. It just seemed like a classic "add water and cook" stuffing to me.2/5This looked cheap and nasty to say the least, and that put me off right away. Then the taste left me thanking God I wouldn't have to eat it again! The first hit was salt, followed by a nasty aftertaste of something unknowable.1/5It achieved 1 on the basis it was presumably safe to eat and had some nutritional value.