I am in Patagonia, sitting in the lobby of one of the finest hotels in all of South America. It is perfectly located in the Andean foothills on a green lawn surrounded by lakes and glorious snow-capped mountains, and today the skies are bright blue. Inside, the old wooden beams radiate warmth and opulence, and waiters in white shirts and mustard-coloured waistcoats attend to one's every need.A man in his late 30s and two slightly younger women walk through the lobby and are seated for lunch in the centre of the adjacent panoramic sun-room. They never notice me – they are too self-absorbed. Their dress is typically Argentinian – neat, but not stylish. He and one woman exchange glances through their dark sunglasses, while the other (likely his sister) looks on.White wine is poured, and glistens in the sunlight. They munch on gourmet delicacies from the salad bar … rarely smiling, often silent. At one point, there is definitely a more energetic exchange between the siblings – a little anger perhaps. At others, the sister picks up her smartphone and texts.The sunlight beams through from the spectacular landscape outside – but it generates little warmth. Eventually, they raise their glasses and have some sort of toast. However, there's clearly not much happiness here – not much joy at the wonder of it all, both inside and out.It's over, and he counts out a thick wad of peso notes to settle the bill. Then the couple get up and as they stroll outside to the viewing terrace, he kisses her quickly on the cheek. The sister, who hadn't quite finished eating, takes another gulp of wine and then gathers up her belongings and hurriedly follows. Where are they going? As a civilisation, where are we going if we don't relish the aesthetic value of such experiences?Meanwhile, Argentine annual inflation is at 30%, and the US dollar has official and illegal "blue" rates, both of which have risen 50% in the past year. Argentinians remember very clearly the dreadful economic crash in 2001 and in particular the television images of people taking food out of trash cans.Today in Buenos Aires the middle classes are queueing at the banks to withdraw their funds, but there's no sense of crisis at this hotel.Every week the Guardian Weekly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com