The largest and heaviest dinosaur that ever lived was, until recently, thought to be the titanosaurian Argentinosaurus, a herbivorous sauropod that lived around 100-90 million years ago in the middle of the Cretaceous period. It is estimated to have grown up to 35 metres long and weighed as much as 80 tonnes.However, in 2006, the discovery of the giant neck, back and tail bones of a new sauropod, Puertasaurus reuili, was announced in Argentina, and it has been speculated that this dinosaur may have extended more than 35 metres in length and weighed close to 100 tonnes.Of course, there has to be an upper limit to what body size can be supported on land by four legs, however big. Another limiting factor is the ability to consume enough plant material to sustain such a huge body, although sauropods' long necks and ability to swallow large amounts of plant food (which was digested in the large gut) without chewing would have allowed them to feed very quickly from a wide area without needing to move their body. (The fact there was an abundance of food available at this time was also critical.)Another evolutionary advantage of their sheer size is that adult sauropods, like elephants today, would not have been targeted by predators because they were just too big to feed on. In comparison, the largest ever carnivores were probably Giganotosaurus (measuring up to 13.2 metres long) and Spinosaurus (up to 18 metres) - significantly smaller than the largest herbivores of this time.Taller and longer but slimmer than T. rex, Giganotosaurus lived in the middle of the Cretaceous period in the southern hemisphere; it was first discovered by an amateur fossil hunter in Patagonia, southern Argentina, in 1993. A second, larger specimen was found in the same area; its skull may have been the largest ever discovered on a theropod dinosaur at almost 2 metres. It has also been estimated that this bipedal predator may have been able to run at speeds of up to 31mph.A single, cervical vertebra of about 75cm was discovered on the Isle of Wight and described in 2004. Unofficially known as Angloposeidon, it is thought to belong to the brachiosaurid family which also includes Brachiosaurus, the dinosaur thought for most of the last century to be the largest of all. Estimated to have come from a dinosaur of around 20 metres in length, this may be the biggest dinosaur ever found in Europe. The specimen is on display at Dinosaur Isle on the Isle of Wight (dinosaurisle.com).