The Argentine football establishment is experiencing one of its biggest ever schisms and breaking new ground in the global business of 21st-century sport with a deal between the local FA and the government to ensure that all domestic top flight matches can be broadcast for free by any national television channel wishing to do so.The deal puts an end to 18 years of exclusive broadcast rights by Televisión Satelital Codificada (TSC) and is expected to cost the administration £94.5m a year. The FA and the government say the deal is necessary to end TSC's monopoly over local football broadcasts. The events that resulted in the deal were unleashed in early August when the footballers' union filed complaints requesting the suspension of all teams with overdue salary payments. The total debt claimed by the union is around £6.4m, a third of which corresponds to top division teams – paltry sums by international and domestic football standards. The complaints forced a delay to the start of the season, with opening day being moved from 14 August to 21 August - an announcement that led to rioting in Buenos Aires.Overdue salaries are part of Argentine footballing lore. Local football officials are mostly terrible at administrating the accounts of their clubs, which are non-profits run by members – much like Real Madrid and Barcelona. Officials are rarely made accountable for mismanagement by either the FA, the clubs themselves or courts.All teams would have disappeared long-ago if they had been made to comply to the financial regulations used on business firms. This applies even to well-managed institutions like Boca, Vélez, Lanús and Estudiantes, who may be in the black now but have spent their share of time in the red as well. Desperate to obtain cash to cancel their debts, club officials did what they almost always do: beg help from Julio Grondona, who has chaired the FA as if it were a one-man-show since his election in 1979. Grondona is one of most important men in world football. He is both Fifa's senior vice-president and that head of its finance committee – a striking job given his record stewarding Argentine football financially over the past 30 years. It is in part because of his power in the international scene that Fifa, usually averse to seeing governments mingle in its business, has not complained about the Argentine administration's intervention in the new television deal.Once the club directors requested his help, Grondona in turn did what he has done for years: go to TSC and ask for cash advancements over future contracts – money he would subsequently distribute among clubs. TSC offered a £7.08m advance, but the clubs rejected the offer, saying they wanted a "better and more permanent solution", and demanded twice the total £42.63m the FA was entitled to annually over the upcoming six years.Grondona simultaneously sought a second alternative to improve the clubs' finances by asking the government to condone the clubs' tax debts – a total of £14.64m. This was when the government leaped at the opportunity to push its own agenda.TSC has held exclusive rights over FA organised football since 1991, and in 2007 Grondona extended the contract until 2014. TSC has two shareholders: Argentina's leading sports channel, TyC, and Grupo Clarín, the largest media group in the country, who own cable television operators, free-to-air broadcasters, radios, newspapers and internet providers. Before 1991, TyC had been the major holder of domestic football television rights. Negotiations with TSC were always managed personally by Grondona and far from the public eye. "Monopoly" has been a term tirelessly used to describe TSC's stronghold on the game, and the label hardly seems exaggerated. The firm regularly intervened in regular programming to fit the need of TV ratings.The administration has used this idea of a monopoly in its drive against TSC and says "everybody has a right to watch football". One can only wonder why such a right has never been included in the Human Rights charter.The truth is that Clarín and the two consecutive Kirchner administrations have always had a complicated relationship, which is getting sourer by the day. The government accuses the media group of opposing its policies and is seeking a way to curtail its power. Snatching football from it is a major step in this direction.