Stanley Harbour was a calm, beautiful sight ­this morning on my short drive to the office. But the quietness of the steel-grey water didn't reflect my fury at Argentina's latest attempt to upset life on the Falkland islands.News of an Argentinian decree intended to block shipping movements between the islands and South America has caused consternation. The oil rig Ocean Guardian will soon begin drilling in our waters, and our economy relies on the sale of fishing licences and visits from cruise-ship vessels. Hosts of happy tourists are regularly offloaded on to the streets of Stanley, where they will take tours to farms and penguin rookeries and spend their ­dollars in our gift shops.The Falklands are also a ­trading partner with Chile – in our main supermarket, ­Chilean milk packets and wines sit on shelves near British baked beans. Islanders have spent years building up a relationship with this benign neighbour and we don't want it disrupted by what amounts to a blockade.But we are hardly surprised by the news. In truth the ­islanders' mood is one of long-suffering frustration over ­Argentina's continued attempts to upset our economy. Recently, it ­told international fishing companies that if they fished in Falklands waters they would not be welcome in Argentinian waters, and there have been accounts of rude treatment at international conferences on every subject from agriculture to oil and minerals.The situation isn't new, and an evening at my local, the Rose Bar, that didn't include at least one conversation on the subject would be unusual. Many islanders would consider life in the Falklands pretty much perfect if it weren't for this hanging over us all. "What gets to me is never knowing what they're going to come up with from one day to the next," my friend Sarah says.We are all still happy for the drilling to go ahead (provocative as Argentina seems to find it). After all, a strengthened economy would help us stand up to the bully, and islanders are also keen to pay Britain for defence.Are we worried about ­another invasion? It seems highly unlikely, but to quote my dad, "You can't really trust an Argentine government. They're unpredictable. Right now they are so bloody hardline that it's a bit like the years ­before the '82 war."