The Argentine conscript border guards were as charmless a bunch of fellows as you'd expect to find dispatched to a deserted road on top of a freezing cold mountain. I imagine they are still there, which makes me feel better.Shortly, we were plunging down again, every 100-metre drop bringing air more syrupy and rich; every degree of temperature raised bringing back the real prospect that one day I might be able to straighten my fingers again. I was breathing extra gulps just for the fun of it.We pulled over at a cafe for coffee. Having coffee in Argentina after being in Chile should be the first thing one does, like the Pope kissing the ground at the foot of the aircraft steps. For coffee in Chile means a sachet of Nescafe and tepid water producing a lumpy gloop of extraordinary vileness. Great dogs, rubbish coffee. In Argentina, it involves a loving process of alchemy with freshly crushed beans and warmed milk and an end product of such ambrosial ecstasy that you instinctively close your eyes as it slides down your throat and sigh loudly. As in San Pedro de Atacama, things felt like a Paramount set. Gauchos tethered their horses to the hitching post and walked past us, ponchos and all, raising a finger to the rim of their cowboy hats, Cuban heels click-clacking on the ancient wood floor as hard as granite. Chevy and Dodge pickups circa 1930 filled up at the single pump, its dials whirring round.We spent the next few days riding through north-west Argentina. First down intestinal tracts of roads – the kind of roads that fill bikers' winter dreams – that wound their way around bald, crumpled hills that changed colour at every bend – green, pink, yellow, even aquamarine – like your TV being on the blink. Then along arid valleys of sandstone, with fluted columns like giant organ pipes and eroded rocks forming fantastical sculptures. We rode along the Valley of the Butterflies, millions of them forming fluttering clouds that we passed through, like riding in a kaleidoscope. Down from the mountains, we hit the plains. Mile after mile of vineyards, then brilliant yellow tobacco crops, their leaves drying on the walls of the pueblos we passed through, each with a whitewashed church and a dusty football pitch, the twin obsessions of Argentina. In the middle of nowhere, we passed processions of devotees, walking who knows where, carrying aloft the Virgin Mary. And always the waving and the smiling. Surely, if there was a country to steal your heart, this was it.We rode along highways so straight and so long that a 20-degree bend constituted extreme sport; past the pigs and the horses and the donkeys and the chickens that seemed to wander around the Pampas at will, as if Argentina was one giant free-range farm.My last day with the group was spent in Alta Gracia. The day after they would be heading off to Buenos Aires, where they'd started their trip five weeks and 5,000 miles before. I was to give Kev's wife Julia back her beloved BMW and would fly home from Córdoba.We rode to Che Guevara's old family home, now a museum. We saw the original South American motorcycle poster boy's Norton "La Poderosa II". Or maybe it was a replica - my Spanish is poor. La Poderosa's journey ended in a ditch in Chile, Che's in a ditch in Bolivia. In every photograph, from childhood on, there is a raging fire in his eyes. In every photograph bar one, of course. There's a terrible sadness in the house, like you're at the wake of a close friend.That night, as on every night in Argentina, we dined in a fine restaurant and ate an entire herd of cattle. If you ask them nicely, they'll often bring you a sprig of lettuce as garnish as well. The food was washed down, as ever, with wine that felt so sublime on the tongue it seemed a crime to swallow it. The group talked about the trip, about Peru and Bolivia, Chile and Argentina, recalled the roads and the spills and the near misses and the things they had seen which would stay with them forever. For this had been an adventure, not a holiday; exposed and vulnerable on a bike, a part of the landscape through which you travel, it brings a real feeling of achievement, of movement, of sensual pleasure, of survival. Because no matter how many times the cliché is repeated, it holds true: driving a car is like watching a movie; riding a motorcycle like being in one. And when the bill came, as on every night, we all looked at it with wonder as pesos to pounds was calculated and, as I glanced round, I sensed, I think, a collective thought: this is living, really living.Globebusters' High Andes trip lasts for five weeks and costs £5,895pp. The price includes all shipping rates and accommodation. The next High Andes trip runs from 21 April to 25 May 2010. For details of this and other Globebusters guided expeditions, including their 135-day Alaska to Patagonia trip and North and West Africa, see globebusters.com; 08452 304015. In conjunction with BMW Rider Training, Globebusters also offer residential rider training courses at their base in South Wales.