 4.26pm GMT That probably wasn't quite as comfortable as the scoreline suggests for England, after Argentina made life uncomfortable for them for a good half hour in the second half. The visitors never really had the quality to come back from a first half pasting and threaten the final result, but England will need a similar improvement to have a chance agains the world's best side next weekend.There were positives for England though. The first half performance was slick and fan-pleasing, and the number of chances they created from the lineout was encouraging. The defence held up well too, but too many penalties were conceded and the Richie McCaw-led All Blacks will present a much sterner challenge at the breakdown.Join me again in ten minutes or so for Wales v South Africa. Thanks again for all your e-mails and Tweets. Bye! 4.21pm GMT 80 min  That's hilarious from Parling as he runs right around to the wrong side of the ruck and lays between the Argentine scrum half's legs as he reaches in and tries to fish the ball out. The ref tells him where to go and Argentina give up, booting the ball out to end the match. 4.19pm GMT 79 min Ashton tries a mini-grubber akin to Will Genia's for Australia in the first Lion's Test this summer. It doesn't come off but we go back for a penalty. England win the lineout and spread it, where Foden bursts and offloads inside to his old Northampton mate Ashton. Argentina turn it over and look to run from their own 22 as the clock goes red. England put the pressure on them on their own line. 4.16pm GMT Parling wins the lineout and Farrell takes it into contact. Morgan picks it up and runs straight through the ruck/Argentina's excuse for a defence and dots down under the posts. Easy as you like for Morgan and the same goes for Farrell's conversion.Updated at 4.17pm GMT 4.15pm GMT 77 min The Pumas were on top at scrum time earlier, but Corbisiero has made all the difference and wins another penalty at the scrum. Farrell finds touch on the 22. 4.15pm GMT 76 min A drinks break now as we wait for a scrum and Dylan Hartley is deservedly named Man of the Match. Here's my new friend Alan Lovell:"I'll be back in the cold next week but the bright spot is I will actually be able to see the Engv NZ game.No ticket though..............do you need someone to carry your kit into the ground?.........and get the drinks............and............."HAHAHA you think the bosses actually let me go to the game? This MBM comes to you live from Guardian Towers I'm afraid. But sure, if you want to come and make me coffee. 4.12pm GMT 74 min Cordeno shows Ashton a clean set of heels but the Saracens man does well to recover and scrag the winger who was about to fly. Not literally, obviously. Although that would be a billion times better to watch than this soporific rubbish. The ball is spending about six hours in every single ruck. 4.10pm GMT Odd decision to give it to the 50/50 man Bosch given Sanchez has already kicked one from further than out. It's dragged left of the posts from right in front 35m out. 4.09pm GMT 72 min Another penalty against Tom Wood, who has played well apart from that whole "gifting Argentina a sheload of shots at goal" thing. Bosch will have another shot at goal to get them within 9. 4.07pm GMT 71 min The scrum is a mess with both sides boring in from all kinds of angles. The result is a penalty to England with which Farrell clears his lines well. The lineout though is overthrown woefully by Youngs. 4.07pm GMT ...says Sky's Miles Harrison of next week's game against the All Blacks. He's lying though, because you could win one by entering our competition. How's that for salesmanship? 4.05pm GMT 69 min England lineout but Argentina steal it. They pick and go slowly but Macome is well tackled and coughs the ball up. 4.04pm GMT 68 min Great kick ahead has Foden in two minds and he allows the ball to bobble into touch near the England line. The remainder of this MBM may be a bit short on detail as I'm busy gouging my own eyes out. 4.02pm GMT 67 min England win a penalty when it should be an Argentina lineout as the touch judge misses Robshaw's foot in touch. Farrell lumps the ball into touch in goal. Ugh. 4.01pm GMT 65 min England pass it into midfield and Flood but he's stopped 10m out and holds on. Amorosino misses touch with the penalty though and back come England. Slowly and laterally. 4.00pm GMT 64 min Argentina off their feet at a ruck and England have a penalty on the right-hand touchline near halfway. Farrell's touch finder is excellent and England have a lineout in the 22. The bad news is Tom Youngs is on to throw in. And crikey, he actually finds Parling in the middle of the line! 3.59pm GMT 63 min Joel Tomkins hoofs it from midfield into the in goal area. It's like watching Stoke, is what you feel the the crowd are moments from singing. 3.58pm GMT 62 min Alan Lovell just e-mailed me to suggest getting Flood on for Twelvetrees in order to inject a bit of creativity into the back line. Did he e-mail Stuart Lancaster as well? Because that's exactly what England have done. The backs have been very poor since Dickson went off. 3.56pm GMT 61 min Yawn. Argentina drive, England's defence doesn't give an inch. That's about all we've had this half. 3.55pm GMT 59 min Argentina kick ahead to Ashton who looks to run before realising he hasn't got any space. He should take the tackle but throws an idiotic offload to thin air and England are lucky to retain the ball. Since half time England have been aimless and a bit pants. It's like the first half of the Australia game again. 3.53pm GMT It's a horrible looking kick and bounces back off the bar. 3.52pm GMT 57 min Great chase from Foden to claim the kick off and he somehow wins England a lineout. England claim and although Cubelli rips it and runs he does so illegally and England are awarded a penalty 35m out on the left touchline. Farrell will be looking to impeded Argentina's momentum and kick at goal. 3.51pm GMT Another good kick from Sanchez and Argentina aren't quite done yet. 3.50pm GMT 55 min Argentina boot a penalty upfield and they look to attack through Agulla. For clarification he's ostensibly on the wing with Amorisino at full back, but they do keep swapping. The ball is passed forward so we go back for another penalty against Wood on the 10m line just to the right. Sanchez will take this one. 3.48pm GMT 54 min England spin it left but Twelvetree's pass goes astray and nothing's really happening for England's backs right now.Alan Lovell, who is much warmer than me being in Florida right now, is back: "I feel Foden has all the skills to be an excellent choice at wing and who could deny Brown his rightful position after toiling on the wing for England and playing so well at 15.Must admit to being surprised at the Launchbury/Lawes partnership going so well. Personally, I rate Parling very highly but Launcbury is an absolute revelation for a guy who doesn't look like a rugby player. He has all the skills and his positional play reminds me of Deano. always in the right place. "Yep I'm with you on all that. 3.46pm GMT 52 min Good lineout and Argentina descend en masse on top of Vunipola. It's worked out to Ashton infield who is tackled but does well to get the ball away to Brown. We're going back for another England penalty though which is kicked to touch 5m out. Ashton has been much more impressive today than of late. 3.45pm GMT 52 min Argentina go quickly so Courtney Lawes takes it upon himself to put an end to all this comeback nonsense with a trademark massive hit on Sanchez. Care comes on for Dickson as Farrell boots the penalty downfield into touch. 3.43pm GMT 50 min The crowd go wild as a poorly-disguised David Beckham is shown in the stands on the big screen. He's got a flat cap on and apparently a bad wig. Argentina have won another scrum at the breakdown, where Dickson has been left a bit unprotected in this second half and as such hasn't been able to get the ball away as cleanly as he'd like. A much improved performance so far from the Argentina back row and they win a penalty at the scrum. 3.41pm GMT 49 min Vunipola breaks the gain line yet again with a powerful charge through the Argentina midfield. There's a small misunderstanding between the half backs but England drive again through the forwards and there's a great offload from Launchbury to Tomkins. He loses it though and England concede another penalty. This second row partnership of England's is looking quite wonderful though. 3.39pm GMT Over it goes and Argentina are back to within 15. If it stays like this I've actually got a prediction right! 3.38pm GMT 45 min Agulla shows great pace, skinning Twelvetrees on the outside. He's dragged into touch but it's a good lineout and from the ensuing maul they win a penalty, Wood penalised for going in at the side. Sanchez elects to have a shot at goal, although I don't really see why. It's about 20m out to the left of the sticks. 3.36pm GMT 43 min Argentina come hard at the England defence but it's a great tackle from Robshaw and Vunipola who hold their man up and win the scrum."Hi Dan, Alan from Florida here again and enjoying the score board" writes Alan from Florida." Sound like this weeks England selection are doing most thngs right. And remember that this team is nowhere near the selection Lancaster would have made with everybody fit. I'm really sorry for Wade as he deserves the oportunity to make an impact and the Argies ould have been ideal.What's happenig with the centre partnership? Not impressive last week, or mayb this week either? NZ will certainly test them out though...food for thought."The centres are looking better, although England's tactic looks to be to get the ball to the back three ASAP so they're not spending much time on the ball and Argentina are getting pummelled around the breakdown by England's back row. Twelvetrees took his try well mind. 3.34pm GMT 42 min That's more lovely passing from Dickson as England stretch Argentina and put Ashton away. His grubber ahead is good but the chasers closing down Agulla were in front of the kicker. 3.33pm GMT 41 min Alex Corbisiero is on for Joe Marler, presumably to allow him to show his match fitness. Farrell kicks things off again. 3.32pm GMT "As a Saints fan (i'm assuming) what do you think of the inclusion of Ben Foden on the wing rather than at full-back? His form in his club position is a good case for having him in the side but I sometimes think that people under-estimate the difference between the positions in the back-three and how difficult it is for him to reproduce club form out of position for England. The same easy-flexibility tends not to be assumed about the different back-row positions for example. Would it be better to have a specialist wing even if he perhaps might not be as talented in terms of basic ability as the man more at home at full-back?"I tend to agree to an extent, but I think given the injuries to Wade and Yarde Foden is England's best bet right now. I think he's better suited to the wing than a lot of full backs, Brown included. His pace and sidestep are his best assets rather than, say, his defensive positioning and kicking, so an attacking full back like him has what you'd want in a winger. Jamie Elliott is (Yarde aside) probably the form winger in the Premiership, but I reckon you'd want someone with Foden's experience over a youngster, especially with the All Blacks up next. 3.18pm GMT 40 min Huge high kick from Farrell is well taken by Agulla the full back, but the kick was on a sixpence and Foden catches him well. Argentina retain the ball but by the looks of things Dickson has caught someone with a slightly reckless challenge and someone appears to be down. I can't see who though, sorry.That's half time. Be right back. 3.16pm GMT 39 min Farrell drops out and Sanchez returns with an up-and-under. Brown takes well but is clattered and for once can't hold on. This time Argentina get quick ball and Sanchez looks to have found a way through, but the ref pulls them back for obstruction and awards England a penalty deep inside their own 22. 3.14pm GMT It's right in front but at that distance it just fades wide. Plenty of distance still. 3.14pm GMT 36 min Sanchez is standing deep and looking to jink but Robshaw is owning the gainline. This hasn't been particularly exciting as a contest but England have been quite brilliant and are playing some of their best rugby of the past 12 months. They concede a penalty though and Bosch will have a shot from just inside his own half. 3.10pm GMT Another good lineout thanks to that Northampton combination (yes I'm biased but they're saying the same on Sky so there). With bodies strewn everywhere and England just a few metres out Dickson spots the massive overlap back out on the right. He passes to Farrell, who puts Ashton in. Great touchline conversion from Farrell.Updated at 3.11pm GMT 3.09pm GMT 32 min Quick ball off the top this time and Farrell runs into traffic so switches back the other way. He jinks but can't quite get anywhere and is scragged so Dickson spins it out to the right. Brown chips through but the ball is bundled into touch. Hartley will get another throw. 3.07pm GMT 31 min It's kicked back and forth, then when Albacete looks to have turned England over on halfway his team is penalised for offside. Farrell puts an excellent kick into the 22 to give England another attacking platform. Imhoff is injured and limps off so Cordeno comes on for his debut. 3.06pm GMT 30 min It's cleared but Farrell takes and offloads as he's tackled, again all in one slick motion. There are some wonderful hands from backs and forwards to get it out for Brown with Dickson involved twice. The scrum half has been omnipresent so far, replicating his club form. Then Hartley gives away a harsh penalty for holding on. 3.04pm GMT 29 min From the scrum Argentina clear but England are right back in their faces. With nothing on Dickson kicks ahead and Argentina show some ambition by trying to run it from just outside their own 22. There's nothing doing though as England are right there. 3.02pm GMT 26 min From a lineout England absolutely storm into the 22. Argentina need to find a way of stopping England from moving the ball so quickly or this could get embarrassing. The move breaks down as Farrell's one-touch offload doesn't go anywhere near anyone.England's lineout has been a potent weapon so far. The combination of Hartley, Wood, Lawes and Dickson of course play together every week at Northampton and are in stunning form, and it shows here. 3.00pm GMT 24 min Good work there from Tomkins on the dummy run, although my Dad pointed out the other day that in his day the elected dummy runner was the guy who couldn't be trusted with the ball. That said this England team is probably a little more well-drilled than that.Incidentally I'm afraid you're going to have to manually refresh to get the descriptions of the tries as I'm posting the updates without description initially in the name of immediacy. 2.56pm GMT Dickson whips it Farrell who doesn't quite find Ashton on the wrap around. The ball bounces up kindly for the winger though and Twelvetrees ignores the overlap, running on the angle towards the line and using his power to ride the tackle and score. Easy conversion from the same spot as last time.Updated at 2.57pm GMT 2.54pm GMT 19 min That's great stuff from Brown, carrying on from where he left off last week. It's an awkward high kick but he claims and offloads out the back of the hand in one move. England keep getting quick ball and are rapidly building their way up towards the line and Brown puts Ashton in... who is rolled and held up, butchering an easy chance. I'll be honest with you, I laughed a bit cruelly at Ashton. 2.52pm GMT That's a beauty, stroked over with plenty of distance to spare. 2.51pm GMT 17 min That's more like it from Argentina, the scrum forcing England's front row up and we have another penalty, which Saracens' Marcelo Bosch will kick at goal from about 47m, more or less in front. 2.50pm GMT 15 min Brown thinks he's away but Dickson's pass is forwards."How you know it's the Guardian" is the subject of an e-mail from Ben Arnulfssen, who is reading The Guardian. "I can't imagine anyone else so tasteless as to open their coverage of a major international, by asking for sarcastic comments about the National Anthem straight after the minutes' silence."Eh? I wasn't asking for them, merely saying that as it's become something of a cliche to do that I'm not going to bother myself. I'll be less oblique for you in future, yeah? 2.47pm GMT It goes to Lawes again and the much-vaunted (er, by me) Argentina pack can't stop the maul going diagonally towards the posts and Launchbury is the man to flop over. Easy conversion for Farrell. Robshaw's decision to kick those penalties to touch is vindicated.Updated at 2.48pm GMT 2.46pm GMT 12 min Lawes takes the lineout and England maul it steadily towards the line. It's dragged down but the ball is driven on. It's held up so we go back for the penalty which is again kicked to touch. 2.44pm GMT 9 min From the kick off Argentina look to carry it back down the left. The ball is dropped and the first scrum is to England on halfway near the touchline. It's nice and clean and England look to run. Foden looks to go on the outside and offloads to Brown as he's scragged. Leguizamon goes in at the side and Farrell doesn't go for goal, instead giving England a lineout 10m out. 2.42pm GMT Easy it is. 2.42pm GMT 8 min Dickson has started well but his clearance kick is charged down by Imhoff. Lawes is offside at the ruck and Sanchez has an easy kick in front of the posts 15m out. 2.40pm GMT Easy for Farrell even after his struggles with the boot last week.Updated at 2.40pm GMT 2.39pm GMT 4 min Lots more kicking back and forth before Farrell of all people decides to run it. He's tackled and England's gameplan is clear as Wood and Lawes look to clear bodies out of the ruck quickly, which the Pumas won't like as it allows Dickson to get quick ball away and try to stretch the defence. At a ruck on the 10m line centre field Argentina are penalised on the ground and Farrell will get his first shot at goal. 2.37pm GMT 3 min England look to run it but after getting the ball through a million pairs of hands Ashton kicks ahead. Argentina return in kind and Brown thinks about a run before kicking again. He chases and it's slooooow ball from the ensuing ruck. I reckon we could be in for a lot of this. 2.36pm GMT 2 min From the lineout Argentina spread it across the park but they can't make any ground from halfway. Cubelli makes the easy decision to chip over the top and England have a lineout on their own 22. 2.34pm GMT 1 min Argentina in slate grey kick off through Sanchez. Dickson catches and returns a good kick amid lingering smoke from those flare things Twickenham is so keen on. 2.33pm GMT The Rememberance Day minute's silence: Impeccably observed as you'd expect from a Twickenham crowdArgentina: Missed itEngland: Insert your own sarcastic comment about God Save The Queen here 2.26pm GMT "This has the potential to be very dull indeed" says Neil McLean. "England by 5." Shhhh I was trying not to say that.Updated at 2.26pm GMT 2.25pm GMT It's a little strange to see an Argentina side without Felipe Contepomi, who retired after the Rugby Championship game against Australia.It's also strange to see England with three full backs in the squad. Do they really need Alex Goode on the bench? 2.19pm GMT Sky are on their final ad break before kick off, which is in ten minutes or so at 14.30. 2.15pm GMT The sun is out here in Kings Cross and it appears to have dried up a bit at Twickenham too. Argentina won't give a solitary one. 2.09pm GMT I've seen it and I won't inflict it on you here. Suffice to say it features Lily Allen covering Keane, and as such I'm fully behind my friend who has threatened to sacrifice a kitten in-branch every time he sees it. It's truly one of the worst adverts I've ever seen and I say this as a Smiths fan who saw 'Please Please Please Let Me Get What I Want' mercilessly slaughtered last year. 1.47pm GMT I'm off to get some change because I had to put an IOU in the office sweepstakes cup. Why not e-mail or Tweet me some thoughts? Or enjoy this, which is pretty incredible. 1.45pm GMT I reckon that if England are going to take Dean Ryan's advice below and run Argentina off the park then the team selection is just about spot on given the injuries on the wing and at loosehead prop. The only area of concern for me is inside centre, where Billy Twelvetrees had a pretty poor match last time out and if he fails again here then Stuart Lancaster will be faced with the choice of sending an off-colour 12 out against the All Blacks or the uncapped Luther Burrell. Maybe this was an opportunity for the Saints' outstanding centre to get a taste of international rugby? 1.38pm GMT Some light reading? 1.31pm GMT Afternoon all. The news as I write this preamble a couple of hours or so prior to kick off is that it's absolutely miserable in London; grey, soggy and as warm as Anton Chigurh.The same adjectives could easily be used to describe last week's opening Autumn International between England and Australia. England were happy, as you'd expect them to be after a win over one of the SANZAR big three, but the same probably can't be said of the punters who shelled out exactly one billion pounds each (or so) to watch what was, in all honesty, a dire match between an embryonic home side and the visitors who were... what's a polite way of saying effin' awful?Argentina aren't a side who should be springing too many surprises out on the Twickenham turf, but their tried-and-tested approach of "scrum the living hell out of 'em" won't be particularly easy to stop. England shouldn't be swayed into thinking this is going to be a cakewalk just because their opponents have precisely zero wins to their name since entering the Rugby Championship in 2012, nor by the absence of their inspirational flanker Juan Martin Fernandez Lobbe. That scrum is a formidable weapon even with the loss of injured first-choice prop Juan Figallo and Leicester's destructive Marcos Ayerza will be relishing some fresh meat in England's brand spanking new front row.Stuart Lancaster said in the wake of that win over Australia that he wouldn't be making a raft of changes for this ostensibly weaker opponent, then proceeded to do so anyway. In fairness his hand was forced in a number of positions, with Marland Yarde and Mako Vunipola of last week's starting XV ruled out with injury, and in the rest of the squad Christian Wade – who rumour had it would have been in for Ashton here – and Ben Youngs also crocked. Ben Foden, in good form at 15 for Northampton this season, is therefore shunted out on to the wing and Danny Care takes the scrum half spot on the bench that his form probably means he deserved over the Leicester man. There he's joined by a fit-again Geoff Parling, who might consider himself unlucky that his extra weight wasn't wanted to start against the Pumas.The biggest news though is that Lancaster has picked an entirely new front row after last week's demolition job on the Aussie scrum. Even though Vunipola is out you would expect an all-better-again Alex Corbisiero to come back in, but instead Lancaster has gone with awful hairstyle choices' Joe Marler, who impressed coming off the bench last week. Dylan Hartley gets a deserved recall to the starting XV after Tom Youngs' throwing went all wonky/wife had a baby last weekend/a couple of days ago. The real shock though is that Dan Cole has presumably worn himself out laughing at Ben Alexander and is replaced by Bath's Dave Wilson. Stop giggling, Mr. Ayerza.For the record, Dan's obviously-going-to-be-wrong prediction: England's pack will be too quick and, in spite of the bad weather and their backs will just outclass Argentina's. England by a reasonably-convincing 15.England: M Brown (Harlequins); C Ashton (Saracens), J Tomkins (Saracens), B Twelvetrees (Gloucester), B Foden (Northampton); O Farrell (Saracens), L Dickson (Northampton); J Marler (Harlequins), D Hartley (Northampton), D Wilson (Bath), J Launchbury (Wasps), C Lawes (Northampton), T Wood (Northampton), C Robshaw (Harlequins, capt), B Vunipola (Saracens).Replacements: T Youngs (Leicester), A Corbisiero (Northampton), D Cole (Leicester), G Parling (Leicester), B Morgan (Gloucester), D Care (Harlequins), T Flood (Leicester), A Goode (Saracens).Argentina: L Amorosino (Oyonnax); H Agulla (Bath), M Bosch (Saracens), S Fernandez (Bayonne), J Imhoff (Racing Metro); N Sanchez (Bordeaux), T Cubelli (Belgrano Athletic); M Ayerza (Leicester), E Guinazu (Bath), M Bustos (Montpellier), M Galarza (Worcester), P Albacete (Toulouse), P Matera (Leicester), J F Cabello (Tucuman), J M Leguizamon (Lyon).Replacements: S I Valdez (Tucuman), N Lobo (Free), J P Orlandi (Bath), M Carizza (Western Province), B Macome (Tucuman), M Landajo (Casi), G Tiesi (Newcastle), S Cordeno (Regatas)