Argentina's first female President, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, is fighting to restore her tattered reputation after a 70-day rural strike saw her public image plummet to its lowest level.Only one in four Argentinians has a positive image of her, according to figures released last week by a leading polling group. Three months ago, her approval rating was more than 50 per cent. Elected last October with 45 per cent of the popular vote, Fernández's popularity has sunk in recent months as a lock-out by farmers threatened food shortages and frozen farm exports.Argentina's powerful farm lobby initially went on strike in mid-March after the introduction of controversial new taxes on soya, wheat and other key agricultural products. Fernández won a brief reprieve after the main farming associations agreed to re-enter negotiations but angry farmers are still planning to go ahead with a huge demonstration today in the port town of Rosario.Fernández will be heading a rally of her own today to mark Argentina's National Day. Behind the customary flag-waving and confetti, she must be asking herself where it all went wrong. The economy, the usual weather vane of public content, is growing at more than 6 per cent a year thanks to rocketing commodity prices. But there are some worrying economic and political trends, including inflation. Government figures put price rises at 9 per cent a year, but private sector analysts say the government is massaging the numbers. Independent data suggests inflation could be three times higher.Fernández's attempts to remedy the situation rest on fixing prices and reducing exports - much the same as her husband, ex-President Néstor Kirchner, while in power. Then, as now, prices show no sign of slowing.'Even if it has the political will to solve the inflation problem, it will still take a year or two,' argues Alejandro Catterberg, director at polling firm Poliarquía. Price rises are feeding into fresh concerns over increasing inequality and poverty. Fernández prefers to cite government figures that suggest a drop in the number of poor - albeit small - to eight million (20.6 per cent of the population). Figures from the church and other private groups, however, say a jump to 12 million is more realistic. The President's handling of the farmers' strike has also raised questions about her capacity to govern. From the outset of conflict, she shunned opportunities to sit down with the rural protesters. Instead, she branded the farmers as rural 'oligarchs' and accused them of unpatriotically not sharing their profits.Her control within the ranks of power has also begun to look fragile. Three weeks ago, her economy minister Martín Lousteau resigned over the unpopular new tax scheme. Meanwhile, several supposedly pro-Kirchner provincial governors broke ranks by talking individually with the farming lobby.More grating for many Argentinians is the personal style of their 55-year-old head of state. Public opinion surveys increasingly portray her as arrogant, intolerant of opposing voices and conflictive. However, with a strong majority in Congress and a flailing political opposition, Fernández has enough political clout to avoid such confrontations, argues Ricardo Rouvier, a political analyst. 'Instead she continues to pursue a policy that quickly establishes groups as either friends or enemies.'Her choice of government spokespeople merely exacerbates the combative nature of her administration. In Luis D'Elía and Guillermo Moreno, she has opted for two thuggish stalwarts of the pro-workers Peronist party. Harder to shrug off is her husband, Néstor Kirchner, who was president until December last year and is now head of the Peronist party. Credited with rescuing Argentina from its worst ever financial crash in 2001-2002, Kirchner continues to enjoy a positive image rating of around 50 per cent.A poll released last week suggests three in every 10 Argentinians believe it is the ex-president who is really calling the shots in the Presidential Palace - up from only one in 10 before the rural crisis.The changing fortunes of the economy also place the President in a very different political environment to her husband, who took over a country deep in debt, whereas Fernández is sitting on federal reserves of more than $50bn.As inflation creeps up, Argentinian consumers are feeling a 'mismatch' between the booming economy and their decreasing personal spending power, according to Graciela Romer, a Buenos Aires-based political analyst.She said Argentinians were also looking for, in their first elected female head of state, a more sensitive, tolerant and conciliatory style of presidency. 'These are not the characteristics that Cristina is showing,' she said.· The following clarification was printed in the Observer's For the record column, Sunday June 1 2008. We described Cristina Fernández de Kirchner as 'Argentina's first female President'; she was the first who was democratically elected. Argentina's first female President was General Perón's third wife, Maria Estela Martinez Cartas de Perón, better known as Isabel Perón, who took over after her husband's death in 1974.