When I ask Hervé Fabre his opinion of malbec before moving to Argentina, his response is very French: he shrugs, his mouth droops and he goes "Puhhh!" Can he be more precise? "Horrible. Dure. Rustique. It didn't even cross my mind to make wine with it. Then I tried one here and was seduced by the originality and quality." It's 17 years since Fabre and his wife, Diane, set up the Fabre Montmayou winery in Luján de Cuyo, in which time Argentina has become justifiably famous for its malbec (so different from its Cahors namesake). But it's no longer enough to talk in general terms about the country and the grape, a point the Catena family made with "malbec-malbec", a blend of malbecs from two sites.Argentina has two buzz phrases right now: "Uco Valley" and '"high-altitude vineyards", and often they are said in the same breath. The Uco Valley in Mendoza is a rift valley formed not glacially but by faulting, a chunk of land that has dropped. In some places (it's crucial to distinguish between districts and producers because the Uco's big and not all marvellous) it produces exhilaratingly vivid, intense malbec. (The transformation is akin to that of sauvignon blanc in Marlborough, New Zealand.) Broadly speaking, altitude has an impact because daytime temperature drops 1C with every 100m increase in height, nights are cooler and UV levels rise as you go higher, which intensifies carotenoids. "Grapes grow thicker skins, and having more layers of cells means more aromatics and tannins," says Catena's Alejandro Sejanovich.Wineries have identified the diverse characteristics of malbec in various districts. At the Doña Paula winery they define these as: strawberry and red fruit in Lunlunta and Drummond; black cherry and spice in Agrelo; plums, spice and dried herbs in Ugarteche; black fruit in Gualtallary... See how a malbec-malbec blend might work? I favour the strong, violet notes in malbec from Vistalba and Agrelo, particularly if combined with the vibrancy of wine from an Uco district. Four favourites: Doña Paula Estate Malbec 2008 (£9.99, or £7.99 by the case, Oddbins, in store next month; 14% abv), which is made with French oak, tremendously perfumed and fresh, with a sensational smell and the purity of a coulis. Doña Paula Malbec Seleccion de Bodega 2005 (£31.65, Cavas de Gaucho; 14.5%) has a broad, sweeping cloud of perfume, a suggestion of prunes, panoply of spice, the comfortableness of an antique sideboard. Fabre Montmayou Gran Reserva Malbec 2007 (£9.99, Laith-waites; 14.5%) is deep, dark as black ink and reeks of violets. And Pulenta Estate Malbec 2005 (£13.65, Berry Bros; 13.5%) is a beauty, structured like an elegant chateau, bold, with a floral scent and refreshing acidity. victoriaxmoore@gmail.comInycon Fiano 2007, Sicily (£4.39, down from £5.99, Waitrose; 13% abv) Good-value marzipan- and pear-tinged white to have with seafood.