Argentina faces a tough time. Last week, after a dramatic 18-hour session congress was in stalemate. The vice-president, Julio Cobos, cast the deciding vote and rejected his own government's proposal to increase a controversial tax on agricultural exports. This proposed tax increase is a major concern to Argentina's farmers as the country is a producer of high value crops for the international market, such as soya, grain and beef. The proposal has provoked famers to protest, blockading roads and causing food shortages across the country.Vice-President Cobos, who is also the leader of congress, was visibly upset after casting the deciding vote. "It has been the most difficult day of my life," he said. The bill, which required senatorial approval to become law, had been approved by the lower house of congress on July 5. The outcome is not only a huge blow to the president, Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, but to the whole of the government, which had put its full political weight behind the new measures.Although it would appear that the farmers have won a critical battle, the dispute is far from over for Argentina. Cobos has previously expressed concerns about the motives behind tying the tax to the value of grain on international markets and his vote could lead to a political crisis. The vice-president belongs to the Radical Civic Union party, a party that has traditionally opposed the Peronist party headed by De Kirchner.The dispute began in March when, in a bid to reduce exports and drive down prices, President de Kirchner announced a greater than 10% sliding-scale increase in export taxes (from 35% to 45%) on soya and other grain.De Kirchner argued that her government needed to raise taxes on agricultural exports to help build a new Argentina, to invest the money in schools, hospitals and new infrastructure. But the tax increases have led to a confrontation between the government and the agricultural sector, one of the most powerful economic blocs in Argentina, which has historically been linked with the rich landowners. The farmers protesting against the measure launched strikes and roadblocks which forced the president to agree to submit the proposed tax increase to a vote in congress. The problem now is that the ruling bloc is fractured. Several prominent provincial governors and former governors of the Peronist party have publicly broken with the government. Much will now depend on what the presidential duo will do next. The dispute has had a huge impact on De Kirchner's image – according to a public opinion poll from Poliarquía, her rating is now below 20 points, having lost 36 points since the beginning of the year.Argentina is struggling to implement a coherent agricultural policy that could help to ease the conflict – a delicate problem for a nation that is the world's third-biggest soya producer, sixth-biggest wheat producer and second-biggest corn exporter. According to Proyecto Sur, run by the ex-presidential candidate and film director Pino Solanas, the vulnerable, and the majority of the workforce in Argentina, are at the sharp end of the problems and are hostages of both the economic boycott by the farmers and the ineptitude of the government. The constant motorway blockades have had a clear effect: shortages, a surge in food prices, economic recession and a rise in unemployment – further fuelled by government policies that since 2003 have pushed for the extensive cultivation of soya and that much of the production ends up on the black market.Until the government implements a fairer agricultural policy, the conflict will continue to create discontent and deeper social and economic divisions.