Question: I emailed Smile to let them know that I would be going to Argentina and Uruguay over Christmas and new year to visit my daughter who was travelling around South America. They wished me an enjoyable trip. On arrival in Buenos Aires, I was unable to withdraw pesos from a cash machine and had no way of contacting the bank because I did not take my mobile phone with me.Later in the day I emailed Smile, but received no reply. My daughter paid for my food and bought me a phone card. When I got through to Smile on the telephone, I was told that they knew I was in Argentina so there wasn't a problem and they questioned whether I was using the correct pin number. When I stated that there clearly was a problem, they said the fraud department had stopped my card. They unblocked my card and we then enjoyed the holiday until, that is, we moved on to Uruguay.I had promised to pay for a celebration meal but my card was rejected. The next day, Christmas Day, I spent nearly two hours trying to get a telephone line to England. When I eventually got through I was told to phone a different number but, when I did, a recorded message told me that the bank was closed and I should email.RM, Brentford, LondonMargaret: This is becoming a common problem. Readers alert their banks before going abroad on holiday, only to find that their credit and debit cards are still blocked when they try to use them in foreign countries. Of course, banks have to maintain their security surveillance because cards are more likely to be stolen while you are travelling than when you are at home and some parts of the world, including South America, are particularly high risk. It is indeed possible that your card might have been stolen before you reached the arrivals hall at Buenos Aires airport. But I would have thought that immediately after landing was the one occasion when Smile could have forecast that you would be using your card in a cash machine. Even so, Smile confirms that your first attempt to withdraw cash was blocked because of a "security concern". It is no easy matter to contact a bank in that situation. Smile says it has no record of you trying to use your card in a Uruguayan restaurant and suggests that this time there was a fault with the connection.But the bank admits it was slow in replying to your email and is sending £100 for the cost of your phone calls and to compensate for distress.Question: I signed up for internet banking with Nationwide before I began travelling for six months in South and Central America. Two months into my trip, my handbag was stolen in Quito, Ecuador. Nationwide agreed to send a replacement debit card to the British Consulate in Cartagena, Colombia, but it didn't arrive. I moved on to Panama having given up hope. I then asked Nationwide to transfer money to my NatWest account, for which I had a cash card but no funds. They don't seem to be able to understand that I can't do it myself. It costs more than $10 to phone and an email costs 25 cents, but neither approach gets me any closer to my money. Eventually Nationwide sent a replacement card to my home in Beckenham, Kent, but no one can forward it to me as I am travelling around.VT, Central AmericaMargaret: Nationwide admits it has taken an unacceptably long time to transfer money to your NatWest account but it has now done so and is offering £250 to apologise.Question: I wanted to pay £1,000 into my Abbey account but the branch is some way off and I no longer have a car. The Post Office is only five minutes walk away so I tried to put the money into an account there. The Post Office then wrote saying I had not declared the source of my funds so they could not accept my money. I did not think it is right to ask this of a 77-year-old. I went back to the Post Office and asked for my money back. Six weeks later I am still waiting, despite sending two more letters.AN, Ingatestone, EssexMargaret: Banks have to ask where money has come from when you open a new account in case you are a money launderer or drug dealer that they can trick into declaring ill gotten gains.But Bank of Ireland, which runs the Post Office's savings accounts, was unfairly inflexible not to help you with information or suggestions, or to return your money promptly.The Post Office has now sent back your cheque but I urge you to reconsider as this will be a far more convenient bank for you, although remember that Post Office accounts are covered by Ireland's compensation scheme and not the UK version.Question: Teachers' Pensions wrote to say that my guaranteed minimum pension has come into force with my state pension and that my teachers' pension should have been reduced accordingly. They say it wasn't and I have wrongly received two increases to my pension - one from the Teachers' Pension scheme and again with my state pension. They now want to reduce my teacher's pension. As I am resident in New Zealand, I do not receive any cost of living linked rise with my state pension and shouldn't suffer this drop in income. CF, Hamilton, New ZealandMargaret: This really is rubbing salt into the wound. Your UK state pension is frozen because you live in New Zealand but you are being treated as though it wasn't. Your problem was that no one at Teachers' Pensions took this on board. They now have and you will not be penalised. Teachers' Pensions blames the Revenue which provided the information about your state pension, - although someone at TP should have hesitated while addressing a letter to New Zealand.Question: My mother died in March 2007 and it took me some time to deal with her affairs. In 2008 I provided Equiniti with the probate paperwork to transfer her shares to my name, but I have had no response to my requests to reissue dividend cheques which were still being sent out in my mother's name. I was told I would have to pay £11 to reissue them, which I thought was outrageous, and that they would write to me about it. I have heard nothing. The shares themselves are now virtually worthless, but I would like to recover the dividends at least.NM, Etchingham, East SussexMargaret: Equiniti admits receiving, but simply overlooking, your letter asking the company to reissue the cheques it had wrongly sent out. It has now sent you dividends worth £76 and rounded this up to £100 apologise for the delay.• Email Margaret Dibben at money.writes@observer.co.uk or write to Margaret Dibben, Money Writes, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way London N1 9GU and include a telephone number. Do not enclose SAEs or original documents. Letters are selected for publication and we cannot give personal replies. The newspaper accepts no legal responsibility for advice.