A boatload of 32 asylum seekers believed to be from Afghanistan and Pakistan found in Australian waters will be the first to be sent to Malaysia, Papua New Guinea or another country under a contentious new strategy to deter future refugees from making the same journey.Following recent riots in Australia's detention centres, the government has announced a controversial agreement with Kuala Lumpur to send 800 boat people arriving on its shores to Malaysia, where they will have their claims processed by the UN. In exchange, it has made a commitment to accept 4,000 asylum seekers over the next four years from among the thousands of people currently waiting in Malaysia. It is negotiating with Papua New Guinea to accept hundreds more.The issue of the boat people has been haunting the Labor government since the 2007 election. One of its first measures was to dismantle the outgoing coalition government's Pacific solution, which involved sending migrants to remote Pacific islands until their case could be reviewed.But since 2008 there has been a steady stream of boats. About 6,000 asylum seekers (primarily Afghans, Iranians, Tamils and Iraqis) landed in Australia last year, up on the previous year though still fairly low by international standards.For some time the government has been looking for a solution involving neighbouring countries, both to reduce the pressure on detention centres and to reassure public opinion. After an unsuccessful attempt at convincing Timor-Leste to play ball, Julia Gillard's government seems at last to have found a regional partner.Gillard admitted families with children could be moved to Malaysia. The aim is to discourage prospective migrants from resorting to people smugglers, mostly based in Indonesia. "Under this arrangement, don't get on that boat. What it will mean is you've given your money to a people smuggler, you've risked your life at sea and you will be at real risk of ending up in Malaysia instead," the prime minister said.Many commentators think the scheme will be expensive and unworkable, costing the Australian government an estimated A$290m ($310m). "It's probably a terrific deal for Malaysia but it's a hopeless deal for Australia … we will send them one and get five back," said the opposition leader Tony Abbott, well known for his outspoken views on immigration.Human rights groups are particularly worried about the agreement, because Malaysia has not signed the international refugee convention. At present there are more than 90,000 asylum seekers and refugees waiting there."The living conditions for refugees in Malaysia are appalling: they are not allowed to work, have no access to education and are often subject to arbitrary detention. It is very worrying that Australia, despite its international obligations, should be sending back asylum seekers – who it should be protecting – to a country which has not signed the convention," said Graham Thom, Amnesty International Australia's refugee co-ordinator."The number of asylum seekers in Australia represents 2% of the total for western countries. We could take more," he added."These people are fleeing situations of conflict and this measure will make no difference: the decision is a matter of domestic politics," said Ian Rintoul, spokesperson for the Refugee Action Coalition. The government seemed to moving closer to its Liberal opponents for fear of alienating part of its electorate.The Greens, currently part of the ruling coalition in parliament, condemned the solution as "inhumane".This article originally appeared in Le Monde