 10.09am GMT From 143-5, 326-6 represents a magnificent comeback for Australia, for whom Smith has been the best batsman by a margin. So another disappointing day in the end for England, who desperately need to bat to their potential when they get their opportunity tomorrow. Well, I'm assuming it'll be tomorrow…That's all for me. Thanks for your emails and your attention, and I'll be back a little after 4am (gulp) tomorrow morning.Aus 326 for six at the close, Smith 103 and Johnson 39. Initiative to Aus in last hour but this is a top pitch on which to bat. 10.03am GMT Five Bresnan dot balls and a simple two through midwicket, and today is officially over, cricket-wise. "Despite the wicket of Haddin, this is depressing stuff," moans Guy Hornsby. "I know the talk is of 'well if we can get them for under 350', but right now Smith looks about as likely to give his wicket away as Beefy is to sing Let It Snow with a Santa hat on. I can't help feeling that Australia's tail will wag, and we'll be stuffed trying to chase 450. Yes, I'm a pessimist. But I'm also hung over, and tired, and nothing grinds you down like a dominant Australian cricket team. Feel my pain." You are not alone. 9.58am GMT The shadows are long and dark now, and that's just under my eyes. We'll have one more over before stumps, and if this isn't to go down as Australia's day it needs to be a two-wicket maiden. 9.54am GMT England are taking their time here, fiddling with the field between each delivery, and Johnson, unbothered, smacks successive boundaries. He's now scored 144 runs this series; England's most successful batsman, Joe Root has scored 130. 9.49am GMT Anderson beats Johnson's edge, and then Smith's, but the Australians survive with ball unedged. Anderson's economy rate, at 2.68, is the best of England's bowlers by a way. 9.43am GMT Johnson edges the ball this time, but it goes nowhere near a fielder, instead flashing through an empty gully and away for four. 9.39am GMT Three runs off Anderson's first two nballs and none off the other four. Signs of an imminent new-ball-based breakthrough unforthcoming. "We haven't been subjected to Jerusalem at the start of play in this series (the cricket equivalent of the England football's brass band), so it was a nice reminder last night when an office party was booted out of my local pub for singing it very loudly whilst hugging one another," writes David Hopkins. In my limited experience that sounds like unusual office behaviour, even at the end of a Christmas party. Certainly doesn't happen on the sports desk nights out.Updated at 9.41am GMT 9.34am GMT Stuart Broad takes the first over with the new ball, as we enter a bonus half-hour tacked on to the end of today's play because we're all enjoying it so much. Johnson grabs a single. 9.30am GMT The batsmen grab a one each from Swann's over, the last with the old ball. 9.27am GMT Joe Root does some bowling, and Johnson thumps the ball dead straight for a one-bounce four. "With all the talk in the Guardian recently of 'selfies', 'lelfies' and 'belfies', was that a 'selvie'?" ponders Charles Evison of that Selvey-with-fan shot. I think it most probably was. 9.24am GMT Johnson swats Swann through point for four. Jokes I wish I got part 2: "I’d like to reassure Fergus (over 75) that he’ll be able to see plenty of ‘nasty, brutish and short’ when the Australians are bowling," snorts Phil Deans. 9.21am GMT Stokes bowls, Smith edges, Cook collects, but the ball bounced a foot in front of him. A lucky let-off there! Smith regains his composure over the next couple of balls, and then slaps one down the ground for four, and pulls yet another short ball, and an over that could have seen his downfall instead sees him bring up his century. "Over on TMS Vaughan is talking about how it's an amazing stat that we've got to the third test and only had one LBW," reports Tim Zobu. "I think the amazing stat is that it wasn't Shane Watson." 9.14am GMT Johnson hits Swann's first two deliveries in the air, but safe. "A very adaptable body part, the thigh, for euphemistic purposes," notes Matthew Clapham. "I remember back in the day of watching too much test cricket (1980s in my case) that a blow to the box would invariably be described as having 'struck him very painfully at the top of the inner thigh'." 9.10am GMT "I've an exam on political philosophy at 12 but can't tear myself away from the OBO," writes Fergus Carroll, as Australia get some ones ands twos off Stokes. "I don't know whether to spend my remaining time reading a depressing manifesto on the nature of man or Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes…" I suspect that people who know what Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes is about will see a clever joke there. 9.06am GMT Despite the imminent new ball, Anderson bowls. Nothing much happens.@selvecricket with his first fan pic.twitter.com/ClPJ8Et3g8 9.04am GMT The ball hits Johnson and Australia run a leg bye. "It's come off the thigh, slightly higher," says David Gower on Sky. It came off his buttock, a word that Gower obviously just can't bring himself to say on air. 8.57am GMT "Nevermind Mitchell Johnson, surely Brad Haddin has been Australia's man of the series so far?" suggests Kevin Wilson, as Johnson slams the ball through midwicket for four. "He's either dug them out of a hole or made a good total insurmountable pretty much every innings. It's easier for Mitch to bowl with loads of runs on the board than when they're defending 250." Johnson also has had a useful innings with the bat, but it's all to play for between the two of them. 8.53am GMT Stokes really needs to watch that no ball. The ball before the wicket-taking delivery could easily have been called, too. Bresnan will take over 72, but after that, with eight overs remaining before the new ball, we might get some spin. 8.50am GMT The breakthrough! Haddin is caught by Anderson at midwicket and though there's a heart-in-mouth moment as replays show Stokes' foot mere millimetres from no-ball territory, Haddin's gone! 8.45am GMT Ian Botham is complaining about the number of short deliveries England have bowled today (too many, in his opinion). I can only recall one ball-on-pad collision since I took over OBO duties at lunch, which feels unusually low. 8.41am GMT A rare moment of discomfort for Smith, who tries to work a Stokes delivery through the covers but misses it completely, the ball flashing past his edge. 8.37am GMT Extended shots of Cooke stroking his chin, literally stroking his chin, as he ponders the state of this match and what his ICC-approved captaincy is going to do about it. Bresnan bowls another maiden, and his last three overs have gone for a combined one run. 8.33am GMT Smith cuts a wide delivery from Broad for four, and lets the rest of the over pass him by, his work done. 8.28am GMT Bresnan's third maiden of the day. "Yes, Smith is obviously doing pretty well," John Starbuck concedes, "but how does his international career compare with all the other Smiths who've played the game?" These are the key questions facing the lad. As ever, the OBO takes you right to the heart of the game. 8.22am GMT The temperature has dropped to a positively chillsome 33.1C – nearly 10C lower than today's peak – which should make England's travails in the field a very small amount more bearable. "The first sniff of a wicket to break this partnership and it is a complete balls up between Carberry and Root," moans Ivan Kinsman. "England are starting to throw this match away." 8.16am GMT Haddin gets away with one there! He scoops the ball into the air off the foot of the bat, but Carberry at deep cover point can't get to it in time to take the catch – it's not clear that the Englishman knew where it was going until it was too late to do anything about it. He's had a few escapes today, has Haddin. 8.13am GMT Broad comes on, and Smith smacks him through the covers for four. This is serense stuff from Smith, who's sniffing a century and also what would be his first ever series win… 8.06am GMT Haddin watches the first couple of deliveries, and then thumps the third, without moving his feet, over the bowler's head for six. He tries to repeat the dose a couple of balls later, and though the ball doesn't reach the rope this time, there's nobody there to catch it, he runs a couple and that's his half-century. 8.02am GMT And that's another maiden from Anderson, after which Cook, Prior and Bresnan converse at length, trying to work out where a wicket might possibly come from. 7.59am GMT Swann's second ball is thundered away for four, and Smith nearly gets another only for Broad to deal well with his proximity to the boundary rope. "143-5 seems a long time ago," writes Aran Scutcher. "We dared to dream only for that dream to degenerate into a familiar nightmare. Australia appear to have some steel in the middle of the order which can correct the misdeeds of the earlier batsmen whereas England just seem to crumble like a biscuit dipped too long in tea. I've Haddin-ough." 7.56am GMT A maiden from Anderson, but there's been no suddenly increased threat post-tea. 7.51am GMT Time for Cook to show his captain-of-the-year chops, perhaps, with England in need of a wicket from somewhere. Can he conjure anything up? The batsmen grab a single each from Swann's latest over. 7.48am GMT Steve Smith can pull the ball for four. This has been established. But Anderson gives him another chance to show us, which he takes. "This strikes me as so far being exactly what has happened in the first two Tests," reckons Bill Iliffe. "Unless Billy Bowden intervenes, by reducing Johnson's overs to a couple of balls maybe, I can only see this going one way." 7.42am GMT The first ball of the 56th over meets the same fate as the first of the 55th, though this time it's Smith smacking it away for four. 7.39am GMT "Why has Michael Clarke been named ICC Cricketer of the Year?" rages Simon Clark, as Haddin boshes Anderson's first delivery of the session through the covers for four. "Do the ICC only judge performance based on what happens in December?! The man lost an Ashes series in England 3-0 and apart from this month, its been a bad year for the Aussie cricket team."Australia's 6th and 7th wicket are averaging 91 in this series. England's 6th and 7th average 11.8 #ashes #bbccricket 7.36am GMT The Australia flag flaps merrily as the batsmen come out, the Doctor doing its thing. The ICC awards have just been announced, incidentally, and it's good news for today's 100-cap winners: Alastair Cook is the captain of the year, while Michael Clarke is the cricketer and the Test cricketer of the year. 7.28am GMT Or "breakfast", as I call it. From 143-5, England will be disappointed to see Australia now at 220 without further loss, with Smith looking good and Haddin improving after a rocky start. It's all delicately poised ahead of what could turn into a marathon final session. "I like Billy Bowden as umpire," writes Peter Brown, of the seven- and five-ball overs we enjoyed during that session. "It's a bit of a lucky dip. Maybe he'll forget it's the last session coming up and we'll get a 4th session. Or he'll think it's lunch and we'll get a 40 minute break. Cricktainment at its best." 7.13am GMT Bresnan's 14th over of the day, which is three more than Broad and five more than Stokes and Anderson. At least he'll get a breather now, because it's TEA.Tea, 220-5. Another cut and thrust session. 7.10am GMT Hadding pushes Swann's last ball through point and it trundles away slowly with Carberry in hot pursuit, eventually earning the batsman three runs. 7.07am GMT It's turned a bit sedate, Australia's score rolling gently upwards and England currently receiving little encouragement. This is bad news, particularly if, as in my case, your alarm went at 3.45am, you're currently sitting on your sofa in your nightwear and your head is pretty insistent that you should be asleep.Updated at 7.08am GMT 7.05am GMT The batsmen help themselves to a single run each from Swann's latest.Updated at 7.08am GMT 7.00am GMT This pair have put on 60 runs so far, and needs to be broken. Haddin plays and misses, but things improve rapidly thereafter as he slams one through the covers for four and pulls the last ball of the over for another.STAT ALERT: England have conceded a record 72 sixes in 13 Tests in 2013. Their previous record was 53, in 2002. http://t.co/TxhKKAchqO 6.56am GMT Haddin slog-sweeps Swann's second ball over square leg for six, a sign perhaps that his early-innings dodginess is coming to an end. We shall see. 6.52am GMT Smith reaches an excellent half-century with a fine pull shot that sends the ball trundling through midwicket for four, and then does it again for good measure. 6.48am GMT Smith slams Swann's first ball back over his head for six, and then Haddin gets away with another loose shot, which lands between Bresnan and the boundary, at which point his bat decides it's had enough and self-destructs. Updated at 6.52am GMT 6.43am GMT …and then he hits Stokes' first ball, straight and full, off his ankles and away for four. A short ball ends up in an almost identical location, pulled through midwicket for four more. Billy Bowden, who earlier allowed Broad to bowl a five-ball over, makes Stokes bowl a seven-ball over, which is a bit odd.Updated at 6.44am GMT 6.38am GMT Now Swann returns, and after five dot balls we find ourselves precisely three overs on from the last run scored. At which point, Smith scores another run. 6.35am GMT Now Stokes bowls a maiden. Shane Warne reckons that if you bowl three consecutive maidens you get a wicket more often than not, and we're now two-thirds of the way to testing his thesis…Updated at 6.44am GMT 6.30am GMT Another maiden from Bresnan, a chanceless, actionless over bowled to Smith. 6.27am GMT Ben Stokes replaces Broad, and Haddin works the ball through the space where third slip isn't for four. "All I want for Christmas is for England to run through these last five wickets cheaply please," pleads Steven Pye. "A Haddin century may result in me lashing out at Father Christmas and that would be a little upsetting." I don't know, I reckon he's got it coming. 6.23am GMT Smith this time top-edges a pull shot, from Bresnan's last ball, and gets away with it. They've handed England a few cheap wickets today, but they've got away with a few lapses as well. 6.15am GMT Broad, told to have a breather, instead demands another over, and he very nearly has a wicket from it, as Haddin bottom-edges the ball onto his thigh pad, which deflects it half an inch wide of the stumps. He could so easily have been out twice already. One run from the over, a wide from a bouncer that flew too far over the batsman's head. Only five proper deliveries were bowled. Drinks will now be taken. 6.10am GMT Haddin gets away with one here, playing the signature shot of the 2013-14 Ashes series – a terrible hook – but seeing the ball land safely, short of Broad. 6.06am GMT Broad gets five-sixths of the way to a maiden of his own, until Smith pulls the final delivery with extreme prejudice for four. 6.02am GMT A maiden over from the boy Bresnan. 5.57am GMT Key moments these now, with Australia wobbling like Weebles. They need a good partnership, smartish. 5.54am GMT Broad starts the over with a couple of short ball to Bailey, both easily evaded, but when the third is also short the batsman lets rip – but top-edges his pull to Pietersen at deep square leg!Now Broad gets Bailey, top edge pull, well taken at deep sq leg by KP. Aus 143 for 5 5.51am GMT Apparently this is the hottest day of the year in Perth, with temperatures in the Waca exceeding a sweltering 40C. So Anderson gets a breather, and Bresnan works up a sweat. Smith grabs a couple off the first ball, but that's his lot. 5.47am GMT Swann is replaced with Broad, and that's a pretty expensive over – no runs off the first ball or the last, but a couple of singles and both Smith (for three) and then Bailey (for four) push the ball through the covers. 5.43am GMT The batsmen help themselves to a single each. Here's the sledging latest courtesy of the Mail's former OBOer Lawrence Booth.Story this morning about how David Warner had been taunting Carberry at Adelaide for "dropping the Ashes"... 5.42am GMT Props to Shahril Hamdan, who emailed from Kuala Lumpur perhaps 90 seconds before Warner fell to say he "felt a wicket coming". He should really have stopped there, rather than continuing to predict that someone would get stumped off Swann, rather than caught off Anderson, but I'm impressed all the same. 5.36am GMT That's a big wicket for England! Warner cuts the ball straight down the throat of Carberry, whose hands are safe enough this time!Swann gets Warner, top edging cut to backward point where Carberry makes no mistake this time. 5.34am GMT Anderson's first ball is tucked away by Smith through midwicket for four, and those are the only runs from the over. Mike Selvey points out that his planned OBO "evening with…" event in January will be involve not David Sake, as suggested here earlier today, but with the England bowling coach David Saker. 5.29am GMT Warner now smacks Swann back past the bowler, this time for four. Nine runs off the over, though the last couple came from a mighty swing, also from Warner, the ball catching the top edge and looping to safety. "First ball I saw this morning was Warner sending a pretty ugly long-hop from Bresnan over wide long on. Nearly went back to bed," writes Dave Adams. "Seeing Bresnan doing a passable Martin McCague impression made me wonder though - why are Finn and Rankin not playing? There won't be a more suitable pitch for them. If England have places in the squad for players who won't be picked under any circumstances, I'd like to volunteer for the next tour." 5.24am GMT Warner doesn't hit it cleanly, but still grabs a couple off Anderson's first ball. Turns out that was a record-breaking six from Smith:Smith off the mark with a 6. Aus' 23rd of the series, their record for most sixes hit in an Ashes. Only England in 2005 have hit more (36). 5.22am GMT With four balls bowled, and Smith still to score having faced 15 deliveries, the pressure was perhaps starting to build on the batsman. And then he smites the next one over the bowler's head for six. Pressure lifted. "That poem you just posted freaked me out," writes Tim Reichelt. "We haven’t won the Ashes yet and at certain times in the past we have shown that we can crumble to dust with the best of them." 5.18am GMT A maiden from Anderson. "Our office party is tonight at a Sydney harbourside location – all very swish," writes Peter Leybourne in, well, Sydney. "It starts at 7pm but because of the time difference, the cricket is on the telly here until 8.30pm. I may have to be very late. There's also the matter of my two-year-old's kindergarten concert at 5.30 this afternoon. If I miss that, the wife will be livid. Does anyone know what a two-year-old's concert involves? Eating crisps in time to Jingle Bells perhaps? Crying because the crisps have run out?" I myself have endured two-year-olds' concerts, and think your child will want to see at least one familiar face in the audience, but if your wife is going that's quite enough representation for one family and you should watch the cricket with a clear conscience. 5.14am GMT Swann restarts proceedings, and Warner brings up his half-century with a single. "Am I wrong to think that the groundsmen (or is it the chief executives?) can't be trusted with the foreknowledge of who will be batting first in Tests two thru five?" asks Marie Meyer of the single-toss plan. Well they wouldn't really know – the captain whose turn it was to choose would do so on the morning of the Test. 5.10am GMT Dab the corners of your mouth with your napkin. Lunch is over, the players are back out, and action is very much about to happen. 5.05am GMT A tasty first session, with England visibly sharper in the field than they have been recently, and getting all the encouragement they need to remain so. 'Tis a shame about the toss, which is one of the things I'd change about Test cricket – me, I'd have a single coin toss before the first match of a series, with the decision to bat or field alternating between the teams thereafter, to avoid a run of toss victories/defeats that has the potential to skew a series.Anyway, email me please at simon.burnton@theguardian.com. Whatever happens in Perth, the next five hours will pass more pleasurably with your help.Updated at 5.05am GMT 4.56am GMT It was The Guardian's Christmas party last night. The drinks flowed free in a central London location as the newspaper's staff let their haird down in officially-sanctioned style. All except for this OBOer, tucked up in bed nice and early in preparation for a 3.55am alarm. And England reckon they lost the toss.Anyway, this arrived overnight from James Anderson (not that one) and Duncan Innes, who were unusually moved to poetry, rather than tears and tantrums, by England's first-couple-of-Tests performances:The Australian came down like the wolf on the fold,And his cohorts were gleaming in em'rald and gold;And the Englishmen quailed at the sight of their 'taches,And meekly collapsed to surrender the Ashes.Yet back in the old times, when Summer was here,T'was then that the Aussies did tremble in fear;But now tables are turning as Winter draws nighAnd hopes for a victory dwindle and die.While far round the world all their countrymen slept,The English, once brilliant, were wholly inept;And the dreams of those sleepers waxed deadly and chill,Till they woke in the morn to a score of two-nil.And there stood the batsman with eyes pale and wide, With fear in his heart where there once had been pride;After tortuous minutes pinned back in his crease,He holed out legside with perplexing caprice.And there stood the bowler, all taken apart,With sweat on his brow and dismay in his heart.And the army was silent, not even a groan,Their banners unlifted, their trumpet unblown.The press and the pundits cry out in despair,And Boycott and Aggers are tearing their hair;And the might of the English, once lauded so high,Hath melted like snow 'neath the hot southern sky. 4.40am GMT And that is LUNCH. Break out the lobsterfish, crack a frothy bottle of fromage, lay out the sherry platter and polish the shrimp spoons. We're having a caviar cheesecake aperitif for dessert.Big session both ways - over a hundred runs in it for the Aussies, but England will be pumped to have three wickets, including the main main Clarke. Warner is the big wicket now. His scores this series: 49, 124, 29, 83*, 49*. That's some run.Mike Selvey has let us know that David Saker will be joining him for an "Evening With..." event in January, in a pub to be decided by consultation with OBO readers. It's part of the cancer research fundraiser we mentioned earlier, check that out here.That's it for me, I will be handing over to Simon Burnton to take you through the rest of the day's play, bless his carpal tunnel. It's a beautifully poised match right now, and we've got plenty to look forward to. Thanks for having me - this is Geoff Lemon signing off.Updated at 5.41am GMT 4.33am GMT Another quiet one from Stokes, Warner just gets the single that moves him to the verge of a third 50 in this series. Stokes keeping things tight in the lead-up to lunch.Fashionistas. Sedhu wants to know something. "My question is rather casual and probably less significant in the larger scheme of things," he says - false modesty, Sedhu. "But why is Clarke batting with full sleeve in the first innings and half sleeve in the second?"We demand answers.Updated at 4.52am GMT 4.27am GMT So it's Steve Smith finishing that over, and he repeats Clarke's shot but keeps it on the ground, then drives lavishly to mid off but can't get through. Also skipping around to the off spinner. Success for Swann in his first over, one wicket and one run conceded. 4.24am GMT That's a huge one, and not just because it's Clarke. Swann came on for his first ball, conceded a single to Warner, then struck with his second ball. Clarke just tried to drive to mid on with his usual footwork, and instead got that ball wider toward midwicket, and accidentally lifted it a little. It was dying on Cook at a shortish midwicket, but he leapt forward and got his fingers under the ball. Huge win for Swann to get some confidence, and for Cook to get into the game. 4.22am GMT Stokes has bowled four overs for ten runs now, not bad at all on this deck. That one's a maiden, Clarke content to stay watchful. Fair call, no need to rush with Warner on the move. 4.18am GMT Salt, meet wounds. The reports will record that as a dropped catch - Warner pulled, Bresnan stuck a hand out but the ball was well wide of him and just deflected off his fingers. To celebrate the reprieve, Warner drove a boundary through cover, then pulled a thigh-high ball way into the midwicket stand for six. What a shot that was. Some sixes these days seem almost apologetic, but that one had its feet on the coffee table and was drinking Bresnan's best Scotch. 4.13am GMT A quiet Stokes over there, just a single from the first ball. Australia consolidating here, their two form batsmen of the series settling in at the crease. 4.09am GMT Bresnan returns to try and force some kind of change. The thermometer has topped 40 degrees at the ground. Bresnan gets amazing lift from a full ball, but Clarke pulls it hard for four.The upside of England's recent form has been an upsurge in productivity. Says Alex, "I've noticed a significant shift in my attitude towards the OBO. During the last two Ashes series, I got almost nothing done, constantly flicking to the browser for the score. With the exception of the first couple of days in Brisbane, I'm now doing everything possible to avoid it. Such as actually working." 4.04am GMT Another reasonable over from Stokes, he's showing a bit. Got a slight mis-hit from Clarke, but then conceded a four steered through gully. Clarke got a single off a short ball, but wasn't entirely comfortable, then Warner got a sharp bouncer to duck under. 3.59am GMT Warner has been resisting Broad's short balls, but gets on on a line that he likes and lifts it with the uppercut over slips. It goes for four, but went very high and rolled away slowly after it pitched. Not entirely controlled. His next shot was, a hard cover drive to a ball that wasn't at all full, but Warner held the bat high and drove almost off the back foot. Hit is perfectly - not the highest-percentage shot though. He sways away from a follow-up bouncer, so he can still resist some temptation. 3.57am GMT Ben Stokes comes on for his first bowl of the day. Interesting to see him keep his place, he looked more likely with the ball than the bat in Adelaide. His fourth ball is a wide full toss that Clarke redirects with a gentle placement of the bat for four. A couple of nice deliveries in that over though. He's a prospect, is Stokes. 3.51am GMT A maiden! Much better from Broad there, got his lengths right and started using that lift from the pitch. Had Warner hopping a couple of times. 3.47am GMT That was looking a tight over from Bresilad, but Clarke drove the fifth ball down the ground with far more style than his last such shot. It wasn't too full, but Clarke manged better than Watson did. 3.43am GMT Huge over, this, from Broad. Warner takes three with another off-side punch. Four leg byes from a deflection through fine leg, then Clarke cracks one down the ground for four. That wasn't his most elegant shot, he had an angled bat and it was a bit of a heave, but it worked. Gets the quick single to cover next ball. Broad has leaked runs today - technically 23 from four overs, but the leg byes came from his poor line.I'm getting of mail in from around the world. Worried Englishmen and women in WA who need the win to stay sane. A shout-out to Martin dodging traffic in Mumbai. The Americans are following the lead of US Cricket Guy to get involved . From Jake in the States: "I'm an American, married to an Australian, and raising a little Australian-Yank 4 year old boy in DC. Like me, and unlike his aghast Aussie mum (who thought she'd escaped the game upon hieing to the US), he took to cricket like a duck to water, and has been following these Ashes with great interest and enjoyment."Well played sir. Also Simon would like to salute his friend Cecilia Lee, "an American working with some Aussies in Scotland, who finds herself in the unenviable position of siding with England against the Aussie co-workers but also sharing in the general Scottish schadenfreude with everyone else. Top marks though for even giving a toss about the cricket." I concur. But was that toss an advantage? 3.35am GMT Bresnan bowling with a short leg to Clarke. Taps a single to midwicket. Warner forces three with a back-foot punch through cover point. Bresnan bowling with some control here. 3.29am GMT Two more low scores for the men who can least afford them, on a brilliant batting pitch. Interesting comments from Mark Taylor (I know!) that Watson is so intent on getting forward and avoiding the lbw that he's not reading the length of the ball. Here and at Brisbane he's driven at balls that just weren't full enough, as well as that pull shot to one that wasn't short enough.First wicket for Broad, Clarke sees out the next couple of balls, without alarm gets off the mark with a quick single to cover. England will be glad to have him out there this early.Updated at 3.33am GMT 3.26am GMT What did I say... Watson gone. Just a length ball, Watson drove too boldly at it, and got a big fat edge to slip. 3.24am GMT Bit of a streaky over for Watson, he needs to settle. Edges four to third man of a big swatted top edge, then scores three in the air past mid off to raise the Australian 50. 3.22am GMT Chris Pitts wants to know, "Has anyone, or a well trained computer, quantified how much it's worth for one team to win the toss? Like, how many first innings runs?"On the same theme, Kieran Bettely has pointed out the table below, with this question. (I am not trusted to do anything with numbers - you've heard how the scorecard confuses me - so I'd appreciate your help, dear reader.)"Now, I can't work out how this would happen. Surely if I win the toss and win, then the other team lost the toss and lost. So shouldn't the number match up? I'm sure there's some logical explanation for this..." 3.16am GMT The first maiden of the day. Anderson beat Warner with a snorter first up, and a quiet over followed. 3.12am GMT It's the eighth over and things are already looking dire for England. Tim Bresnan brought on to replace the expensive Broad, but Watson has seen how Warner's going and wants in. First ball from Bresnan is clanged through cover for another boundary.A fair question from Toyin on this bouncy deck. "No Finn. No Tremlett. No Rankin. What was all that twaddle about our seven-foot bowlers trundling in to deliver steepling bouncers at afrighted antipodeans?" So why did they bring the tall ones? Bresnan has skid, Anderson swing, only Broad is a bouncy fellow. 3.07am GMT Bang. First ball of Anderson's next over is over-pitched, and Warner gets that nicely down the ground. Three boundaries in five balls from Warner now, 16 from 13 balls. Drives the next one in sliced fashion through the covers and gets two, wasn't a firm hit, took the outside half of the bat. A sighter for Warner who nails the next cover drive three balls later. 22 from 18 at the over's end. That's a gear change.Updated at 3.11am GMT 3.03am GMT Well, that didn't last long. Warner punches Broad down the ground for that first boundary, then gets one on his hip that he helps round to square leg for another. Bat pad is out now, and deep square leg has been sent out. Chappelli is livid. "Captain has to stand up to his bowler." Warner pinches a single with a defensive shot that rolls out toward cover. 2.59am GMT Warner starting in singles here, collects one more from Anderson, before Watson gets a half glide, half edge along the ground to third man. What odds on two other batsmen hitting a boundary before Warner's first?Updated at 3.04am GMT 2.58am GMT Hahaha oh my, that was humour! There was a car ad on the TV, and the couple are buying a car, and the man says something about room for his golf clubs and the pregnant wife is all like "You mean the baby gear" - oh that's funny, do you get it? Because men and women are different, right, and men only ever think about sport, and women only ever think about babies, and men have to fool their tyrannical wives to get to their sport and then they get busted and put on that goofy man-who's-been-caught face, and how witty was that agency's observation about people, right? Right? And basically the human race should end itself right now. 2.53am GMT What a stop by Anderson. Watson utterly creamed a cover drive, but Anderson was full length, off the ground, and stretching one hand right out to snare that ball, then bounced up like compo rubber to aim at the stumps in case they'd set off for another Self-Destructo Single. Hot stuff in the field from your lead paceman. Watto did get two through midwicket before that though. 2.50am GMT A quiet one from Anderson, Watto off the mark with one, then a wide from a high bouncer to Warner.Do you English people have any idea how hard it is to reverse the habit of a lifetime and write 15 for 1? I keep trying to write 1/15 and then realising you'd get over-excited. 2.47am GMT Elizabeth Saxton is telling me that Land of Hope and Glory is actually England's national anthem, not God Save the Queen. I won't dare dispute it, perhaps someone out there knows the full story.In the meantime, some nice words from Greg Pemberton on the anthems: "I definitely regret the intrusion of jingoism into cricket where the the shared creams/whites of either team emphasised their sharing of cricket as an ethos above tribe, with only caps or ties-as-belts gave subtle hints of origins. At the SCG as a teenager, I much preferred the silent expectation before a ripple of polite applause greeted what Cardus called something like a white waterfall as the players skipped down the stairs of the grandstand." 2.44am GMT What an eventful over. The first ball from Broad was short and had Warner fending. But Warner got a single from the second, then Rogers nudged two through midwicket, then played a beautiful on-drive to the midwicket boundary, followed by a leg glance for four, then ran himself out off the last ball. He called yes, Warner responded, then Rogers just paused. Put in the dive, but it was no good. He had 11 from 9 balls on what was his home deck for years. A huge waste of an opportunity. 2.40am GMT Oh, calamity. The third umpire is called for, but it was clear from the live shot. Rogers had taken runs at ease through that over, then tapped the last ball to the on side, hesitated a split second, then set off for one that wasn't there. Anderson had the stumps down in a flash from a shortish mid on. What an absolute waste of a dismissal from Rogers.Updated at 2.42am GMT 2.36am GMT Holy nickels. This pitch is zinging. James Anderson hasn't bowled a bouncer with that much pep in... well, the recorded history of time. Rogers played a lot of state cricket for WA for many years before moving to Victoria, so he's unfazed. Gets one outside off, then the big bouncer over middle stump, then shovels a fuller ball to the gap wide of mid on for a scurried single. Warner's also off from his first ball with a leg glance, misdirect there from Jimmy. 2.32am GMT Chris Roget's Thesaurus facing Hams Handerson. Did I read that right? 2.29am GMT ... to make themselves known. There's no need, they are. Plenty of excellent correspondence so far about the West. From Dan Osborn, "It's interesting to note that England's anxieties may not be confined to the field of play whilst in Perth. Local custom dictates that residents and visitors alike must make a suitable offering to the giant squid which lurks in the mighty Swan River."From Tom Johnstone: "I'm from Perth and remember waking to the hot easterly with a day of (distinctly medium pace) bowling ahead. My only comment to the English: don't let the flies bother you - they're just patting you on the back for trying your best."And from Nick, "As an Englishman, I'll make the blanket assumption the State of Western Australia is rubbish. Too hot, too far away, too bouncy a Walkabout. That's post-colonialism: making stuff up is all we have left now. Enjoy your lovely country/Ashes win." 2.26am GMT Does anyone think it's a bit unnecessary having all this national anthem business? I know we've got two national teams here, but we all know where they're from. 2.25am GMT At least for Dom the Pom in Geelong (his title, not mine).Cometh the hour, cometh the man. Today, Friday the 13th, will be Cook's day.**Conditions apply: see caveats** for details**Assuming he wins the toss, bats first, Ryan Harris declared unfit and Mitchell Johnson gets a nasty attack of migraine / nerves / gastro / drug induced psychosis / leprosy / beard rash******delete as appropriate 2.21am GMT Our cricketing spiritual leader, Mike Selvey, has been asking for OBO readers' help. His wife Sarah is doing good work trying to raise money for research into an extremely rare cancer, Cholangiocarcinoma. Sarah's brother David died of this extremely quickly earlier this year, and there's very little research into the disease.Sarah is raising money through a JustGiving page, by doing a charity run. She's had great support from OBO readers, but it would be great to get her over the 2000-pound mark this match. If you can help out, please head over to http://www.justgiving.com/Sarah-Selvey1 and leave a message for Sarah and the rest of David's family. 2.15am GMT There's some extremely poignant symphonic music playing over a Clarke montage. A brave spaceship pilot will sacrifice himself to save his planet by flying straight into the invading fleet leader's reactor core any minute now... any minute.I wonder what tunes Cook will get. Something ordered and Teutonic. 2.10am GMT How unlikely is it that two opposing captains would manage to play their 100th Tests matches at the same time. That's some Illuminati business happening right there, I can tell you. It's also a bit mean, because one of them is going to have to have a miserable time while the other is happy. Would you rather lose your milestone Test against your full-strength arch-enemy, or win it against an understrength West Indies side completely out of their depth in three days? 2.05am GMT We've got minimal changes on the team front. The same XI for Australia - how long since they played the seam team three matches in a row. Only one change for England - Bresnan coming back in for Monty. Should they have kept Swann on here? Should they have given old Lanky Rankin a run on this pitch? Should I phrase everything as a rhetorical question? 2.00am GMT Nothing going England's way here. Michael Clarke even does a little dance as he tries to step the wrong way and falls over. Australia are, you will be shocked to know, going to bat. 1.58am GMT Good to see the coverage off to a great start, with a video report on Michael Vaughan playing a knockabout football match. It must be extremely validating to have every mundane facet of your life captured by camera crews for distribution to a national and international audience. Now if only we could a few banter-filled anecdotes about commentators' playing days! 1.54am GMT The start. It's easy, hey? No one is winning, no one is losing, no one has gobbed off at anyone yet. Geoff Lemon joining you from the far Antipodes for this civilised early encounter. It is blazing hot here in Perth, and not yet 10am, and that's the real 10am because they hold no truck with this daylight savings rubbish here in the West. So it's going to be a tough old day.Fire off an email as you see fit on the state of play, the state of commentary, or the State of Western Australia. 1.00am GMT Geoff's at the Waca and will be here shortly. In the meantime, here are a few things to keep you occupied …Alastair Cook has described the third Test as "do or die" for England, though the captain's cause was immediately hindered when Monty Panesar suffered an injury scare to further complicate England's delicate selection process.Panesar, who made his first international appearance in almost nine months in the second Test defeat at Adelaide, was unable to bowl in the team's penultimate practice session at the Waca because of a sore side. He did some fitness and fielding drills on the outfield and England say he is still available but they will not want to take any chances given the forecast temperatures of up to 39C over the weekend.Continue reading here …Back in 2001 I was a novice reporter working for Australia's Channel Seven in Sydney when I interviewed a relatively unknown 19-year-old left-arm fast bowler called Mitchell Johnson.I wanted to write a profile for its sports website after seeing some comments online from the legendary Dennis Lillee about a young fast bowler he was calling a "once-in-a-lifetime prospect". Two years earlier, so the story goes, Lillee had phoned his old team-mate Rod Marsh and told him to "get this kid into the [Australian Cricket] Academy" after seeing him bowl only three balls.Continue reading here …Updated at 6.01am GMT