Standing in the kitchen of a small apartment in outer-suburban Melbourne, Htoo and his wife Gana are reading aloud from an English textbook, helped by their volunteer tutor Narelle. The language is clear and easy to understand, but when they put the book away and sit down to speak about their progress with learning English, things get much more difficult.With the help of a translator, Htoo and Gana explain that they, like thousands of refugees belonging to the Karen ethnic group, fled Burma in 1990. They spent 15 years in a refugee camp on the western border of Thailand, where their daughter was born, before being accepted for resettlement in Australia in 2007. In many ways they are the new face of Australia's long-running Australian Migrant English Programme (Amep) which, 60 years after it was founded, is struggling to deliver functional English to a changing, and swelling, cohort of arrivals. Amep has seen client numbers increase from 37,000 in 2004 to more than 50,000 this year, a third of whom are resettling under the programme's humanitarian stream. This changing demographic has sparked a major review of the Amep programme that will lead to a complete re-tendering for provision of teaching services from 2010. In a discussion paper released in July, the recently renamed Department of Immigration and Citizenship reports that: "An audit undertaken by Ernst & Young in 2007 noted that the current strategic goal and objectives of the programme do not align." Htoo and Gana have completed the standard 510 hours of tuition provided for all non-English-speaking- background (Nesb) migrants, but are clearly having trouble communicating in spoken English. Michelle de Courcy, senior lecturer and postgraduate coordinator for Tesol at the University of Melbourne, said this was a familiar scenario: "The decoding skills required for reading aloud are relatively easy to acquire, and we often encounter Karen people with very large and complex vocabularies, but not the links required to put them together for interpersonal communication." The Amep review discussion paper notes: "A major criticism of the Amep is a lack of distinction between client groups and a 'one-size-fits-all' approach in providing English tuition." De Courcy, who with the Australian Council of Tesol Associations is making a submission to the Amep review, explained: "The Amep programme may have been appropriate for earlier highly schooled, highly literate cohorts, but you have to look at exactly who is making up the classes — a good example is the Sudanese migrants arriving in the past few years. You need to look at whether they're from southern Sudan, the Dinka, whose language doesn't really have a written form, or those from the Muslim north who have to be literate in Arabic to be able to read the Koran."Another facet of the problem is that the programme has long been promoted as a pathway into employment, despite the fact that 56% of migrants arrive under the "family" stream and many of them are too old to work. This is now being addressed in the Amep review, which proposes to create two distinct pathways: "Settlement for Employment Participation" and "Settlement for Social Participation".Perhaps more importantly for groups such as the Karen, the review discussion paper raised the issue of the number of hours of tuition that will deliver basic functional English. It stated: "The 510 hours entitlement is not based on any estimate of the time needed to reach proficiency in English. It was derived by averaging the hours that Amep clients spent in the programme irrespective of educational background." It also notes that Canada and the UK "do not cap the number of hours of English language training offered to eligible clients".The report cites recent research that suggests "the learning of another language requires on average 1,800 hours". While this is a laudable objective, such a large and expensive increase in hours for 50,000 migrants a year looks unlikely.Where government funding falls short, charities do their best to bridge the gap. In the case of Htoo and Gana, and the four other adult Karen with whom they share their weekly classes, the charity is The Smith Family, which runs a language programme known as Each One Teach One (Eoto). While the scheme itself is not new — it was founded in Sydney in 1971 largely to help socially isolated migrant women — it is now attempting to expand in Melbourne to help refugees falling through the Amep net.Since 2006 it has expanded into five of Melbourne's poorer suburbs, funded through individual and corporate donations and with all tutoring done on a volunteer basis. "Finding the tutors is the ongoing issue," said Eoto coordinator, Lisa Miller, "though we'll never run out of students."In addition to face-to-face tutoring, it links students to English speaking "mentors" by phone, sending each a copy of the same book to read aloud during three 20-minute sessions a week. "One big problem is that they need a landline to call their mentors, which many of them can't afford. Some have mobile phones, but the calls are expensive. That's a huge frustration, because we can achieve so much just for the cost of a phone call," said Miller.Eoto volunteer tutors complete a six-week, part-time training course before teaching. Htoo and Gana's teacher Naralle works for an insurance company by day and teaches the Karen group one evening per week. "Their reading and writing is very good, so I'm going to start to focus more on conversation," she said. "For me, it's about giving something back to the community, but I also get a lot of insight into their culture. I've travelled in south-east Asia and I hope to go and work in the camps my students come from."