The craic – the conviviality - was there all right. A dozen or so young Irish men and women singing and dancing their way through the night. Shouting and singing over the roar of a wild weekend pub session.McAlpine's Fusiliers, Spancil Hill, The Rakes of Kildare, Drowsy Maggie. And the rest. All the current favourites were being sung or played.It might have been a session anywhere in the Republic or Northern Ireland.But it wasn't. This session was taking place in Frances – a delightful little hamlet in South Australia near the Victorian border.The place was really jumping that night because there was a folk festival in the town and all the musos from near and far were there.On the night of this pub revelry the town was sweltering in uncharacteristic tropical humidity. It was also besieged by a plague of insects that had come with the weather. Crickets for example. And mosquitoes: the word in Frances was that in Naracoorte, the nearest sizeable town and one which has a hospital, they are getting four or five new cases of the mosquito borne Ross River virus a week.An Irish voice at my elbow in the session gave me some of their background: "They're picking onions on farms in this area … There's some deal you can do with the government whereby if you do the seasonal rural work for six months you can get an extension on your [holiday] visa and stay here longer … There are big problems with the economy in Ireland now and that's why they are out here … Back home it's bad … The jobs aren't there for young people now … So, you do what you can to get by."Maybe these young ones are thinking of staying on in Australia. Who knows?For several delightful hours the songs and tunes kept coming – and the pints flowing – until we were all tipped out of the pub at midnight.I hope they all made it back safely to their farms. Someone's son or daughter back in Ireland, every one of them. Let's hope these young backpackers go on to live long and happy lives. Whether they spend the rest of their days here, or over there in Ireland, I hope they do so secure in the knowledge that the land of their birth has survived the current economic and social disaster and has continued to make its way in the world.Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a 'Letter from' one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions for our Letter From page – they should focus on giving our readers a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send submissions to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com 