It is a Commonwealth cliche that coups take place in benighted developing nations. On Saturday, however, the Lucky Country will choose between two leaders who deposed their predecessors. Australia's election fight, between Labor's Julia Gillard and the Liberal Tony Abbott (whose party is in semi-permanent coalition with the Nationals) is brutal, and polls suggest the slugging will go on until the final bell. But for all the blood and sweat, the scrapping feels pathetically small – the arguments turning on the format of staged encounters, and the source of the coalition's financial figures. In sum, the campaign seems more concerned with the campaign than anything else.Issues of substance do divide the centre-left and the rightwing platforms, but politicians are not minded to appeal to the better angels of Australian natures. Kevin Rudd, the prime minister whom Ms Gillard ousted and replaced in June, rapidly shredded his great popularity by describing climate change as the great moral challenge of the era – and then failing to deliver the changes he said it required. Mr Abbott is a climate sceptic, a stance which helped him displace Malcolm Turnbull last year. Ms Gillard expresses confidence in the science, but her plan of action centres on citizen consultation, which sounds like a recipe for overheated air. Water shortages and arid weather leave Australia close to the climatic frontline, and with passivity emanating from the mainstream, the Green party appears to be on the verge of something of a breakthrough.The campaign briefly promised to take a more inspiring turn this week, when the Welsh-born Ms Gillard raised the question of whether the 110-year-old Commonwealth of Australia might finally be ready to sever its deference to the British monarchy when Queen Elizabeth shuffles off the coil. Demographics, trade and geography have all run in favour of republican independence for decades. The democratic shortcomings in the existing arrangements were exposed some 35 years ago when the Queen's governor general sacked the prime minister, Gough Whitlam. Australia's monarchists are blind to much in their country's present, and are as selective in their reading of its past as America's Anglo-Saxon Protestant elite once were. Mr Abbott once said affinity to the British monarchy was as natural as respect for one's parents. Such remarks discount the perspectives of Australia's modern-day Asians, and also betray ignorance of the ethnic Germans and other non-Britons who have long been part of its story. The anti-monarchist majority is well established, but it has lacked any strategy since going down to defeat in a 1999 referendum. Disagreements within its ranks about the new republic's rules were to blame, the chief argument being about whether the president should be elected. The politicians feared a popularly chosen president might become a second head of government, so under the model on the ballot paper, parliament would choose. But the people suspected a politicians' stitch-up, and the crown lived to fight another day.In the event, the insubstantial air of this year's campaign reasserted itself, without any need for Ms Gillard to explain her strategy for uniting republicans – rather than allowing them once again to divide and fall. She talks vaguely about consultation in which the prime minister would only be one voice. With the environment that is plainly inadequate but with constitutional change a little fudge might be what is required. As with voting reform in Britain, there is much to be said for concentrating first on winning agreement for change, and moving on to the potentially divisive discussion about precisely what happens next only once that is won. Ms Gillard is plainly shrewd, too, to decouple the monarchy from the person of a popular Queen. From a dismal election campaign in a country far, far away, British republicans might just garner valuable food for thought.