Everyone dreams of the glorious sunshine, the succulent barbecues and the azure ocean. But living in Australia offered other pleasures: a sense of unimaginable space, friendly locals, proper power showers, cute wombats, and, best of all, never having to wear socks.After two years, however, I gave up the antipodean idyll for cramped, chilly Britain once again. And I am not alone. Thousands of "ping-pong poms" emigrate to Australia only to return home again: almost 107,000 settled in Australia between 2005 and 2010, but over the same period more than 30,000 decided to leave permanently. Despite its booming economy, 86,300 people left Australia for ever in 2009/10, the highest emigration ever recorded.Why? Are ping-pong poms classic whingeing poms, unable to appreciate the wonders of down under? Or is Australia an achingly dull cultural desert?Economics may cause people to leave but emotions tend to bring them home again, say sociologists Mary Holmes and Roger Burrows, who studied the reasons for returning given by Britons on an internet discussion forum.After six years in Victoria, one woman bounced back to Britain citing the joys of "walking everywhere, wrapping up warm, politeness, greenery, quality TV, cosy rooms, good driving, friendliness of people, sense of humour, being part of Europe, pubs, accents, shops". She disparaged the Australia of "macho culture, the bush, terrible driving, cliques, awful TV, heat, boredom, four-wheel-drives everywhere and dumbing down".Finding Australia "boring" cropped up more than once but the urge to return may say more about the individual than the country they moved to.Returnees, says Burrows, are often "very local people" who grow up in close extended families and communities. "If they moved to another town in the UK they would have that sense of displacement and loss," he says. Other studies have shown how British men in particular suffer loneliness in Australia because there is less post-work pub culture.Surprisingly, Skype and social networks may make things worse, says Burrows, because keeping close ties with home makes people less likely to bond with their new country.And ping-pong poms often keep on pinging. It is the curse of the exile to return home and find everything has changed, and disillusioned returnees often go back to Australia again.Australia has tempted me at times but it was not just my girlfriend and family who pulled me back to Britain. I missed football on a Saturday afternoon and grey days in November. And for all the glories of the ocean, I pined for the sea. The grey-brown, flat-calm North Sea.