Australians who have spent sizeable amounts of time in China learn to distrust western representations of our adopted motherland. We inherit the same defensiveness seen in every high-level political exchange, where some great western power shakes their finger like a nagging teacher and Chinese leaders – feeling much aggrieved – stamp their feet in a huff.“This play is all about China – right up your alley!” a friend said, just before Sydney Theatre Company’s Kryptonite began. Internally, I was in brace mode.Over the next 15 minutes I slowly, cautiously, began to relax into the hands of writer Sue Smith, who has clearly been flexing her research chops. We are introduced to a pair of university classmates, Dylan (Tim Walter) and Lian (Ursula Mills), who will meet at various points over the next 25 years, each meeting sending them in new trajectories, like pinballs colliding.The Australian Dylan and Chinese Lian embody for each another (with mutual exoticisation) the good, bad and ugly of their respective nations. Dylan with his “curling, gold” leg hair has a looseness that’s seductive to Lian. But when his political demonstrations reveal more larrikinism than conviction, he comes off as flippantly narcissistic. “I just wanted to get naked and put a rocket under this complacent joint,” he tells Lian.She is serious, but not without humour; a glowing optimist with a purity that is a product of inexperience, not naivety. She finds shame in her lowly situation, but it is simply the flipside of her ambition and work ethic. “I have pride, Dylan. You know this word? Pride,” she tells him heatedly. He is captivated – and later horrified – by her steeliness versus the soft nostalgia with which she recalls an idyllic Chinese childhood.While this kind of cross-cultural exchange is nothing exceptional, from my own experience, the gap between local and foreigner does seem to be wider in China. Foreigners are perceived, at least initially, as draped with the colours of their national flag, and with varying degrees of frustration and humour the words “you don’t understand” inevitably show up regularly in conversation. It is a sentence uttered throughout the play.Of course, understanding that big, energetic, messy thing called China is a mammoth task. In her latest book, Linda Jaivin – one of many writers and academics that Smith consulted in writing her play – quotes a famous Taiwan writer called Li Ao: “China’s a massive thing, still hidden in the mists. The Chinese don’t understand China; all they know are ‘Chinese cliches’. Foreigners don’t understand China; all they know is ‘Chinese chop suey’.”Smith does much better than “chop suey”, despite having only been to China once, for a few weeks, more than 30 years ago. In her cosy Petersham home, the playwright credits her Chinese sister-in-law. Many of their long conversations fed into this work and it shows: the play is stuffed with contemporary Chinese references, from Weibo, to land dispossessions, “leftover women” and internet censorship.There is a spinning, joyful nausea about the play too, which required big risks on Smith’s part. In explaining the challenges of capturing an alien culture, she says: “I’m actually trying to walk this fine line of how do we feel about each other? Can we ever really trust one another? Can we ever real understand each other? Of course there’s going to be dangers in that territory. So, just bite the bullet and hope for the best really.”The play is uneven in spots, as it attempts to juggle political intrigue, with a love story and rich historical details. But it is also a bold work that tackles a critical issue in contemporary Australia: our relationship with a foreign nation, and how we react to large cultural differences. In looking at Australia’s foreign policy, Smith identifies the country’s heavy-handed suspicion of non-democractic, non-western countries.“Clive Palmer’s recent spray is a reminder of just how profound the distrust is under the surface in this country. The politicians, when they’re sensible, say all the right things: ‘we respect China and China’s our best friend, blah blah blah’. In reality the whole geopolitical sphere is nervous about the rise of China. “Is it [because] China is not a democracy or is it the old yellow peril fear? What is it? I don’t know, and I wanted to just shine a light on it.”• Kryptonite is presented by the Sydney Theatre Company until 18 October, then by the State Theatre Company of South Australia from 22 October to 9 November.