Turning right about 500km north of Adelaide we are in the desert land of yellowcake uranium, opals and fossil hunters. The landscape is dusk red as we drive into Andamooka where we are misled by the empty streets, seemingly abandoned mine workings and drifts of emus in the myall scrub. This is no sleepy landscape – there is drama, adventure and change all around us. Just a few kilometres away is the largest uranium deposit on the planet. Andamooka is starting to reap the benefits of its proximity to Olympic Dam and Roxby Downs, where rents are soaring and the Fifo (Fly in, fly out) set is being augmented by a more permanent mining society. Business is booming and the birth rate higher than the Australian average.Not everyone is happy. Opal miners cherish their privacy and some shake their heads over the newly tarred roads that will bring unwelcome, as well as welcome, visitors. Andamooka produces some of the world's finest opals and many of its rugged individuals prefer to gouge out their ghostly, open-cut mines up close and personal rather than with hands off, hi-tech juggernauts. Opal mining is an addictive quest, and only the heat and flies drive some to brief sleep before they shrug back over the potch mounds to their treasure hunts.But the real buccaneers of this outback are the fossil hunters, ranging across the arid depths of the ancient Eromanga Sea to uncover plesiosaurs, ichthyosaurs and giant crocodilians. Academics love them or loathe them; their finds are so precious they are sent to high-security lockups in the southern cities – or, sometimes, freely given to the nation's museums.We walk down a dusty road with a fossil hunter and he soon spots a perfect opalised shell under someone's foot. We are lucky enough to be invited home to see a dinosaur laid out across the carpet of two rooms, with its head on the kitchen table. Indiana Jones pales by comparison with this adventurer.As night falls the "mine that never sleeps" hurls it sulphurous glow at the sky, but fortunately loses the challenge to that majestic, glistening canopy. This mine can be spotted from space, and everywhere we are losing the wonder of the night sky to such light pollution.Perhaps the tarred road through Andamooka marks an end rather than a beginning?Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving our readers a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com