Ireland has bequeathed much to Australia, from the bloodlines of legends such as Ned Kelly, Thomas Keneally and Paul Keating, to cutting those with overinflated egos down to size (aka the tall poppy syndrome), to much of your humour.But one of the greatest aspects of Irish life – the utter adoration of Christmas – has failed to ever find serious purchase down under.My first encounter of the great oddness of Christmas in Australia was in Perth in 1992 when I saw schoolchildren wearing synthetic red outfits singing hymns in 30 degree heat. But at least they were trying. Most people don’t make any effort to get into the spirit of the season. In Ireland we start celebrating Christmas as soon as Halloween is over, and it doesn’t end until January 2. We spend two months meeting people, socialising and properly analysing the year that’s ending and previewing the one to come. It’s psychologically more beneficial than just going for a swim.Halloween emerged from Samhain, a pagan Irish festival. They ate, drank and celebrated what they had because the nights were drawing in and there was no guarantee the sun would ever come back as strong as it was just weeks earlier.  Related: How to do an Australian Christmas Now when St Patrick brought Christianity to Ireland, and helpfully got rid of the snakes while he was at it, he assured the natives God would not smite them and spring would surely follow winter. My ancestors believed him, but this was not reason enough to do away with Samhain – it was just a good excuse to continue the party until it was time to wet the head of baby Jesus eight weeks later.People in Australia just don’t love Christmas. Longtime Sydney mayor Clover Moore was the Christmas Scrooge in 2004 with her “seasons greetings” banners, which John Howard rightly called “political correctness from central casting”. Stung by the criticism, she has been pro-Christmas ever since, and wants Sydney to be a “Christmas destination”. It hasn’t made any discernible difference.Australians do, generally, send Christmas cards, but they very often write Xmas, which I cannot abide. The Christian Brothers beat that hatred into me so hard it still gives me shivers when I read it. And when you complain about someone writing the dreaded word, the Xmas-writer will invariably get all defensive and say the X part comes from the Greek word for Christ. So either Australia has the world’s highest number of Greek scholars or, just possibly, the highest number of people too lazy to write Christmas. (And please don’t refer to “Chrissy” and definitely do not wish me “happy holidays”.)Think I’m being a bit pedantic, taking this all too seriously? That’s nothing. I come from a country where Christmas tree theft is so common the police have air patrols to protect remote plantations. Operation Hurdle, as it’s called, is now in its fourth year after a 2011 incident in which a Christmas tree grower in County Wicklow was tied up and robbed. Now that’s taking things a bit too seriously.Part of the problem in Australia is, of course, that it’s summer. Christmas in Ireland helps shorten the winter. There are only seven hours of daylight at this time of year so it’s never far from being dark and very cold. But pubs are a nice warm place to meet friends. Add some alcohol and Christmas magic happens.I was in Dublin last November and it seemed Ireland’s economic woes were a thing of the past, as if the Celtic Tiger had been resurrected. Christmas lights and decorations were everywhere, the Grafton Street string quartet buskers who play Pachelbel’s Canon all day long in summer (because it’s the best earner) were still playing Pachelbel’s Canon all day long – but doing so while wearing Christmas hats.  Related: Band Aid song Do They Know It’s Christmas? re-recorded for Ebola cause Everybody seemed happy, Band Aid’s Do They Know It’s Christmas (the original 1984 version) was belting out of every shop, the streets were alive and the pubs and restaurants were packed. Australian cities could sorely use some of that happy nighttime economy.If you really want to impress an Irish person that you’re down with this whole Christmas thing, refer to the day after Christmas as St Stephen’s day, not Boxing Day. On that day we do not trifle with cricket tests or the Sydney to Hobart yacht race, we return to the pubs which were all closed on Christmas Day and listen to the Wren (pronounced wran) boys singing carols. And if we just want to stay at home, we listen to dedicated radio station Christmas FM.Australia’s journey to properly celebrating Christmas needs to start once the Melbourne Cup ends. As soon as you have torn up your non-winning betting tickets you should start wishing people “happy Christmas”. Trust me, you’ll feel better. 