The rise of China is a massive realignment of economic and, in due course, political and strategic power at a speed and on a scale the world has not seen before. According to the International Monetary Fund's forecasts it will overtake the United States as the world's largest economy in 2016. Others argue it has already done so.There are a few nations with a sense of cultural continuity and exceptionalism that rival China's, but none rival its scale. China sees itself as a 3,000-year culture, for almost all modern history the world's largest and strongest country.Resource security (energy, minerals and food) is a growing preoccupation of Beijing. Its rush to acquire access to natural resources, including in Australia, is entirely understandable. And the financial crisis offers great opportunities for a cash-rich China to acquire as many premium resource assets as it can, so that it emerges with a global portfolio of sufficient scale and diversity to secure long-term, low-cost access to all the resources it needs.So China represents a challenge to the US that is utterly unique. Americans, have assumed that they will always be the strongest, richest and cleverest nation on earth. Tom Friedman and Michael Mandelbaum's book, That Used to Be Us, is eloquent testimony to a growing sense of inadequacy. This sense of being outclassed by China is not limited to Americans. Nobody who has visited Shanghai could be unimpressed.To many in the west, as worrying as the shift of manufacturing and economic output to Asia are the transfers of political, institutional and military influence that will surely follow. And international institutions are changing to reflect that – the G20 is one example. Shifts in economic weight and military potential are a legitimate cause for anxiety, as the world's grim 20th-century history reminds us.Previous threats to more than a century of American economic primacy were not credible: the USSR of the late 50s and the Japan of the late 80s, the two alleged challengers, had economies only 40% as large. So the stakes are high, and this time the challenger is real.And there is also strategic anxiety in the US over China, reflecting a concern that China has a very different understanding of the way in which world affairs should be ordered than the west.While ever alert, we should not be alarmed, says Henry Kissinger, who argues that China's well-developed and historic sense of its central place will make it a less outwardly assertive leading power than the US. China's growth has indeed not been matched by any expansionist tendencies beyond reuniting Taiwan. The central role of trade in China's prosperity also argues for its rise to remain peaceful. At 55% of its GDP in 2010, it has more to lose than most from any conflict that disrupts global economic flows.The best and most realistic strategic outcome for east Asia must be one in which the powers are in balance, with each side effectively able to deny the domination of the other.With its energy and resource security depending on long global sea lanes, it is hardly surprising that China would seek to enhance its naval capacity, so suggestions that China's recent launch of one aircraft carrier and plans to build another are signs of a new belligerence are wide of the mark.It makes no sense for the US or its allies to base long-term strategic policy on the proposition that they are on an inevitable collision course with a militarily aggressive China. I disagree with the underlying premise of a 2009 Australian white paper that we should base our defence planning on the contingency of a naval war with China in the South China Sea. Prejudice is not a substitute for coolly rational analysis. China needs to be more transparent about its goals in the region and build confidence with its neighbours so that misunderstandings can be avoided.We in Australia have to adopt a clear-eyed appraisal of the strategic balance in east Asia. America is our closest ally. However, as China rises to become the world's largest economy and in time a military rival to the US we are presented with a nation whose institutions and culture are very different to ours. Yet China is our largest trading partner and in large measure responsible for our current and prospective prosperity. We have every reason, and indeed every prospect, of remaining close and becoming closer friends of both these giants.