Last Thursday, the head of the Treasury, Dr Martin Parkinson appeared before the Senate economics committee, addressing the subject of living standards and normality.He referred to a speech given by the deputy governor of the Reserve Bank, Dr Philip Lowe, called What is Normal. Parkinson described it as “compulsory reading for anybody who is thinking about these sorts of issues”.So what is the speech about and why should we listen to it?The crux of the speech is that Australians are not really comparing themselves with a normal state of affairs when considering the past 10 years.The period from 2000 to the start of the GFC was so good and so long that we forgot it wasn’t normal.He notes, for example, that from the mid-1980s up to the mid-2000s the amount of saved income fell, but by the mid-2000s things got a bit silly. From 1998 to 2006, as a nation, we spent nearly all we earned and sometimes spent even more.Where did we spend? Well, a lot of it went on debt to buy houses.After five years from 1987 to 1992 of fairly modest increases in the amount of debt households were taking on, in the mid 90s Australia started to get a taste for debt.By 1997 it was an addiction. From 2002 Australians binged on debt like it was a drug. From June 2001 to June 2006 the ratio of Australian debt to household income had risen 55 points from 98% of income to 153%:This was neither sustainable or normal.Similarly, Parkinson noted that when people think of standards of living, they don’t think, “Where was I 20 years ago? Where was I 10 years ago?” Instead they compare their position yesterday with that of tomorrow. As a result, he noted “a lot of the sheer increase in average wealth in this country is not recognised”.That sheer increase in wealth and living standards was also on the back of a very abnormal rise in Australia's terms of trade – the price for exports over the price paid for imports.This means that national income has grown by more than productivity. This is not normal:This is where the bad news arrives: no one expects the terms of trade to continue to grow – indeed, it is expected to fall.If we want general living standards to increase like they have in the past 10 years (and I’m talking generally, not in terms of equality), we will need productivity to take up the slack.Now you might look at the 1990s and think national income grew quite nicely, but the problem during that time was quite abnormal productivity growth and also abnormal increases in participation due to a big influx of women entering the workforce.For most of this century productivity growth has slowed. This was due in part to the drought which hurt the rural sector, and, ironically, in large part to the increases in terms of trade which made less productive mining more profitable. This also led to a massive increase in investment, which was more labour intensive and less productive.The Treasury has estimated that productivity will grow at around 1.5% a year for the next four years, but if terms of trade decline by 7.5% a year standards of living will stay flat.The good news is that in the past five years productivity growth has averaged 1.5% a year and in the past 12 months it grew by 2.4%. It is still unclear, however, if the increase is part of a cycle that will soon end, or whether it is a structural shift that will continue.We also often forget how abnormal it is for the economy to grow at 22 years without decline. The second longest period of such continuous growth since 1960 was for 13 years between 1961-1974.Does that mean we’re headed for a recession and declining living standards? No, but in the next few years we may begin to grasp how good we had it for the past 20 years.Normal might no longer be abnormal.