A young man in shades is being interviewed. The conversation, airing on an old black-and-white TV, runs like this: "Do you think purchasing Aboriginal art is an act of cultural reconciliation?" "Uh, no." "Are you sure about that?" "Uh, no." "So it is reconciliatory?" "Uh, yes." "In what way?" "I hadn't thought about it."The video, created by Tess Allas, Charlie Schneider and Vernon Ah Kee, is a parody of the TV interviews given by Andy Warhol in which he rotated three responses: "Uh, yes", "Uh, no" and "I hadn't thought about it".The work is part of Four Rooms, an exhibition at Tandanya, the National Aboriginal Cultural Institute in Adelaide. Tandanya usually shows more traditional indigenous arts, but for the duration of the Adelaide festival it has been transformed into a Factory-like environment of silver walls, popcorn machines and vintage sofas. There are posters that state "Let's be polite about Aboriginal art" and reproductions of Warhol's soap boxes that substitute Brillo for a contemporaneous Australian brand, Nulla Nulla. The latter's packaging features an Aboriginal woman in a breastplate being beaten with wooden spoons beneath the line: "Knocks dirt on the head."Playing the Warhol part in the video is Vernon Ah Kee, whose surfboards decorated with sacred Aboriginal designs have earned him rock-star status in Australia. He's the only visual artist here who also took part in the Royal Academy's survey of Australian art in London last year. It's fair to say that the critical response wasn't kind. Writing in the Sunday Times, Waldemar Januszczak likened John Olsen's Sydney Sun, an iconic abstract painting, to "a cascade of diarrhoea". Brian Sewell dismissed the Aboriginal pieces as "stale rejiggings of a half-remembered heritage wrecked by European alcohol". The Guardian's Adrian Searle was more balanced, but had to concede that the representation of Australian art from the 1960s to the present day was piecemeal and unsatisfactory.The curator of Four Rooms, Troy-Anthony Baylis, suggests that the whole notion of cramming a continent into an institution was misguided. The first thing visitors to the RA were presented with was an acknowledged masterpiece of modern Aboriginal painting, Anwerlarr Anganenty (Big Yam Dreaming), created by Emily Kame Kngwarreye at the age of 85. "When I see photographs of Emily Kame Kngwarreye painting those huge canvases outdoors in wide-open spaces," says Baylis, "it reminds me of the drive-in cinemas I used to go to as a kid. These paintings are not pictorial representations of the landscape, they are part of the landscape itself. Displacing them to the white walls and artificial lighting of a gallery is like putting a lion in a cage."Baylis is a gay, cross-dressing blue-haired performance artist of Irish and Aboriginal descent who still travels to Brighton once a year to visit the widow of his friend Leigh Bowery. He didn't see the RA show on his last trip, nor did he particularly want to. "I have no personal disregard for the 19th century paintings that made up the bulk of that show," he says. "But they're so indebted to European styles and schools of thought, I don't really think of them as Australian art at all."Nick Mitzevich, director of the Art Gallery of South Australia, adds: "It was a pity that Australian critics seemed to take their lead from their British counterparts. But on a personal level, I was proud that a significant selection of works from this museum were made available to audiences on the other side of the world."Mitzevich is also the curator of Dark Heart, the 2014 biennial of new Australian art. "I called the exhibition Dark Heart because, for me, the most exciting artists today are those interested in representing the underbelly of Australian culture," he says. "I wanted to show work that represents a young country still healing from the wounds of its frankly brutal colonial past."Mitzevich points out that Australia is a country in which one in two members of the population were born overseas, or have at least one parent who was. Yet the migrant dream is succinctly exploded by Alex Seton's work Someone Died Trying to Have a Life Like Mine, which features an array of limp lifejackets strewn across the gallery floor. It's a reference to an incident from last May, in which 28 empty lifejackets washed up on the shore of the Cocos Islands off Western Australia. It comes as quite a shock when you realise the jackets have actually been carved from solid marble. Wombeyan marble from Queensland, to be specific, which itself seems to challenge the Eurocentric assumption that sculptural-grade marble must come from Carrara.Yet there is one work that seems to outstrip everything the RA attempted. It's by Ben Quilty, generally reckoned to be the finest of Australia's young painters with a solo exhibition coming up at the Saatchi Gallery in London in July. For Dark Heart he has created a vast, symmetrical, butterfly-shaped blob formed by slathering an eight metre canvas in acrylic and folding it in half. Its title, The Island, pays homage to the Tasmanian views of the great 19th-century Australian landscape painter Haughton Forrest, and has been executed with a confrontational messiness in which European history painting, Aboriginal art and contemporary surf culture slide into a viscous mix. There's horror within it, like smeared entrails, but great beauty as well. It's too big. It defies comprehension. It's a Rorschach test that opens up the subconscious of Australia.• The Adelaide festival runs until 16 March. Alfred Hickling's flights were provided by Emirates