The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and clarifications column, Tuesday 24 August 2010 In the article below we incorrectly stated that the Australian Green party was either about to have, or as it transpired on Saturday, had indeed achieved, its first elected MP. Adam Bandt was the first Green candidate to win a seat in the lower house of the Australian parliament at a general election; the first ever Green party MP was elected in a byelection in 2002. Early results from Australia's federal election suggest the country faces the prospect of a hung parliament for the first time in 70 years.With more than half the votes counted, Australia's first woman prime minister, Julia Gillard, is set to lose at least 16 seats and gain only two, leaving her well short of the 76 seats required for an overall majority, according to public broadcaster ABC.Gillard told supporters at her Labor party headquarters in Melbourne: "Obviously, this is too close to call. There are many seats where the result is undecided and where it will take a number of days of counting to determine the result."A record number of votes cast for independents and the Green party makes the prospect of a coalition government likely. The Greens look on course to hold the balance of power in the country's powerful upper house, the senate, for the first time in their history, and they may also win their first seat in the lower house.The closeness of the contest is a huge turnaround in fortunes for the incumbent Labor party, whose previous leader and prime minister, Kevin Rudd, had a 70% approval rating. His decision in April to shelve the centrepiece of his climate change policy, the emissions trading scheme, dealt his popularity a heavy blow, and a fight with the country's big mining companies over tax finished him off.With an election due in months, the party needed a new direction and a scapegoat. Gillard appeared to be the perfect solution. When she took over on 24 June she was embraced as Australia's first female prime minister while Rudd took the blame for the party's woes.But the respite did not last long. Gillard's campaign has been dogged by leaks against her, party infighting and the presence of Rudd himself, and now she is fighting for her political life. No first-term government has been thrown out in Australia for 80 years.Gillard's rival Tony Abbott became leader of the conservative Liberal opposition nine months ago, defeating his predecessor by one vote. At that time, the party was deep in the political wilderness. It was reminiscent of the Tories under William Hague and Iain Duncan Smith, suddenly dishevelled in opposition after a long period in power.Abbott has long been seen as a gaffe-prone fitness enthusiast who is lampooned in the media for wearing tight swimming trunks. More recently, however, he has managed to portray himself as a viable prime minister.