It’s 6am on a winter’s morning: mist is rising off the lake, and the kookaburras laugh in a nearby gum, challenging the laggards to get up and enjoy yet another sunny day in the low-to-mid-20s. That’s 20C, not your Pommy 20 Fahrenheit – it never gets that cold here.We turn over in bed. No need for us oldies to get up just yet, though our friendly juvenile whip-bird has now joined the morning chorus, lulling us back to sleep.Boreen Point is 20km from civilisation, by road or by river, but many more from the cares of the everyday world. Ready to retire from the city life 10 years ago, we were fortunate in finding the right place at the right price at the right time. We only needed a six-month babysitting sojourn with our grandchildren in Kirriemuir, Scotland, to convince us that we could easily adapt to life in a small community: in this case, one that houses less than 200 people, after a lifetime spent, in my case, living and working in cities from 1 to 8 million, here in Australia and in Britain.Our little community sometimes swells, especially at holiday times and when there is a sailing regatta, or our international arts festival The Floating Land is happening, to almost 1,000: every spare bed in the town is occupied. Many of us are retired, but a growing number of young families have come here to share the tranquillity and embrace our natural environment. We respect our neighbours’ privacy, while knowing that help will be at hand when it is needed.We’re high on a hill, a mere 6km from the ocean, with the sound of the breaking waves soothing us to sleep at night. Lake Cootharaba on the pristine Noosa river separates us from the beach to the east, while to the north, west and south, national parks and state forests surround us. We have a village store and a convivial hotel, the Apollonian, just around the corner. If we don’t feel like driving, a $1 flexi-taxi service will take us to the shops and services 20km away.What more could anybody ask for?Guardian Weekly regularly publishes a Letter from one of its readers around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letters@theguardian.com