The experts say that the fire on Black Saturday was travelling at 145km per hour. I can testify to that because I was doing 140 in my Ute when I got to the hill outside Marysville that afternoon, and it was dumping spot fires as big as my house in front of me… kaboom, kaboom, kaboom!I was on my way back from a meeting in nearby Narbethong, and I'd seen cars scattered at an intersection like there had been an accident. I looked over my shoulder and the whole Black Range mountain was on fire. The flames were 130ft high. That's when I put my foot down.As soon as I got home, I removed anything that might be flammable from outside my house and started the sprinklers. They weren't working very well because everyone in Marysville was drawing water. I emptied all the bins and filled them from the taps. I filled every bucket I could find.By 5pm the sky was so black I had to use the torch. There was a roar like being behind a jumbo jet. It felt like the end of the world, but I had testicular cancer last year and I thought, "I beat the cancer, so I can beat the fire." I went down to my best mate Glen Fiske's house where his wife Liz and son Dalton were, and told them to evacuate. She said, "No Bruce, I'm fine."At six o'clock the first front hit. It suddenly went from pitch black to the brightest light you've ever seen. The back of the house caught fire. I was darting in and out as quickly as I could with buckets, because I was mindful of the heat. Then the mulch in the front garden bed caught fire. I'm still going around with the torch, a bucket, a hanky tied to my face, putting all the flames out.The fire front went through the town up on to Mount Strickland, then there was a wind change and it came back. The wind was unbelievable. I was up on the roof of the veranda putting out a fire when the ladder blew down. I scarpered down the drainpipe and rang Liz again. I got young Dalton. He said, "My knees are rattling, man." I said, "Don't worry, mine are, too. You've got to be a big, brave man for your mum, mate," and he said, "I don't know if I can." I said, "Of course you can. As soon as this front has passed I'll be down there."I ran to Glen and Liz's house after that front had gone, but it was a fireball. I'd hoped they'd escaped on foot and went looking for them at the village sports oval, where the locals who didn't evacuate were sheltering. They weren't there. I went back home and laid on my bed.At first light, my son Jared found Liz and Dalton's remains in what was left of their bathroom. Thirty-eight people died in Marysville on Black Saturday. There were so many bodies that Liz and Dalton's weren't able to be removed for four days.