Last time, we went to America; the next stop on our crosswording journey is Australia.Our guide is David Astle. David sets for the Age and the Sydney Morning Herald, appears as "Mr Dictionary" on the Australian Countdown and has written a book about crosswords called Puzzled, a mixture of memoir and how-to which discusses this very blog at one point in its sweep of the cryptic landscape.Hello, David. You got into crosswords by sending a jumbo tribute puzzle to the editor of the Sydney Morning Herald. Why the Herald?I was in my late teens, still in school, and the Herald was about to reach its 10,000th puzzle. The number suggests how cherished the crossword had become to Sydney life over several generations, even within my own family. I longed to be part of the party, so to speak. I toasted the milestone in the guise of a puzzle, and hoped the gesture might be seen as the scribblings of a future setter. I revelled in the prospect of my own clues delighting and confounding my fellow citizens; I still do.Melbourne and Sydney are the Tom and Jerry of geography. Athens and Sparta; Bloods and Crips - we love to hate each other, though more as siblings indulging in a fond sledge. The crossword is the same in both papers as Fairfax Media owns both mastheads and there is fiery debate among solvers when too much Sydney or too little Melbourne enters the grid. For example, when I made a crossword in which every across clue was an Australian beach, Sydney solvers resented the Victorian bias, going so far as to say a Victorian beach is not a real beach, since some lack surf.Perhaps in the past. The reason is twofold. Thirty years ago, the Herald's principal setter was LB, the alias of Lindsey Browne, a cricket fanatic and a wily off-spinner in his day. LB ensured there was plenty of cricket lore running through his canon. The second reason: Australia was quite handy back then. Do the names Thommo and Lillee ring a bell? Not bad, eh? Warney and McGrath were quite useful too. But since then your mob has learned how to play the game properly and pound us into the dirt on a regular basis, so we setters tend to look elsewhere for our thematic jollies.I blame English. It's a glorious mongrel. Linguist David Crystal calls it the most hospitable language on the planet, as we invite influences from everywhere. That alone lends our mother tongue a richness and lexical density that few can rival. Just look at an Italian crossword and you'll see the curse of having so few words ending in consonants. Add to this the abundant nuance pervading English: the rife idiom, the wealth of vocab, the regional fluctuations and how words have shifted in their jackets across time. It's a perfect storm for wordplay.Guardian readers may not realise that I was Susie Dent for two years. Let me rephrase that: I was the dictionary bloke on Letters and Numbers, the Aussie version of Countdown. We're currently in hiatus, so there's more time to write books. Our studio tome was the Macquarie Dictionary. This rejoices in the Aussie tongue - swaggie slang, Anzac stuff, our -IE obsession as in CROSSIE and PREZZIE plus our general irreverence - and embraces the bulk of UK and US listings. The Herald now uses Oxford as its house dictionary, but Macquarie is the fallback for many setters and solvers.I'm still staggered the Times puzzles remain anonymous: so often they are peppered with timeless clues, yet we can't credit a certain compiler. At least the Guardian editor has the good sense to tag all culprits. In that regard I relish many in your stable: to name three, Paul, Brummie and the man to instil me with an innovative spirit, Araucaria. But I'm equally thrilled to see the arrival of two stylists: Puck and Picaroon. Likewise I lament the passing of two masters, Taupi and Fawley.Elsewhere I adore the FT's Loroso, whose clues are so deceptively concise. I'm a rusted-on fan of the best in US crosswords. Quick in name only, the premium American puzzle has an exquisite interlock, or maverick theme. Let me recommend Brendan Emmett Quigley and Matt Gaffney, both rebels with a fiendish cause.Auster was the late Shirley O'Brien, a warmhearted wordsmith based in Brisbane. While I chatted with Shirley on half a dozen occasions on the phone, I never had the pleasure of meeting her. Elsewhere, social media is a godsend. Now solvers can assemble in places like this one or The DA Trippers to celebrate the week's enigmas. The same channels make it easier for solvers to contact setters and editors. The Australian Crossword Club is a vital body of puzzle fans and various compilers and my own website is a hatchery of clue-crafting and general verbal mischief. But we setters seldom congregate as a guild. We mainly keep in touch through each other's creations."Translating" Puzzled for the UK market, I had to drop several words that were deemed too parochial by my English editors. Apparently BLUE doesn't mean a fight in Burton-on-Trent, nor does DO mean swindle, duff, or bungle. By the same token, I'm told you've never heard of BOGAN (a unsophisticated person), BOOFHEAD (fool), JACKEROO (a young farm hand) or CHOC-TOPS (chocolate-coated scoops of ice-cream). And no, choc-ice is not even close. You should try the difference some time.For over-Australian clues, try these:Encroach on Prue's hot friend? (7)750ml beer bottle sustained passion (8)Medic and paramedic tuck into feast dish (9)Wily forward AOK with angles, perhaps (4,5)Many thanks to David. The answers to those Aussie clues are, he tells me: INTRUDE (Kath & Kim reference); LONGNECK; DREAMBOAT (ambo is short for ambulance officer) and GOAL SNEAK (Australian Rules slang). I'm going to get me a copy of Macquarie and try some upside-down solving.