When Pelé became an international star at the 1958 World Cup, he immediately became a powerful symbol for Brazil. Black and aged only 17, he played football with a smile on his face – a wonderful metaphor for a young, racially mixed and culturally vibrant country.Back then Brazil was a country on the rise. Its new capital, Brasília, was being built at a frenetic pace and President Juscelino Kubitschek was promising "50 years progress in five."In 2010, the most famous Brazilian in Britain is Wagner Fiuza-Carrilho, a 54-year-old bleached blond former karate teacher and losing X Factor contestant. He too is a perfect ambassador for his homeland.Brazil in 2010 is again a country on the rise. It's now the world's eighth largest economy, with increasing diplomatic clout and will host the World Cup in 2014 and the Olympics in 2016.Pelé was synonymous with being the best in the world. Wagner, on the other hand, was the least talented singer on this year's X Factor.And that's my point. As Brazil has changed over the last half century so has its sense of self-esteem. Today it is a much more confident nation. It doesn't need to produce winners to feel good about itself the way that it needed to before. As a culture it has so much to feel proud about. Including – if not, especially – Wagner.When I first saw Wagner I was captivated by him because I saw so many of the qualities that I love about Brazil and Brazilians. It struck me as offensive and wrong to describe him as an oddball or wacky. Even though much was made of the fact that people only voted for him as a protest vote against Simon Cowell, I think he won over many viewers with his humility, charm and humanity. We weren't laughing at him, we were laughing with him. The public was bear-hugging, not bear-baiting.I lived in Rio for five years. One of the most noticeable aspects of living there is how un-ageist it is – young children are welcomed wherever you go, and equally no one would think twice if you went to a samba club with your grandparents. Age doesn't seem to define you in the way that it does in the UK. There is nothing more natural than a 54-year-old wanting to take part in a talent show aimed at people less than half his age.Likewise the informality between generations is reflected in more communal behaviour generally. Carnival is a spectacle where everyone who attends takes part. The transformative process of plucking the boy or girl next door and making them sing and dance on a stage was happening on the streets of Rio long before it was in ITV studios.Wagner's personal story is also deeply evocative of modern Brazil. He was born in the north-eastern state of Paraíba but moved as a child to Rio de Janeiro. There is a social stigma in being from Paraíba, since it is one of the most economically backward states, and Wagner would have felt like an outsider in his own country. In fact, when I saw Wagner berated by Cheryl Cole for allegedly making disparaging comments about her upbringing, it reminded me of the patronising way the Rio rich often reprimand their maids or porters, often from states like Paraíba.Wagner's dignified response to Cheryl seemed to completely throw her. He was cordial, modest and affectionate. That's the Brazilian way.The writer Euclides da Cunha once famously said that those who come from Brazil's north-eastern states "have, before anything else, inner strength." When I watched Wagner I saw that inner strength. And what could be more Brazilian than to counter the pain of cultural dislocation than through song?Keen to establish Wagner as some kind of monster, the press threw every Latin American cliché at him – alleging that he scored drugs, got into fights, wanted to marry his first cousin, and lied about his benefits. The X Factor bosses played along to the oversexualised stereotype by surrounding him with female dancers who shocked with their lascivious routines.Wagner's life became a soap opera and his progress in the competition made him, for a few weeks, the biggest celebrity story in the UK. In Brazil, however, Wagner's exploits garnered almost no coverage at all. And this too is a positive sign of the times – the country has much more important things going on.