Our village's patron saint is venerated all over Brazil and every year thousands of pilgrims flock to this tiny seaside resort for a fortnight's celebration. Along with daily religious masses that wake up everyone with firecrackers at 5am, a lot of sun-block cream is expended and a great quantity of beer is drunk in the bars.It all ends when the statue of Nossa Senhora d'Ajuda (our Lady of Help) is paraded through the streets accompanied by the crowds and a brass band. The local politicos usually vie with each other to help carry the image – either to gain kudos or for good old-fashioned publicity. There's a travelling fair on the village field and roundabouts and rides and things we rarely see.But just as in Chaucer's Britain, the pilgrimage has its sinister side. The devotees are nearly always accompanied by hordes of ladrões, malandros and what the Brazilian police call meliantes – thieves, rogues and vagabonds.They rob houses, hotels – and there are occasional cases of assault on the roads and beaches. The general advice is not to resist a thief armed with a gun or a knife. But human nature is stronger than logic – and there's some satisfaction in giving a good punch to a robber even if he secures some modest bounty.And that is why, as he bandaged up a broken bone on my finger, the doctor firmly admonished me to not to try fighting any more ladrões – and certainly not for the next four weeks.My puppy, running free on the beach, had hurtled off in the direction of two guys who gave her some bread. Then as we walked along the footpath to the road, one produced a knife and demanded money. The other was rifling my pockets and I fear I couldn't resist taking a swing at him. I can only hope I did as much damage to him as I suffered. They ran off clutching my ageing camera – a haul that would be exchanged for the night's drugs.So I'm in the doghouse for taking an unnecessary risk and the dog's there, too, for accepting food from strangers.But a world full of ladrãos still has its magical moments. And I found one as I was returning home on the ferry. The full moon was casting brilliant reflections on the boat's wake and I still thought that it seems like Paradise here. The vision may have been a bit rose-tinted as I was sipping a beer, but I hope not – it was only the first can!