A week after BP announced its "giant" oil discovery in the Gulf of Mexico, BG has been boosted by a find of its own.The company said the Guara field in the Santos basin off the coast of Brazil - where BG has a 30% stake and is partnered with Petrobras and Repsol - could contain up to 2bn barrels of oil equivalent. BG chief executive Frank Chapman said the Santos basin "will make a very material contribution to the production and cash flow of BG Group for many years to come."The news has lifted BG shares 25p to £10.80 and prompted some positive analyst comment. Seymour Pierce said:"To put the scale of this discovery in context, the recent news of Tiber in the the Gulf of Mexico [the BP project] indicated that the modern definition of "giant" is 500m barrels or more. Repsol has labelled Guara a mega-Field. As important as the reserves, is the fact that the test programme showed that the formation is a prolific producer with a permanent production well capable of flowing up to 50,000 barrels a day."In terms of valuation, on an indicative basis we estimate that Guara is worth between 35p and 65p per share net to BG. The Santos Basin has been an outstanding success for BG. With drilling activity continuing on its acreage, we would expect further good news flow and reiterate our buy stance."Meanwhile Evolution Securities is also upbeat:"Although BG has not previously given specific guidance today's announcement is slightly above our assumption of 1bn barrels of oil equivalent. Based on the new range we would estimates that Guara is worth between 30p and 60p net to BG."We suspect the market is still discounting both Brazil and Australia quite aggressively in BG and so keep our price target of £14.50."The BG news and the announcement by Moody's that Britain is set to keep its triple A credit rating  have lifted the market from its early doldrums. The FTSE 100 is now up 19.42 points at 4966.76 with 5000 back in sight for the first time since last October.Meanwhile Lonmin is still leading the losers, down 52p to £16.60 as Merrill Lynch played down the prospect of a bid from Xstrata, up 3p to 883p. Cutting its recommendation from buy to neutral after Lonmin's recent strong share price performance, Merrill said:"Lonmin shares are rallying on speculation that Xstrata will return to bid for the remaining 75% it does not already own (a "bolt on" transaction) as the time limit on the takeover panel bid conditions is reached on October 2nd. While we don't discount this completely, neither do we view this as "sure thing". We believe Xstrata would still prefer a transformational merger with Anglo American."