For most analysts, the political regimes of Venezuela and Brazil are very different. Some governments, such as Barack Obama's, suggest the two regimes are opposites, even conflicting. But the solid alliance between the two countries, overlooked by the media, does not mesh with these simplistic analyses.The Venezulean government of Hugo Chávez is accused of being populist and authoritarian, because the state plays a central role in the economy and society, and the regime of showing a dangerous tendency towards single-party politics that makes it very similar to that of Cuba.The Brazilian governments of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (2003-10) and Dilma Rousseff, on the other hand, support private companies and have a good relationship with the opposition, to the extent that half a dozen parties, ranging from communist to centre-right, make up the government led by the Workers party. The leading players in Brazilian media, such as Rede Globo, do not mention the existence of censorship in the country.One of the main differences between the two countries is the relationship between the state and civil society. In Brazil, social movements such as Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem Terra (Landless Workers' Movement), arose against the state. In Venezuela, they were created to a great extent by the state after Chávez got to power.The conservative media consider Venezuela to be a potential danger for the security of the US and a threat to democracy and its neighbours. We should remember that the George W Bush administration assigned Brazil the role of "moderating" Venezuela's alleged radical impulses. What these analyses fail to explain is why two regimes that are meant to be opposites and incompatible with one another have established the most solid strategic alliance in the region, as solid or more so as that of Brazil and Argentina.After Lula's arrival in government, the quality of Brazil's relationship with Venezuela leapt. In 2003, the trade between the two countries amounted to $800m. By 2011, this figure had gone up to $5bn. The two countries tightened institutional links through consultancy on public policies and training courses for leaders provided by the prestigious Brazilian research centre Ipea (Institute of Applied Economic Research) and Embrapa (the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation), which opened offices in Caracas.In 2005, Lula and Chávez signed the Brazil-Venezuela strategic alliance and in 2007, they started holding quarterly presidential meetings – an unheard-of regularity – to accelerate the integration of infrastructure, which continued until 2010In May 2011, Ipea, which is dependent on Brazil's ministry of strategic affairs, published two important studies that highlight the progress made on integration, involving areas such as the road, river and air transport systems. A "common economic area" is being created, stretching from the north of Brazil to the south of Venezuela.Brazil contributes to the industrial development of Venezuela to help it reduce its dependency on oil exports and the import of 70% of all food consumed. Venezuela has started to supply industrial consumables to north Brazil, creating complementary industrial chains in the border area, in sectors such as the metal mechanics industry and agro-industry.Brazilians emphasise "the quantity and quality" of the region's resources. Venezuela has the largest oil reserves in the world, having displaced Saudi Arabia, the third-largest bauxite reserves, the fourth-largest gold reserves, the sixth-largest natural gas reserves and the 10th-largest iron reserves. The Brazilian state of Roraima, on the border with Venezuela, holds the world's biggest reserves of gold, niobium and tin, in addition to important deposits of thorium, cobalt, molybdenum, diamonds and titanium.However, the main goals of Lula and Chávez were geopolitical. Samuel Pinheiro Guimarães, the most influential diplomat in the Brazilian chancellery, explained that Brazil's strategy sought to prevent the "removal" of Chávez through a coup, to block the reincorporation of Venezuela into the North American economy, to extend Mercosur with the inclusion of Bolivia and Ecuador and to hinder the US project to consolidate the Pacific Alliance, which includes Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru.This high level of contact and co-operation shows that the analysts who believe these two nations represent opposites in their approach to the politics of the left are wrong. The friendly relations forged by Chávez and Lula have continued under Rousseff. They present a challenge to those seeking to undermine Venezuela by promoting a so-called "Brazilian" way: in fact the two models are closer than we are led to believe.