By the age of 10 I was running out of things to read. I had already charged through Malory Towers, Enid Blyton’s postwar boarding school series that might best be described as “jolly hockey sticks” were it not for the fact that the girls actually play lacrosse. I had trudged with my cross-country skis along Elinor M Brent-Dyer’s winding Chalet School oeuvre (60-odd volumes of Alpine adventure and German vocab tests). Now there was no choice but to turn to some old Angela Brazils that my grandmother had given me from her first world war schoolroom. But the titles were hardly promising. The Madcap of the School, The Jolliest Term on Record and For the School Colours all sounded like someone’s clumsy parody of a hopelessly dated genre (I was reading them in the 1970s, the decade of the state comprehensive).Once I got going properly, though, I realised that Brazil’s books weren’t parodying anything. They were, rather, the fons et origo from which later writers, including Blyton and Brent-Dyer, had drawn heavily for their own mid-century yarns of flunked music exams, dorm feasts and – always a popular one, this – rescues from burning buildings. And while Brazil is barely read now, and her 49 books have not been reissued in those clunky liveries that you see on new editions of Malory Towers and Chalet School titles, hers is still the name that stands as shorthand for the entire genre of boarding school fiction. When it comes to working out who Harry Potter’s parents really are, it is Brazil’s gymslipped heroes rather than Frank Richards’ Billy Bunter or Anthony Buckeridge’s Jennings that we should examine for Muggle DNA.This is not as queer as it sounds, because Brazil’s schoolgirls were always a gender-busting bunch, chafing furiously against the notion that there was anything their brothers could do that they could not, specially when it came to helping Britain win what was already known as “the Great War”. In A Patriotic Schoolgirl (1918), 15-year-old Marjorie Anderson burns with desire to bunk off from Brackenfield College and “nurse the wounded, drive a transport wagon, act as secretary to a staff officer, or even be telephone operator over in France.” Head girl Winifrede Mason, meanwhile, announces to the assembled school: “‘It is the duty of every British girl to make every possible sacrifice to keep those unspeakable Huns out of our islands’ … ‘it’ll mean knocking off buns, I suppose,’ sighed Sylvia mournfully.”The war made Brazil. Although she had dabbled with writing for children since 1899, it was with her first girls’ school story, The Fortunes of Philippa (1906), that she really hit her stride. By 1914 and the publication of The Girls of St Cyprian’s the world of global geopolitics and what Brazil called her “state in miniature” had perfectly aligned. The qualities required by young men at the front – teamwork, honour, the all-important “pluck” – found their natural corollary in the developing schoolgirl ethos as crafted by Brazil. Instead of regiments there are houses, instead of NCOs there are prefects and, rather than trenches, there’s a hockey pitch. In A Patriotic Schoolgirl, Betty Moore has some chocs from home and scoffs the whole box in bed without offering them round (“We could hear her crunching for ages”). Brazil’s subtext is immediately legible: Betty is not the sort of person you would want next to you in a Flanders trench.Marjorie, by contrast, is a team player. Since she is too young to join her father and brothers at the front, she decides to participate in her aunt’s postal service for befriending lonely soldiers. But it all goes wrong when the 15-year-old’s chosen Tommie writes back offering to “keep company” when he returns to “Blighty”, helpfully adding that his civilian wage is £2 a week. Marjorie is mortified “to find that her protege was an uneducated working man who had entirely misconstrued the nature of her interest in him”. Summoned to the headmistress’s study, she is expelled on the spot for being “fast”.In 1936 the high mistress of St Paul’s declared that she was minded to gather all Miss Brazil’s books and burn themMarjorie’s social naivety – she “had a vague idea that the army consisted mostly of public school boys” – is weighed against her lack of judgment and she is eventually restored to the bosom of Brackenfield. From now on, the firm-but-fair headmistress Mrs Morrison suggests, girls should channel their war efforts into sewing bed jackets for soldiers rather than offering to be their friends. Duly warned off heterosexuality, Marjorie develops a passionate attachment to her classmate Chrissie Lang instead. The two teenagers walk arm-in-arm, write each other sentimental notes and promise to “make love” all evening. Marjorie’s amused classmates conclude that she has “got it badly” although they can’t really see why: “Chrissie can’t pronounce her rs properly.”You only need to have read a couple of Brazils before to guess how it all ends. Chrissie Lang (“a good old Scottish name”) is in fact Christine Lange, a German spy who has been enrolled at Brackenfield to help her soldier brother escape from a nearby PoW camp. She is last heard of making for the beach where a boat is waiting. There is a silver lining, though, quite apart from the fact that Marjorie will no longer have to spend her evenings embroidering hankies with a wobbly “CL”. The teacher whom the Brackenfield girls have long suspected of being the spy in their midst turns out to be entirely innocent. Miss “Acid Drop” Norton actually has a perfectly good reason for hanging around the local pub talking to funny-sounding foreigners (and it has nothing to do with needing a stiff drink and adult conversation after a long week closeted with the Upper Fourth).It all sounds like good, clean, formulaic fun, so it comes as a shock to learn that, just like Blyton 40 years later, Brazil’s work was bitterly condemned by professional educators. In 1936 the high mistress of St Paul’s, Ethel Strudwick, declared in assembly that she was minded to gather all of Miss Brazil’s books and burn them. It wasn’t the repetitive plotlines and sketchy characterisations that offended her, nor even the vague possibility that St Paul’s might have loosely figured in one of Brazil’s books; it was the terrible language: “Rouse up, you old bluebottle, can’t you”; “Right you are, O Queen! It’s a blossomy idea!” “Miss Jones is a stunt, as jinky as you like”, and, the one that got everyone especially riled, “Twiggez-vous?”Whether or not schoolgirls actually spoke like this, or whether they only started to after reading Brazil, remains a moot point. But perhaps what really bothered Strudwick was not so much the silliness of the slang so much as the way it marked early adolescence as a distinct culture, one with its own impenetrable codes and customs. Until the 1880s middle-class girls had been mostly educated at home under the watchful eye of mothers, governesses and elder sisters. But with the coming of academic boarding schools and high schools, young women’s bonds were increasingly with other girls of their own age. Brazil’s books glory in this new complicity, showing loud, boisterous teenagers forming themselves into self-policing groups, untroubled by the distant rumble of prefects and teachers. The girls of St Cyprian’s, St Ronan’s and St Chad’s jump out of windows, play pranks, go awol on cliff tops and tie things to weather vanes. From here it is but a short jump to the dystopian fantasy of the St Trinian’s series, Ronald Searle’s accounts of posh-girl thuggery that were published toe-to-toe with Blyton’s Malory Towers books.Rereading Brazil now, though, it is not her girls’ potential for tribal violence that strikes one so much as their social vulnerability as individuals. Far from being secure in her privilege, a typical Brazil hero is only at school because of some particular bit of luck: perhaps her sister already teaches at the school so she gets a bursary, or her uncle has agreed to pay the fees, or the number on her scholarship exam paper is mixed up with someone else’s. It is the other girls – usually the not-so-nice ones – who have a pony at home and an uncle who is a brigadier. And it is precisely because the hero is declassee that she is the prime suspect whenever some bit of transgressive behaviour, usually stealing or snitching, is suspected, a trope that Denise Deegan nailed so brilliantly in 1983 with her smart stage parody of Brazil’s universe, Daisy Pulls It Off.This acute sense that her heroes did not quite belong in the world in which she had placed them was grounded in Brazil’s own experience as the daughter of a Lancashire cotton-mill manager. Far from being at Cheltenham or Roedean, her education was mostly undertaken at cheaper local day schools: “Bolton was a penance to artistic minds,” she once recalled with a shudder. This also explains why so many thousands of girls, whose only chance of gaining access to a boarding school was through a job in the kitchens, gulped down Brazil’s books with such passion. “It has always been the dearest wish of my heart to go to a boarding school,” runs a typical letter to the author, “but unfortunately we are poor and I had to go to a board-school.” By identifying with a precariously privileged hero, working-class girls were able to spin for themselves a Cinderella narrative in which they were, for a few hours at least, able to attend The Gables, Uplands or Manor House.The way in which Brazil used fairytale devices to resolve her plots – her books contain far more orphans, baronet uncles and long-lost Stradivariuses than I had remembered – also explains the recherche names of her heroes. Instead of “Dorothy”, “Gertrude” or “Violet”, Brazil’s leading ladies are Loveday, Winona, Avelyn, Aldred and Lesbia. Especially Lesbia. It was a name that she recycled, bestowing it on minor characters as well as on the two heroes, Lesbia Carrington (For the School Colours) and Lesbia Ferrars (Loyal to the School), with whom she most closely identified.That doesn’t mean, of course, that Brazil was throwing out coded messages about her own sexuality. Her outward life was one of deep respectability, spent with her unmarried brother and sister in a handsome villa in the centre of Coventry. Her inner life, by all accounts, remained entirely opaque to her. What we can say, though, is that her books are full of girls developing “red hot” pashes on one another, breaking up, sobbing and coming together for a cuddle in bed. All of which was suggestive enough for Philip Larkin, as a young man at Oxford in the 1940s, to write Trouble at Willow Gables, an over-excited pastiche of Brazil in which both staff and girls are oddly forgetful when it comes to wearing knickers.More benign were the various parodies produced by Arthur Marshall, the late, (assumed) gay broadcaster who had a declared passion for the world of Angela Brazil. In his autobiography Marshall explained how he managed to get through the Dunkirk evacuation of 1940: “I chose to imagine that we were all in a vast girls’ school: Headmistress, Miss Gladys Gort; School colours, khaki and black; School motto, Don’t Look Back Or You Might See Something Nasty. All the junior girls were dead nuts on that new and dashing hockey mistress, Miss Brenda Montgomery” – aka Field Marshall Montgomery.In 1944, when Brazil was coming to the end of her life, the new Education Act furnished able girls from the middling middle classes with a free education at either a direct-grant or grammar school, leaving boarding public schools such as Benenden, the model for Malory Towers, to a financial and social elite. That didn’t stop girls wanting to read about such schools – Blyton and Brent‑Dyer sold extremely well right up to the early 1990s – but there was a sense that what was being described was a kind of education that had happened a long time ago and far away. Until 1997, that is, when JK Rowling, the comprehensive-educated girl who had grown up with a passion for boarding school fiction, sat down to reimagine Brazil’s universe for a new generation of girls – and boys.• This article was amended on 24 February 2015. An earlier version of the photo caption said that the 2002 production was at the Lyric Hammersmith, rather than the Lyric on Shaftesbury Avenue, London W1.