Brazil's air force was yesterday scouring the country's north-eastern coastline for survivors after a plane carrying four British businessmen vanished over the Atlantic on Friday afternoon.The men, named as Alan Kempson, Nigel Hodges, Sean Woodhall and Ricky Every, were travelling from the north-eastern tourist capital of Salvador to the city of Ilhéus about 125 miles away on Friday afternoon when their twin-engine Cessna plane disappeared.Yesterday morning there were unconfirmed reports that pieces of wreckage, possibly from the missing plane, had been found near Ilhéus.The privately charted air taxi took off from Salvador's airport at 5pm on Friday. Forty-three minutes later its two Brazilian pilots communicated for the last time with the tower at Ilhéus airport to say they were preparing to land. They had been due to arrive nine minutes later.Márcio Rodrigues Coutinho, a 43-year-old resident of the beach town Itacare, told Brazil's Globo TV he had seen a small plane flying low at about 6pm on Friday."The plane was much lower than usual for the planes that fly over this region. It was starting to get dark and its lights were on. I didn't hear any noise from the motor," he said.Two of the missing passengers are involved in Worldwide Destinations, a property development company that specialises in emerging property markets and has real-estate projects in Egypt and Brazil.The group is working on the construction of a luxury, seaside eco-resort with an 18-hole golf course near Ilhéus called the Barra Nova Pearl Eco-Nature Resort. The company's website claimed that "Brazil's outstanding natural beauty, safe political climate, dazzling beaches, tropical habitat, exotic food, colourful culture and vibrant cities" made it a perfect ex-pat destination. Woodhall is the group's president while Every reportedly lives in Brazil and is the company's representative in South America.According to the Brazilian newspaper A Tarde the group claimed to have business ties to Prince Albert of Monaco.In 2001 Woodhall received an 18-month suspended sentence after being convicted of a £1.4m fraud in the UK. He subsequently moved to Spain. Hodges and Kempson work for Diamond Lifestyle Holdings, a Cambridgeshire-based finance company.Woodall's parents, speaking at their home in Tempsford, near Sandy, Bedfordshire, said they were refusing to give up hope.His father, who did not wish to be named, said: "We're going out of our minds. I know they are now saying they are looking for bodies but we're keeping our hopes alive. We don't believe he's dead."We only found out yesterday when we saw it on Teletext. My wife and I had been gardening all day then sat down for a cup of tea and saw the news. My wife has a heart condition and is seriously distressed, I'm very worried for her."The local newspaper Correio da Bahia suggested the group's plane had been flying over the area where the eco-resort was to be constructed shortly before disappearing.Other reports claimed the group had been forced to cancel a helicopter trip earlier on the same day because of poor weather conditions.Claudio Soares, the owner of a Salvador-based air taxi company who knew the businessmen, said the group had planned to fly over several islands off Brazil's north eastern coast in a helicopter before heading to Ilheus. Bad weather forced them to cancel the trip, he said. "The weather was not 100% for the flight."Caliana Mesquita, a 20-year-old student, was one of the last people to see the plane. "The plane seemed a bit out of control. It swung out towards the sea and then back towards the forest. Not long after it disappeared," she told Globo.Yesterday a search party including helicopters, boats and foot patrols was searching a 25-mile stretch of coastline for the executives and their two Brazilian pilots.According to the Brazilian air force there have been 40 accidents involving small planes this year.With its virtually uninterrupted beaches and year-round sun, north-eastern Brazil is billed as the new Algarve by property developers. A growing number of British citizens, many of them retired, are choosing to set up home there, drawn by the golden beaches and the cheaper cost of living. Several European companies offer slices of the Brazilian coastline for a fraction of the price charged in more established resort areas such as the Caribbean.In January this year David Beckham visited the region to announce the construction of a football academy in the north-eastern state of Natal. The development, funded by a Norwegian development group, will include a 10,000-capacity beachside football stadium.