Brazil is being rocked by a graft scandal involving local and national policymakers, police officers and business leaders, with a special panel preparing to question the alleged mastermind.News of the scandal broke in February with the arrest of Carlos Augusto Ramos, aka Carlinhos Cachoeira (Charlie Waterfall), who is thought to run a gambling racket in Goias state. He is a familiar face in Brazilian politics. In 2004 he was at the centre of the Mensalao scandal that shook former President Lula's government and Workers' party (PT). Several officials were sacked but Cachoeira walked free.Now he is being prosecuted for corruption and money-laundering offences, charges he denies. What started as a relatively low-profile investigation has grown into a major event, now known as Cachoeiragate.Prosecutors have accumulated 40,000 pages of evidence and over 11,000 hours of phone taps. Cachoeira is allegedly the lynchpin of a scheme involving three senators, five MPs and four companies. More than 80 Cachoeira employees are thought to be involved. "If you don't pay everyone, the system doesn't work," one of his henchmen reportedly let slip in a phone call.On 19 April Congress set up a special committee to investigate the matter. It has published a preliminary timetable for hearings, listing 167 summonses. The editor of the conservative magazine Veja is among the first on the list and Cachoeira is due to appear this week.After that it will be the turn of the reputedly incorruptible opposition senator Demostenes Torres, who is suspected of negotiating public works contracts in exchange for kickbacks. Investigators say they intercepted some 300 phone calls to Cachoeira. Torres also denies all charges.On 29 May attention will turn to Claudio Dias de Abreu. Currently in custody, a former head of operations for construction firm Delta allegedly negotiated deals directly with local politicians. The firm is doing renovation work for the 2014 football World Cup, and has contracts with both Rio de Janeiro and federal authorities.The government hailed the launch of the special committee, but President Dilma Rousseff may fear that the investigation will upset a busy political agenda and endanger a fragile ruling coalition.This article originally appeared in Le Monde