Heavily made up and dressed in a white bathrobe and heels, Isis Valverde marches into a suite at Rio's Copacabana Palace, stretches out an elegant hand to greet me and says, with a winning smile: "Looks like a gringo, huh?"She could be forgiven a little grandeza: at just 26, the actor is already one of the most famous women in Brazil – a star of novelas, or soap operas, that the country watches every night with such relish. "Our novela is what cinema is abroad. It is very well done. There is a lot of money involved," she says. "A lot more than there is in cinema, which is a great shame, because I am in love with cinema."Valverde has made just one film to date – a "Brazilian Western" called Faroeste Caboclo – and she previously declined a test for the James Bond film Casino Royale as she was not yet fluent in English, she says, punctuating her rapid-fire Portuguese with frequent husky laughs, and occasionally referring to herself in the third person.She has just finished filming a mini-series called Amores Roubados (Stolen Loves) for Brazil's dominant Globo network, to which she is exclusively contracted, and is at the Copacabana Palace for a high-glamour photoshoot for a Brazilian newspaper.This is a role she relishes. "See Isis, full of Dolce e Gabbana, in an amazing hotel," she says. "It shows the different faces you have, in a different way: 'Oh, she's modern, she also likes fashion.'" As Valverde observes, the photoshoot is a vivid contrast to her most famous role to date – that of Suelen, a brash, loud and hugely entertaining footballer's girlfriend from a poor Rio suburb in the hit 2012 novela Avenida Brasil.The soap caught the imagination of Brazilians with its boisterous characterisation of the lives of the country's "Class C" – a colourful and consumerist lower-middle class created after a decade of economic advancement enabled millions of Brazilians to come out of poverty and become consumers. More than half the population is now classified as Class C, but they had never been so expertly depicted in a soap before.Clad in skin-tight, colourful leggings, heels and crop tops, Suelen clacked and wise-talked her way into Brazilians hearts, and a new slang word was coined: periguete. "She is that kind of woman who is more self-interested, who wears clothes to show her body, who always likes to wear short, clingy clothes, she is a very vain woman," Valverde explains.Like the novela, which has since been sold to over 100 countries, the word "periguete" took off in Brazil – there was even a samba written about it. But despite – or perhaps because – of Suelen's inner gold-digger, the character resounded in an extrovert culture which is deeply macho, but which also prizes women with powerful personalities. "The strength of a woman. The seduction of a woman. The way she is potent. I think the character brought this," says Valverde.Valverde grew up in the small town of Aiuruoca, in the interior of Minas Gerais state. Her father was a chemist and her mother a lawyer and former actor. Isis was signed up for a Globo soap at 17. She always wanted to be an actor. "I think that it is one of the most beautiful expressions that exists, because you live your life, and you live various others," she says.When a million Brazilians took to the streets in June last year to protest on a range of issues, from failing public services to the costs of staging next year's World Cup, she joined them. "Brazil has to start to focus more on education, on health, on teachers' salaries," she says. "I think that education and health are the principal points for a society to evolve and grow."Money spent on stadiums could have been better invested, she continues, but she remains cautiously optimistic about the World Cup. "There is a real lack of infrastructure. But I think it will be good for the country."Instead, she called for better salaries for teachers and an end to a constitutional amendment called PEC 37, which had been passing through Congress, and which would have taken the power of prosecution away from Brazilian public prosecutors and given it to police. PEC 37 was seen as a blueprint for yet more corruption. But Congress threw the amendment out following the protests – which Valverde saw as a success."We have to ask for few things. If you ask for a whole list, they end up doing nothing," she adds with a throaty laugh. "But Brazil's endemic corruption is a much bigger problem. "I think it's a big mess. "But we are Brazilians and we never give up."