For 25 years, Brazil’s biggest political party has made and broken governments, patiently profiting from patronage without ever taking an ideological stance or an overt leadership role.But with the country now in the midst of a political and economic crisis they helped to precipitate, elements in the king-making Brazilian Democratic Movement party are finally pushing their own claim to the throne.Although nominally part of the ruling coalition, senior members of the PMDB (the Portuguese acronym by which it is best known) are peeling away to support an impeachment bid against President Dilma Rousseff.Rousseff is still favoured to survive, but the odds for impeachment have narrowed in the past week as PMDB support for the government has started to crumble.On Monday, aviation minister Eliseu Padilha resigned. Then on Tuesday, vice-president Michel Temer was revealed to have sent what reads like a petulant break-up letter to Rousseff in which he complained of being given only a “decorative” role.“I have to get this off my chest,” he wrote in the letter, which was leaked and published by Brazilian newspapers on Tuesday. “I know that you do not trust me and the PMDB today, and I know you won’t tomorrow. I am sorry, but this is my conviction.” Strengthening suspicions that this signalled a shift into the anti-Rousseff camp, Temer – who would become president if Rousseff were removed – later told a journalist that he believed there were legal grounds for the impeachment motion.There are no shortage of reasons why the PMDB might fail to inspire trust in its allies. Although the party played a prominent role in Brazil’s transition from a military dictatorship in 1985, it has spent most of the years since aligning itself with any party – centre-right or centre-left – capable of securing power. With no overarching ideology, the party has often resembled a vipers nest of deeply divided factions, ranging from conservative rural landowners and urban social democrats to evangelical nationalists and former guerrillas whose only common ground is a desire to secure the patronage, prestige and – very often – bribes that come with government posts. Over the past three decades the PMDB has been involved in every major corruption scandal. Many of its members – including house speaker Eduardo Cunha and senate president Renan Calheiros – have been implicated in the Lava Jato investigation into billions of dollars of kickbacks from Petrobras and other major corporations that were used to grease the wheels of politics. Related: Death by 1,000 defamations: Brazil riven by slow-burn impeachment struggle There is particular indignation that Cunha is now pushing for the impeachment of the president in part because he is himself threatened with removal from office – and subsequent arrest – for allegedly taking bribes and stashing money into secret Swiss bank accounts. He denies any wrongdoing.By contrast the case against Rousseff seems less grave. She is accused of window-dressing public finances ahead of last year’s election by using money from state banks. This was an act of fiscal wrongdoing, though it had a precedent with previous administrations and many legal experts say it is insufficient grounds to remove a presidents.Rodrigo Motta, a history professor at the Federal University of Minas Gerais and author of a book on the party, said the PMDB was hoping to use the current crisis to secure the middle ground of Brazilian politics. But he condemned the morality of Cunha’s tactics and doubted how much difference a change of leadership would make. “The irony is that the PMDB is up to its neck in corruption, just like the others,” he said. “In the midst of a political crisis, it makes no sense to condemn one side and absolve the other, as if this would trigger any change.”Many in the PMDB realise this, which has worsened splits in the party. Although Cunha has been openly plotting against the president for months and Temer now appears to be drifting away, the party’s leader of the house, Leonardo Picciani, and several state governors have lined up to support the government. Party insiders estimate that Rousseff also has the backing of about 40 to 45 of the 67 PMDB deputies. Related: Brazil's supreme court suspends impeachment moves against president In the first big test of parliamentary loyalties on Tuesday, Rousseff lost 272-199 in a secret vote on the make-up of an impeachment committee that will decide whether to move forward with her case. The ballot – which saw scuffles between lawmakers – looked set to be a major setback that left hostile lawmakers from the PMDB and other parties dominating the 65-member committee. But this was successfully challenged in the supreme court, which said the vote should have been open. Other battles will follow in what could prove a drawn-out impeachment process. But whether now or in a few years time, the PMDB and Workers party appear to be on course for a divorce. After decades in the background, the PMDB decided earlier this year to field its own candidate at the next presidential election in 2018. Senior party grandees, including Temer, Cunha, Calheiros and Rio city mayor Eduardo Paes, are already jostling for position.This has meant the impeachment fight is not just between Rousseff and the opposition, but between PMDB rivals trying to get ahead of one another. It is a familiar, though unedifying sight for many politicians and observers.“The internal struggle of the PMDB is sinking Brazil,” Socialism and Liberty party lawmaker Jean Wylls lamented on his Facebook page.