Roy Hodgson does not fear change. Transformations are a speciality for this 61-year-old. In Switzerland and Scandinavia he is celebrated for cultivating unprecedented success, and it was in the home of a Brazilian World Cup winner that, this time last year, he resolved to return to his native London to attempt his most audacious metamorphosis. Should Fulham stretch their unbeaten run to nine against Chelsea today, it will be a further sign that Hodgson is making a success of his task.While enjoying the hospitality of his friend Carlos Alberto Parreira last Christmas, Hodgson heard Fulham's rescue plea. He was not desperate for a job, the Finnish FA having offered him a contract to continue his impressive work there with the national team. The Republic of Ireland had also expressed an interest, and one of his former clubs, Internazionale, had invited him back to Milan to become their director of football. What was to be gained by cutting short his holiday in Brazil and jumping into the deep end of the Premier League? More money, yes, but you suspect Hodgson was motivated by something more: redemption.Like Parreira and other friends such as Arsène Wenger, Hodgson was never much of a player. His high point was playing for Crystal Palace reserves. On the sidelines, however, he became a top-class performer. In a coaching career that began in 1976 when he inspired Halmstads BK to their first Swedish title, he enjoyed success and popularity in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Switzerland, Italy and the United Arab Emirates. The only place where success eluded him was his homeland. At Bristol City in the 1980s he was foiled by the club's bankruptcy, and in 1998 he was sacked by Blackburn three months into his second season. Fulham tempted him with an opportunity to rectify a wrong that rankled.From his predecessor at Craven Cottage, Hodgson inherited a side who were heading for the Championship. Lawrie Sanchez had bought badly and imposed a brand of football that frustrated his few classy players. The Cottagers sunk down the league and were anchored one place above the doomed Derby County. The mood was dark, the outlook gloomy. A perfect contrast to the present."My first match in charge was against Chelsea, coincidentally, and it was the first time I had seen many of my players," Hodgson says. "It took me two months to really get to know the squad and it wasn't until March that we had a team I was happy with." No esoteric remedy explains Fulham's rehabilitation from basement-dwellers to European hopefuls. Hodgson has simply gone back to basics, recruiting good athletes and getting them to play tidy, tough football. The club's defensive record attests to the touch of a diligent technician whose instructions are being applied with conviction. This time last year Fulham had the third worst defence in the league - now only today's visitors and Manchester United have conceded fewer goals.Paul Konchesky is the only member of today's probable back five who featured in Hodgson's first match. Aaron Hughes was at the club but injured; the others are Hodgson recruits. Gigantic Norwegian centre-back Brede Hangeland is the most lauded of these. The £2.5m signing from FC Copenhagen immediately cured the side's aerial vulnerability after arriving in January. Until then Fulham had conceded more goals from headers than any other team, a fact that underlined the folly of the previous manager; Sanchez advocated the long ball though his team were tiny. Hangeland has been one of this season's outstanding defenders. He has performed more clearances, tackles and interceptions than luminaries such as Rio Ferdinand and John Terry. Yet it is perhaps the form of John Paintsil that best conveys Hodgson's coaching prowess. Bought for £1.5m from West Ham, the hitherto erratic Ghana right-back has gradually refined his positional sense to become a reliable defender who can use his speed to help Hughes cover for Hangeland, a lack of pace being the Norwegian's only apparent shortcoming.Painstil's pace is also important going forward, enabling him to fire in more than 50 crosses this season, better than Ashley Cole, Patrice Evra or Bacary Sagna. The width he provides permits Simon Davies to shift frequently into the middle, reinforcing a spine already made sturdy by Jimmy Bullard and Danny Murphy. That central strength contributes to Fulham's defensive fortitude, not only by sheer numbers but because those players are also encouraged to play neat football, meaning Fulham generally enjoy more possession than their opponents. Harsh statistics may not impress everyone, but they tell it how it is: Fulham are averaging 52% possession every game, compared to a wasteful 44% under Sanchez, and pass completion in the opposing half is up to 68%, from 59%."It's not easy to replace a squad in a reasonably economic way," Hodgson says. "But our platform is very solid now and that's something we haven't had for a few years. But even today we're still a long way off where I'd like to think the club could get to."For his next trick, Hodgson needs to embellish solidity with goals, particularly away, where Fulham may not lose as regularly as before but rarely win. Andy Johnson is yet to prove prolific, while Bobby Zamora was not expected to be, his role being more to replace the departed Brian McBride, the target man who never hit double figures for Fulham but was nonetheless pivotal.January will be crucial. The prospect of Bullard departing may raise fears that Fulham could unravel the way Hodgson's Blackburn did when the similarly influential Tim Sherwood agitated for a move. Fulham, though, seem more stable. More likely, perhaps, is Hodgson discovering or developing a creative talent to advance their transformation.