Are you on Facebook? Don't lie to me. Do you have a profile? What is your relationship status? Political views? Don't forget to tell me about your religious beliefs. Oh, and how we know each other. You're my cousin's hairdresser? Great, good enough for me. Let's be friends.Don't be self-conscious about it either, because if you are a member of this popular social networking site, you are hardly in the minority. In fact, Facebook announced last week that they just acquired their 200 millionth member. 200 million! Can you remember the last time 200 million people across the world were ever members of the same club, especially considering the club is only a mere five years old? Me neither. According to Facebook creator Mark Zuckerberg and his team, if Facebook were a country, it would be the fifth largest in the world (more than Brazil, fewer than Indonesia). That's incredible. It would seem that Facebook is brilliantly snaking its way into almost every manner of online interaction. There's the marketplace, where you can buy/sell/trade with "Users Near You". There's the Notes feature, allowing you to share your innermost secrets with your family and friends and their families and friends and-oops-potential employers. There's the People You May Know feature, which allows you to reconnect with that groomsman from your college roommate's wedding which could, in theory, lead to a charming Facebook-inspired romance. Even job opportunities, tailored to your interests, are posted on the side of your Facebook homepage. And don't forget everyone's favorite microblogging tool, the status update. 160 delicious, self-absorbed characters to convey who-the-hell-cares-what: "Meg is reading a book ... Meg thinks it's time for a cup of coffee! ... Meg can't wait to watch Lost! ... Meg WOULD REALLY LIKE SOME ATTENTION, EVERYONE."In reality, the status update in combination with the News Feed feature makes it possible for your friends to insert themselves in to your day as often as they'd like and unless you remove yourself from the site (an act alarmingly referred to as "Facebook suicide") you are powerless to stop them. You will know who is a fan of Madonna (me!), who is attending the Save the Sea Turtles rally (probably not me), and and who made it to the gym after work whether you like it or not (not a chance that this one is me).I just did a Google search for the phrase "Facebook is taking over the world" and I got 30,200,000 hits. Because Facebook really can be quite annoying (and can also get you fired) it tends to get a bad rap. But you have to give credit where credit is due: Facebook has certainly allowed for a unique form of social mobilisation and its spirit, speed, and versatility can not be underestimated. The ease and frequency with which users can alert friends to "Causes" has been credited with allowing do-gooders to find each other through shared interests in non-profits, and has allowed for donations and fundraising for those activities near and dear to one's heart. Users and non-users alike are probably fully aware of Facebook's presence in our recent presidential campaigns. The Facebook team explains that of 45 million active users, a whopping 80% are of voting age. And lest you still confuse Facebook with some teeny-bopper chat board for co-eds, reps will remind you that more than 50% of users are over the age of 35, and the fastest-growing user demographic is men and women aged 55 and over. It would seem that Mark Zuckerberg's network has morphed into an all-encompassing zeitgeist party bus, and you're either on board or you're left behind. Okay, that was a little dramatic. But it could behoove some businesses to view Facebook that way in light of its ability to broadcast or showcase a company's product or service to a rapidly multiplying target audience. Right now, just any old business can log onto Facebook, make use of its Platform feature, and therefore utilise yet another marketing tool to access a diverse and readily-available pot of potential customers. It would seem, however, that Facebook doesn't plan on being so ameniable for very much longer. As any Facebooker can tell you, the past several months have seen rumours that Facebook would start charging for its services. Gasp. Facebook might not be free anymore? What, there isn't enough revenue generated from adspace as it is? I understand the temptation to extract even more money from this beast while it's at its peak, but I can't imagine that this will allow Facebook to continue its whirlwind enrolment of new users. I mean, people will put up with a flawed product as long as that product costs zero dollars and zero cents. And Facebook is far from perfect - the relatively open access to Platforms means that nearly anyone can design an obnoxious, in-your-face application to meet their needs, and you have to suffer the consequences. (Quiz overload, anyone? I really don't care What Type Of Shoe I am.)Obviously, there are lots of people in the world who aren't on Facebook, and are never going to be. But the site finds itself at a tipping point, in terms of creating an internet presence that rivals Google's (who actually tried to purchase Facebook at one point): does it stick with the paradigm and allow Facebook to remain the social networking site open to anyone (person, place or thing) or does it streamline, retain better control of the product, and charge for its use - and thereby alienating a good portion of the population responsible for bringing it to its current omnipresence?It will be interesting to see what happens in the next year or so. If Zuckerberg and his team rock the boat too much, it's only a matter of time before a replacement product is generated and Facebook is left high and dry like last year's beauty pageant winner, forced to hand over her cyber-crown to her successor.