Greetings from Canada, where it's just turned midnight and the clock has struck on the first weekend of the Toronto film festival.News on The F Word, Daniel Radcliffe's third breakout film festival hit of the year (after Kill Your Darlings and Horns), as well as on Belle and The Armstrong Lie. Plus for those who need it, an instructional video will bring you right up to speed on the weekend at Tiff. Chris Michael reports from the sneak preview of Spike Jonze's new film, Her, and the Q&A afterwards.We'll have review of Jason Bateman's directorial debut, Bad Words, of Matthew (Mad Men) Weiner's first film, You Are Here, of Amma Assante's Belle, John Turturro in Fading Gigolo, Alex Gibney's The Armstrong Lie, Colin Firth in Devil's Knot, Keanu Reeves's directorial debut, Man of Tai Chi, Cory Monteith's final film, McCanick, and Chiwitel Ejofor's other film this fest, Half of a Yellow Sun. And, if you can stay up late enough, the verdict on Monday's big Oscar contender, August: Osage County. • Charlie Hunnam says Queer as Folk will prepare him for 50 Shades sex scenes• Tom Hiddleston set for Guillermo Del Toro's Crimson Peak• Gemma Arterton and Tim Roth eye Christopher Nolan-scripted Ruth Rendell thriller The Keys to the Street• Anne of Green Gables coming to big screen• Nicole Kidman in talks for Werner Herzog's Queen of the Desert• Emma Watson set for film of Emma Forrest's memoir Your Voice in My Head• Jeremy Kay tells us five things we learned from the US box office this weekend, including why this is the weakest weekend in yonks and the rising pulling power of Hispanic audiences. • We've an exclusive trailer, launching 9am GMT, of Justin Chadwick's Mandela biopic. Toronto kept us busy over the weekend. Have you done your homework yet? Hop to it!• Paul MacInnes reports from the 30th anniversary event for The Big Chill and from the live read of Boogie Nights. • Four stars for Dallas Buyers Club.• News and review of Labor Day.• Daniel Radcliffe grows Horns. • Ralph Fiennes talks Charles Dickens.• News on the premiere, press conference and a first look review of Steve McQueen's 12 Years a Slave. • News and review on Colin Firth in The Railway Man.• News and review of Idris Elba as Nelson Mandela. • Five stars for Richard Ayoade's The Double.• Director of James Gandolfini's last film pays tribute to the star and here's a review of the movie• Andrew Pulver rounds up the second week at Venice• It was Guy Lodge's inaugural DVD column. • And the man he took over from, Mark Kermode, with his first week of reviews, including About Time, Riddick and Ain't Them Bodies Saints.• John Hurt talked about his buzzy bees film. • Beeban Kidron on latest film InRealLife. • And the Observer profiled Jack Nicholson.