A manhunt is under way for a US reality TV show contestant believed to have fled to Canada after killing his ex-wife.Ryan Jenkins, who was a contestant on the VH1 show Megan Wants a Millionaire, was charged today with the murder of former swimsuit model Jasmine Fiore. The couple married in a Las Vegas wedding this year.Police said Jenkins had removed Fiore's teeth and fingers in an apparent attempt to impede efforts to identify the naked body, which was found stuffed in a suitcase in a California litter bin over the weekend. A preliminary coroner's report indicated she had been strangled.Jenkins had reported her missing on Saturday night and then vanished after the body was found. Authorities suspect he drove 1,000 miles to Washington state and then hopped in a boat to a peninsula on the border, where he walked into Canada. Canadian police said ground, air and canine units were involved in the search."At this time, although we believe he crossed the border, we're not 100% sure of that," a US marshals chief inspector, Thomas Hession, said."There will be no stone unturned and we'll look under every rock for him." Police believe he may be armed with a handgun.A car and empty boat trailer belonging to the 32-year-old native of Calgary, Canada, were found at a marina in the remote north-west Washington town of Blaine.Jenkins, variously described as an architect, real estate developer and investment banker, appeared in at least three episodes of Megan Wants a Millionaire, about a woman seeking to land a wealthy bachelor by putting suitors through their paces.The couple had been fighting in recent months, according to Fiore's mother. Prosecutors said the two checked into a San Diego hotel on 13 August and Jenkins checked out the next morning. Fiore was not seen alive again.Police received a report yesterday that a man matching Jenkins's description had arrived by boat at Point Roberts, Washington, about 10 miles from Blaine at the tip of a peninsula. The point is reachable by land only from Canada, and Jenkins is believed to have walked across the border from there.After taping for Megan Wants a Millionaire finished in early March, he met 28-year-old Fiore in a Las Vegas casino and the two got married on 18 March, said Fiore's mother, Lisa Lepore.But in May, "they had a big blowout", and fought because he was jealous of her ex-boyfriends, Lepore said. "She had the marriage annulled."Fiore's ex-boyfriend Robert Hasman urged Jenkins's friends and family to help police find him."Ryan Jenkins is an animal, what he has done to Jasmine is unspeakable and it's just not right and I'd appreciate your help," he said at a news conference.If Jenkins is apprehended north of the border, authorities there could extradite him but only with assurances that he would not face the death penalty. Farrah Emami, a spokeswoman with the Orange County district attorney's office, said the death penalty issue had not been addressed yet. Prosecutors have recommended bail of $10m (£6m)."Mr Jenkins is considered dangerous, possibly armed, and has the financial means to hide anywhere in the world," said the Orange County district attorney, Tony Rackauckas. "Anyone helping Mr Jenkins hide from the police may go to prison themselves."Court records show that Jenkins was charged in June in Clark county, Nevada, with "battery constituting domestic violence" for allegedly hitting Fiore in the arm and was due to be tried in December.Jenkins also has a criminal history in his home town of Calgary. He was sentenced to 15 months' probation in January 2007 on an unspecified assault charge, according to the Alberta ministry of justice. No further details were available.