The idea was to have a place where social innovators could work. In 2004, five social entrepreneurs tested this idea by turning 5,000 of the 100,000 sq ft Robertson Building, an early 1900 Edwardian style structure that was once used as a manufacturing warehouse for the James Robertson Company in Toronto, into a shared workspace.The idea became a success and the demand was enormous. Individuals and organisations were put on a waiting list. By 2009, the Centre for Social Innovation (CSI) occupied more than 20,000 sq ft of the Robertson Building and then there was even more demand.When the opportunity came up to expand with another building in the heart of Toronto, there was only one problem: money. The centre had to find $6.5m (£4m) to cover the purchase and renovations for the 36,000 sq ft building. They first went to the City of Toronto and were able to secure a loan guarantee, which allowed them to shop for a better $4.5m mortgage with Alterna Savings & Credit Union. This meant they still had to raise $2m.Birth of the Community BondWith a lack of money but a willing community the idea of a community bond was born. A community bond is a debt instrument that allowed CSI, the issuer of the bond, to promise its community of lenders, the holders of the bond, the principal amount borrowed plus 4% interest over five years. Because the bond was backed by an asset, bondholders could place them in their registered retirement saving plans. CSI ended up raising $1.4m in the first four months and eventually the full amount to fund what is known today as the CSI Annex.The story of CSI is not uncommon but the growth of social innovation in Canada, as exemplified by CSI's overcrowding problem, has triggered a great demand for channeling investments into initiatives that deliver a mixture of positive social and environmental impact and financial returns, often referred to as "social investment" or "impact investment". Today, CSI operates three shared workspaces in Toronto and a fourth in Manhattan, New York, that opened last month.Based on the success of the community bond and a desire to mobilise money for socially innovative projects, other organisations have created their own bonds. In December of 2011, the YWCA Toronto issued a $1m community bond to fund 300 affordable housing units for women and children. Purchased by the Muttart Foundation, the bond carries a 10-year term and pays 4% interest annually. Community bonds are also used for financing local solar energy projects and food markets.Government catches onThere has been a spur of successfully operating social finance initiatives across Canada in the last few years. To name just three, the Desjardins Group has established microcredit programmes to provide individuals and entrepreneurs small interest-free loans that have two- to five-year payback periods. Provided that they agree to lessons in budgeting, employability, and starting a business, these loans are available to those who are traditionally excluded from the financial market, such as single parents, Aboriginal people living off reserve, and new Canadians.Another example, the Youth Social Innovation Capital Fund provides micro-loans and non-financial support for young social entrepreneurs to develop their ideas. There's also Resilient Capital, a $15m fund formed by a credit union, Vancity, and the Vancouver Foundation to invest in social enterprises. In fact, Resilient Capital was established with a grant from the Government of British Columbia.What's happening is that government has caught on to the notion of using social finance to build better communities. Last November, the government of Canada launched a national call for concepts to seek "investment ready" social finance projects to develop and expand. More than 150 submissions were received, including ideas for using social impact bonds, social investment funds, and social enterprises.Full speed aheadA 2012 report published by the Social Investment Organization estimates Canadian impact investing assets, defined as those aimed at solving social or environmental problems, are at $5.3bn, which is a 20% increase since 2010. The government of Canada vows to continue outreach, connect key players together, sharpen ideas and test social finance tools.Likewise in the UK, the development of social finance initiatives is moving full speed ahead. David Cameron took advantage of the UK presidency of the G8 to set the agenda on social investment while announcing three new major initiatives at home: tax breaks for social investment, the Social Stock Exchange, and a £250m commitment from the Big Society Capital and Big Lottery Fund to help communities buy local assets such as pubs, shops, and community centres.Social problems have "frustrated government after government, country after country, generation after generation", the prime minister said, "I want to use our G8 Presidency to push this agenda forward. We will work with other G8 nations to grow the social investment market and increase investment, allowing the best social innovations to spread and help tackle our shared social and economic challenges."This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To join the Guardian Social Enterprise Network, click here.