I realise we're all in this together when an elderly gentleman opens a small suitcase and I notice it is tightly packed with drugs, medicines and dressings. I examine him carefully for signs of illness or collapse, but he seems durable enough.Karen and I are in Toronto's Union station, waiting for the 10pm departure of The Canadian, a train bound for Vancouver in British Columbia, more than 2,500 miles and three-and-a-half days away. I look around at our fellow travellers and run my hand through my greying hair. I needn't have worried; I fit right in.In the dark and rain, the train glistens like a stainless-steel serpent with two massive locomotives at the head, vibrating and shaking the ground. It is so long the last coach disappears in the murk, a quarter of a mile away.I run to the front to take pictures, not realising how close we are to departure. Whistles blow and the crew yell at me, so I jump into the first car. It's a long walk back to our luxurious double cabin, through 21 cars: three "panorama" cars, restaurant car, kitchen car, luggage car, cars with single, double or triple cabins, cars with tables, cars with seats for the budget travellers, cars with fold-down beds and curtains in the aisle, like the one Marilyn Monroe enjoyed in Some Like it Hot.I wander through a staff meeting, clamber over some gates, and thread my way through several excited groups busy unpacking and trying out the taps in their cabins.This refurbished train was built in the 1950s and resembles an Airstream caravan, with stainless steel inside and out. But it creaks and groans the way an old train should. Crossing over the coupling between coaches, the sight of the ground rushing by beneath the steel plate brings a quick fear from childhood … and I hope I'm on the right train.A little later I'm trying to digest an enormous breakfast of eggs and bacon and pancakes and fruit and muffins and unlimited coffee – all served by graceful, good-humoured staff in impeccable surroundings, as a landscape of the forests and lakes of Ontario glides by the windows at an amiable 40mph or so.In watching trees file past the windows, I realise I could be watching a form of television: The Tree Channel. Only the occasional lakeside cabin buried by trees, and a rare level crossing over a dirt road, break up the endless forest. The sheer scale of the country is starting to penetrate. The numberless trees. It's as if the train is a kind of cultural time capsule from the 21st century, gliding through an ancient post-glacial landscape of trees, rock and lake, with us inside, looking out.Armstrong, Ontario, population 1,216, seems to be one tarmac road with a church, several dirt roads and a dog. I wonder what life is like here in winter and receive a small answer when I notice everyone has a pile of logs as tall as their house in their garden. The PA announces a brief stop here, so we all disembark for some air and the men walk to the front to stare at the locomotives.The PA sounds like Radar in MASH and summons us to every meal with the reminder: "Please don't forget your ticket, folks; it's the second sitting for lunch so please bring the yellow one." They seem to know who doesn't appear: "We seem to be missing two people for lunch, folks, so …"Karen and I look at each other and say nothing. If we keep quiet they'll never find us. At lunch we drink beer with pony-tailed Californians, retired – or nearly so. The clean, confident look about them makes me feel like an undernourished peasant from Europe, desperate for a life in the New World.Dinner features an outgoing Canadian pair of friends celebrating reaching 40, and doing battle with two hard-drinking Californian couples. Does Canadian money smell of maple syrup, we all wonder? And can you tear it? We're all sniffing and wrestling with bank notes until the waiters get involved to prove that no it doesn't and no you can't. And order was restored.We retreat to one of the panorama cars with a glass of wine and find four backpackers have crept in there with beer and snacks. Two boys and two girls, just met on the train and roughing it in the cheap seats at night, eating their own food.They play cards in a raucous and good-natured way, then discuss literature, French and English, since the boys are from Quebec. Karen and I are charmed by them, by their willingness to communicate, and their brittle optimism. Youth is not wasted on these four, we decide."What day is it?""Winnipeg, this is Winnipeg, so it must be Thursday morning."Winnipeg station, unlike all the others, has a platform and a fence around it, which I find quite reassuring. The PA has told us to leave the train for a few hours while they change crew and "suggests" breakfast in the town. We're keen to obey their instructions. As we wander into a mall for breakfast we are staring at a sky full of towering, fantastical clouds – for we are now on The Prairie.I'd assumed it would be treeless and as flat as a table, but it's not. While the fields are too big to even see across, it rolls like the swell of a sea, with copses and woods dotted around.I see a house off in the immense distance, standing alone without the usual farm buildings and vehicles, surrounded by space. I've been feeling compressed, as if a piece of me has been left behind in England. I see myself sitting on the porch of this house, drinking a beer as the sun sets, admiring the view across a hundred miles of land, maybe my land, watching the sun burn it all down.Saskatoon passes in the night. We've been stopping more frequently. A stop is usually to allow a freight train to pass by, or to use the single line as they have priority over passenger trains. But this stop is for much longer and it turns out one of the locos has a problem. We're all allowed to disembark as we happen to be in a station, so in the fading light we wander up and down the gravel strip, watching the porters stationed at each door for any sign of a sudden departure. They, too, are watching out, for passengers straying too far.They needn't worry: by now we're all institutionalised and stay close to the train, the source of all comfort. We huddle in a panorama car and drink whisky, withdraw into the stainless steel cocoon: we won't get left behind when they fix the engine.In the panorama car's upper level, you can look forward over the roof and watch the sun set over the prairie. It's a gorgeous, prolonged burst of colour, with every branch of every tree picked out in perfect silhouette.But the sun is taking too long to set: we've been sitting here for hours it seems. Then I realise that this is because the train is travelling due west towards the setting sun and is playing tricks with time, or maybe it's the PA telling me to turn my watch back an hour every night because we enter a new time zone every day. Or maybe it's just the whisky.We leave the town of Jasper in the morning with a hangover and an extra locomotive to help us up the Yellowhead pass, because it's the Rocky Mountains at last. Karen sees bears and has a proper view of the mountains because she's in the observation car, which has clear Perspex walls and roof, and comfortable raised seats that allow passengers spectacular views of the snow-covered peaks.The low cloud and rain don't do justice to the sight but in the evening the cloud clears and the light paints the mountaintops gold and rose. The PA tells us we are crossing the lowest point of the continental divide in North America, at 3,718 feet: from here all rivers flow west to the Pacific, whereas before this point all rivers flow east to the Atlantic. I sit and think about this, and about the European navvies and Chinese labourers who built this railway in the 1880s.Vancouver is Canada's eighth city by population, at 600,000, but first in terms of rainfall. We're rolling through the industrial outskirts and I feel an urgency about arriving: it's been over three days of this long, narrow life and I want to be somewhere. But we're marooned in a freight siding. Freight cars crawl around us on both sides, stacked with timber or containers piled two-high, and all pulled by invisible engines as we wait for a distant signal.I'm fixating on the ends of the freight cars' wheel axles, three bolt-heads set in a triangle revolve at low speed, making a kind of spirograph effect that is somehow pleasing. I'm starting to count axles, then wheels, but now we're moving! The train reverses into Pacific Central station, where we sit on the concourse with our luggage, listening to the PA for instructions, drinking coffee and wondering what we're supposed to do now.• The trip was provided by the Canadian Tourism Commission (uk.canada.travel). A one-way sleeper ticket, including meals, from Toronto to Vancouver with Via Rail (viarail.ca) cost from C$545 (around £334). Air Transat (airtransat.co.uk) has flights from Gatwick, Manchester, Birmingham and Glasgow to Toronto and back from Vancouver from £796Read Dave's winning entry for the 2012 competition here