Canada is putting skilled British workers on a fast track for immigration visas to exploit the UK's soaring cost of living, the Daily Mail reports today."(Canadian) officials believe superior public services and the ability to weather economic turmoil will lure Britons fed up with fuel and food prices and with the state of schools and hospitals," the paper says.The Alberta employment minister, Hector Goudreau, currently in Britain, believes you could sell a small flat in London and buy a large detached house with garden in Canada for the same amount.The Mail describes it as one of the "most audacious recruitments raids since Australia poached a million Britons", and is not amused. The paper has commissioned the former Telegraph New York correspondent Philip Delves Broughton to put Britons off leaving for the world's second-largest country. "Canada is the big, earnest, empty restaurant which can't understand why the scrappier joint next door is hopping. People just do not want to go ... the climate makes Britain's look positively Mediterranean ... In the dramatic arts, Canada's greatest recent contribution is the incomprehensible, semi-nude contortion act of Cirque du Soleil. And as for its newspapers, they are lifeless and hobbled by the provincialism which divides the country."But not all British expats in Canada are so nonplussed, as the Guardian's Helen Pidd found out when she covered this story three months ago."Even the criminals are friendly, Russ Harper, 41, an ex-military man who served in the North Yorkshire force for eight years, said. "They hardly ever even run away, and often when you stop them, they admit there are warrants out for their arrest. They say 'yes sir' and 'no sir', even when you're arresting them."Canada is not without its darker side - the rendition of Maher Arar, for example - but the country is regularly ranked in the top five places to live in the world. Alberta's immigration website doesn't have to try too hard to depict a province of beautiful open spaces and carefree children flying kites. The landscape is stunning. And, most important of all, the weather doesn't look too bad today, either.