It is ironic to hear Brits bemoaning the possible sale of their one rather dishy fast railway track – High Speed One from St Pancras International to the Channel Tunnel – to a bunch of retired Canadian teachers. It's too late for Britain now. Any society that would allow the sale of its phone, electricity, gas and water to private companies, particularly foreigners, decades ago and then complain about losing Cadbury chocolates... well, your values are skewed.So are Canadian values, which is where the irony comes in. We'd love it if our teachers bought a high-speed rail line from us. If we had one to sell, which we don't.There may not be a nation in the world that needs high-speed trains more than Canada does. We're a big country, with long, boring highways between our lonely cities sustained by a restricted oil supply extracted at hideous environmental cost from the tar sands of Alberta. Compared to us, why do Brits even need a train à grande vitesse on that 67-mile route? But our hard-right government opposes ambitious infrastructure projects. They reek of the future, and prime minister Stephen Harper hates the future, his aim being to return Canada to a notional past. He also sees train projects as "big government", which your David Cameron similarly hates. And here is where I do mourn for both our nations.The Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan is huge and powerful. The compounded savings of a sturdy unionised group of 289,000 teachers, run by a pleasant grey-faced man named Jim, are worth C$96.4bn (£62bn). To you, it's just another foreign monolith that keeps buying things dear to your heart. To me it is, quite literally, my youth. It is my Miss Jean Brodie, but in a nice way: Miss Batty's class in English literature and Mr Butcher's class on Canadian history (which is mainly about railways). The money you may have to hand over to them when you race to the Chunnel is keeping my beloved teachers of yore in bacon and Manitoba minks (our name for puffy down coats) to this very day.The attempt to purchase the 30-year concession for the High Speed One route is part of a trend. Teachers, a solid, practical bunch of no-risk managers, is getting the hell out of Canadian investments because they don't see them as good for the long term. Sixty years from now Teachers will have to buy total-body joint replacements for the young people now about to finish their first year of teaching. Apparently, it has more faith in Brits eternally buying lottery tickets (it owns your Camelot) than in, say, Canada ever building a desperately desired high-speed train between Montreal and Toronto.We want Teachers; they don't want us. They want you but you don't want them, and rightly so. The Guardian reports that any new owner may dump its current maintenance contract with Network Rail. Why should they be allowed to fire workers whose executives just got huge bonuses? And what kind of country would divide its treasured rail network in two – one bit owning the trains and the other owning the track – and then sell it off in the first place? That's crazy.I just finished reading Matthew Engel's entrancingly squalid history of British rail, Eleven Minutes Late: A Train Journey to the Soul of Britain, in which he describes the sheer awfulness of train travel that followed privatisation: the crowds, noise, delays, the crimes against food, the air of interpersonal hatred. The book climaxes with the author's encounter with a surly staffer on the route from Euston to Glasgow. "Have a bacon roll, you cunt," the man told him.My husband travelled from Montreal to Toronto yesterday by train. It was a dreary six-hour ride delayed by an earthquake between the two cities. Via Rail, as the hated company is called, halted its trains to see if any rails had shifted. Some might call this prudent. But I doubt that Japan, one of the most earthquake-prone landscapes in the world, shuts down its bullet trains every time the coffee cups tremble.I oppose the sale of national essentials to foreigners hot for profit. Teachers is simply another heartless multinational with a benign face, which is what you'll think when your Slow Speed One train gently chugs along making little steam-engine noises. But judging by that train wreck of a Tory budget, you'll never be able to afford a ticket anyway. We are all hobos now.