A handful of protesters shivering in –22C weather failed to cool the welcome Bill Cosby received when he brought his one-man show to a small Canadian city, his first live appearance since November.While news reports added three more names to the long list of women who have accused the embattled comedian of sexually abusing them, Cosby fans in Kitchener, Ontario, would hear none of it. “Innocent until proven guilty!” they declared repeatedly to media outside the 2,000-seat theatre, where Cosby played to an appreciative house about two-thirds full.The comedian’s 90-minute set on Wednesday night, filled with shaggy dog stories of family life, ended with a brief standing ovation. Although he joked extensively about domestic violence, drawing the biggest laughs of the evening with stories of parental beatings and “whuppings”, Cosby did not broach the accusations of sexual violence that are threatening to destroy his career.More pointedly, his fans did not stay away because of them. “He hasn’t been charged with anything,” said Bert, a local retiree. “You either go with the law or you don’t.”On Wednesday, Phylicia Rashad, the actor who for 12 years played the role of Clair Huxtable, Cosby’s TV wife, lent her support to the comedian. In an interview with US network ABC News she accused the media of waging a campaign against him without any proof. “This is not about the women, this is about something else,” she said. “This is about the obliteration of legacy.”But some of those attending the show were more ambivalent. “If I had known about this months ago, when I bought the tickets, I probably wouldn’t have come,” said one elderly man, who declined to give his name. “Twenty-odd allegations can’t be wrong. But I hate to see justice done in the Twitterverse.”Making the decision to use her tickets was “tough”, said Dawn, who attended the show with her husband and three children. “Let’s just say this was awkward for us. I had two channels growing up, and The Cosby Show was the only show I ever watched. We spent more than $700 on tickets to see someone we’ve supported for years.”More than laughs, Dawn came seeking an explanation. “Just because you go to the show doesn’t mean you think he’s not guilty,” she said. “I want to hear what he has to say.”Although Cosby made several jokes at the expense of his wife, he steered clear of any sexual innuendo. “It’s good clean humour,” said one young man, who gave his name as Gerald. But Gerald and his friend, Austin, were somewhat disappointed that no hecklers disrupted Cosby’s performance. “I’m not going to lie to you, that’s a big part of what brought me out today,” Austin said.Wednesday’s performance was Cosby’s first since a November show in Florida. Since then, at least 10 US dates have been cancelled as a growing number of women have come forward to accuse the famously wholesome figure of sexual abuse – with many alleging that he drugged his victims to render them helpless before raping them.In a statement issued by his publicist after the show, Cosby thanked his fans “for giving me the opportunity to bring laughter back into your lives tonight”.Two more Canadian performances were scheduled for Thursday night and Friday. Citing legal and financial necessity, the Chicago-based promoter Innovation Arts and Entertainment went ahead with the gigs despite widespread calls for their cancellation.“If the allegations are true, of course I find them abhorrent,” company spokesman Adam Epstein told the Canadian press. But Epstein, like the audience he attracted to Cosby’s Kitchener concert, still refused to believe the worst. “What if it is not true?” he asked.Ontario’s premier, Kathleen Wynne, was less hesitant, citing the “very serious” allegations against Cosby. “Until those are sorted out I certainly would not go to a performance,” she said.Journalists outnumbered demonstrators on the frozen pavement outside the theatre prior to the performance by about 10 to one. “Rape is not a joke” declared one much-photographed placard.Most protesters eventually sought the comfort of a nearby tavern, where a volunteer group mounted a fundraising concert for local rape-crisis facilities. Staged at the same time as the Cosby show, it attracted about 300 attendees, including Kitchener’s mayor, Berry Vrbanovic.“We wanted to make a positive statement, to focus on survivors,” said organiser Melanie Baker. The purpose of the event, she added, was to “make it easier community-wide for people who have experienced sexual assault to come forward”.As for those who chose Cosby instead, Baker held no grudge. “I hope they had a good time,” she said. “We would have preferred the show was cancelled and I would prefer that everyone was on our side. But you can’t reach people who don’t want to hear.”