Near the end of Scott Pilgrim Vs the World, Comeau, the guy who "knows everybody", can be overheard having a conversation about which is better, the movie or the comic book. Lest I be out-meta'ed, then, let me carefully sidestep the issue of whether Bryan Lee O'Malley's graphic novel is superior to its big screen adaptation (or vice versa) and just say this: Hollywood nimbly dodged a fireball and landed a 64-punch combo by staying so true to Scott Pilgrim's strange, funny and very deep-rooted Canadianness.Which is not an easy thing to define. A surefire dinner party conversation starter with Canadians (and a quick way to send everyone else home early) is to ask: "But what ... exactly does it mean to be Canadian?" Try it. If you come up with anything other than single-tier universal healthcare, ice hockey and a sort of vague licentiousness, I have a 1kg bottle of Quebec Medium No 1 maple syrup with your name on it.But Scott Pilgrim has Canada – or at least Toronto – down. It nails the city's confident but self-conscious sense of humour, the love of bad puns ("I was just a little bi-curious!" "Well honey, I'm a little bi-furious"), the self-deprecating jokes ("What's the website for Amazon.ca?"), and the very malleability of being Canadian ("When I'm around you, I kind of feel like I'm on drugs. Not that I do drugs. Unless you do drugs, in which case I do them all the time.")Many Canadians feel towards their country exactly what the Scott Pilgrim comic/film feels towards its protagonist: fond contempt. Not taking yourself too seriously seems to be key when you're lying in bed with a cultural elephant that could not only squash you, but doesn't even know you're there.This wary jokiness about America is also a key element of the plot. In search of bigger US box office takings, Edgar Wright could well have set Scott Pilgrim in, say, Seattle, but only at the expense of the comic's wonderfully pitched attitude towards the States.Scott's love interest, Ramona Flowers, is an American, and so is the No 1 big boss ex-boyfriend, music promoter Gideon. The latter makes various disparaging remarks about Canada, but Scott (or, as Ramona calls him in the comic, "Canada boy"), fights right back: "You're pretentious, this club sucks, I have beef. Let's fight."With a light touch, the film captures Toronto's paradoxical, smug inferiority towards the US, and specifically New York. Torontonians know they're less important, less powerful and generally less stylish than New Yorkers, but take a perverse pride in not caring. It shows off what I've always loved about Toronto: its beautiful marriage of big-city sheen and quiet, empty, snow-muffled desolation. Toronto is a romantic city, especially in winter, especially if you take romance with a grain of salt. If you can set a romcom in coffee chains in Seattle, it's about time we had one on snowy park swings at midnight.Not all film adaptations are as faithful to setting – with often disastrous results. Fever Pitch transposed Nick Hornby's novel about his solitary, girl-free obsession with Arsenal into a romcom starring Jimmy Fallon as a Boston Red Sox fan. The US remake of the Australian comedy Kath and Kim inexplicably made the two characters educated, middle class and attractive, thus inherently negating the "bogan" hilarity of the original.Also, in its American, Richard Gere-led incarnation, Shall We Dance? was an embarrassing misstep. This makes sense when you understand that what made the original Japanese film a hit is that ballroom dancing, and the public male-female physical interaction it requires, is fairly taboo in Japan.But my vote for worst locale-changing in film goes to U571. This ping-and-periscope schlock about the boarding of a German U-boat in the second world war had the gall to state it was American submarine officers who captured the famous Enigma cipher machine from the Nazis, thus changing the course of the war and helping to defeat Hitler. It was, of course, British naval officers who captured the first Enigma, not to mention British codebreakers at Bletchley Park, led by Alan Turing (British), who cracked its secrets. The movie's only saving grace is that Jon Bon Jovi gets swept overboard.U571's setting crimes may soon be dwarfed, however, if rumours of a live-action Akira set in Manhattan, rather than nuclear-afeared Tokyo, are true. (See this artist's rendering of Akira USA for further evidence.) But that's just my precious little Canadian opinion. Let's hear your votes: know any Fear & Loathing in Enfields I haven't mentioned?