They will be watching Juan Carlos Guzmán-Betancourt very closely at his jail in Vermont.The last time the silver-tongued Colombian conman with a taste for the high life was locked up he walked out of a British prison after persuading the authorities to let him go to the dentist on his own.But after illegally crossing the border from Canada, the man who British police have likened to the legendary US conman Frank Abagnale, played by Leonardo DiCaprio in the film Catch Me If You Can, now faces the prospect of up to eight countries and the US state of Nevada asking for his extradition.Guzmán-Betancourt, 33, is believed to have stolen at least $1m (£625,000) across the globe including more than £150,000 in Britain by conning his way into hotel rooms and clearing out safes as well as more routine fraud.The Colombian has at least 10 identities and has been pursued in Canada, Colombia, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Thailand and Venezuela. He's been convicted of larceny in Virginia and New York and credit card fraud in Florida, and deported from the US three times.His earliest known con was to be found standing on the runway of Miami airport claiming to be a 13-year-old orphan who had clung to the undercarriage of a flight from Colombia. That unlikely story generated an outpouring of sympathy and gifts, and tens of thousands of dollars in donations to a support fund. After he fled with the cash, it emerged that Guzmán-Betancourt was 17 years old with two healthy parents.Guzmán-Betancourt was known in Britain as Gonzalo Zapater Vives. He was detained there in 1998 following a series of burglaries but jumped bail. When he was finally picked up again in Mayfair in 2004 after an off duty policeman spotted him in a supermarket, the Colombian was tried and jailed for burglaries at the Dorchester Hotel and the Mandarin Oriental Hotel.The detective who arrested him, Andy Swindells, described Guzmán-Betancourt as a "highly accomplished liar" who staked out high class hotels, identified wealthy victims and waited for them to leave their rooms. Then he persuaded hotel staff to let him in, and once there would call security claiming to have forgotten the key or security code to the safe. Guzmán-Betancourt walked out with money, jewels and passports.He was sentenced to 3½ years in prison but served only two months at Standford Hill open prison on the Isle of Sheppey before being allowed out on his own for a dental appointment. He never returned.The Colombian was arrested a few weeks later in Dublin for theft, served prison time and was ordered extradited to France. Then he disappeared again.Guzmán-Betancourt was detained by US border guards earlier this month after a tipoff as he waited for a taxi at a petrol station. He tried to persuade the officials that he had wandered across the frontier accidentally after his car broke down. But the border guards took him in to custody as a suspected illegal immigrant until his fingerprints revealed him as the elusive conman.