The promoters of Bill Cosby’s three performances in Canada this week have announced that they are going ahead with the shows but have prefaced the decision by giving advice to women who have experienced sexual violence on how to seek help.Innovation Arts & Entertainment, based in Chicago, says in its statement that it “condemns physical violence in any form. We recommend that anyone who has experienced the pain of sexual violence, reach out to helpful organizations in Western Ontario.”It then lists three specific organisations that provide advice for sexual assault victims. “The fact that an artist is performing on stages is no endorsement, in any way, of behavior of that artist,” the promoters say.Cosby, who has been the subject of a storm of allegations that he sexually assaulted numerous women, largely in the 1970s and 80s, is set to make three appearance in Ontario this week. He will appear on Wednesday at the Centre in the Square in Kitchener, followed by the Budweiser Gardens in London on Thursday and the Hamilton Place Theatre in Hamilton on Friday.All three venues confirmed to the Guardian that the shows would go on.Despite the promoters’ obvious unease at the situation, they said they had no choice but to go ahead. Should they attempt to cancel, the statement said, IAE and the venue would be subject to legal action and with it “the prospect of significant financial damage that, as a small business, would be insurmountable”.More than 20 women have now come forward to allege that Cosby subjected them to sexual assaults and that he in some cases drugged them. He is also facing a defamation lawsuit that has been joined by three women in which they claim they were branded as liars by Cosby after they spoke out.All the allegations have been consistently denied by the comic’s representatives, and he has never been charged with any offence. He settled a lawsuit with Andrea Constand, who alleged he drugged and molested her, in 2006.In the wake of the allegations Cosby has had numerous shows axed by venues across the US, including dates scheduled for this year. A Netflix special broadcast to mark his 77th birthday and a planned NBC sitcom were also scrapped.IAE’s insistence that they had no option but to press ahead with this week’s performances did not satisfy women’s rights advocates who plan to demonstrate outside all three Ontario venues. Megan Walker, executive director of the London Abused Women’s Centre, pointed out that two of the venues – those in London and Hamilton – are operated by Global Spectrum whose parent company is the multibillion-dollar media giant Comcast Corporation.“Once again the almighty box office is taking priority over the safety of women,” she said.Walker also objected to suggestions in the IAE statement that the Ontario venues could face security issues as a result of the protests. The promoters said that they had co-opted “private security companies to ensure the safety of our valued audience”.Walker said the implication was that the planned protests were problematic. “The very reason we are protesting is that we are opposed to violence – in this case men’s violence towards women.”