Canada, the world's second-largest country, was colonised by the British and French in the 15th century, meaning that today it is officially bilingual, with almost a quarter of citizens speaking French (centred largely around francophone Quebec). This isn't the only reason Canada is popular – modern cities nestled among stunning scenery make for a vibrant, outdoors lifestyle.Almost everyone has access to high quality healthcare in Canada, which makes it attractive to expats, and there is an incredible variety of regions to see and explore. These range from cities such as Toronto (pronounced "Tronno" by the locals), Montreal and Vancouver (where most expats congregate), to the world-class ski resorts of Whistler and Calgary.Canada is a vast expanse, where locals and visitors alike can holiday in the country every year without getting bored. A trip to see the northern lights in Newfoundland and whale-watching off Vancouver are musts.If you settle in Canada you should feel welcome – the country has one of the highest per capita immigration rates in the world. According to the Canadian immigration service the country is looking to attract between 240,000 and 265,000 new permanent residents in 2012 alone.You'll probably need the most common visa – the skilled workers and professionals visa – but in order to get one you'll have to prove you will be an advantage to the economy (Quebec has its own regional visa of this type). You'll be scored on criteria such as age and occupation, with the holy grail of 67 points needed to be considered for entry. Failing that there are visas for entrepreneurs and investors, visas for people who have skills that are needed in a specific province, and family visas for those joining a spouse or family member.Check out the Canadian Citizenship and Immigration service's Visa Wizard to see whether you're eligible.You must be able to show you have enough money to support yourself and your dependants, unless you have arranged employment in Canada. This means you need to have funds from CAN$11,115 (£6,968) for one family member, to CAN$29,414 for seven or more family members. You will also need to pass a medical exam.The UK state pension is payable in Canada, but unfortunately you will not get annual increases in benefit once you have ceased to be resident in the UK. This means your benefit will stay at the same rate as when you left the UK.You need only routine vaccinations, though Hepatitis B is recommended, as well as rabies if you are likely to be involved in any activities that might bring you into direct contact with bats, carnivores and other mammals.What airport will you arrive at? Depends where you're heading. Ottawa is the capital, but the largest city is Toronto – either are likely first stops.Local currency The Canadian dollar. On 12 NOvember 2012 £1 is $1.59.How do you spot a cab? Many cabs are yellow, like New York taxis, but there are just as many cabs of other colours.Price of a hotel room Depends on the season and where you are, but anything from £50-£150 for a three-star hotel. For example, in November the three-star Ramada Downtown Vancouver is charging £52 a night compared to £103 at the three-star Ramada Downtown Calgary. Hotels.com put the average price at £105 in the first half of 2012.Price of a house About $750,000 for a three-bed house in Vancouver. According to Numbeo, the price per square metre for an apartment in Toronto city centre is $6,234.31, dropping to $3,767.37 in the suburbs.Price of a pint of milk: $1.13.What language do most people speak? Canadian English and Canadian French.What tax will you pay? Federal tax rates are 15% on the first $42,707 of taxable income; 22% on the next $42,707 of taxable income (ie, more than 42,707 up to $85,414); 26% on the next $46,992 of taxable income (up to $132,406); and 29% on income in excess of $132,406. There are also lower, provincial tax rates which you can view at the Canada Revenue Agency's website.How long will it take to send a letter home? Up to two weeks, but five-10 days if you're lucky.• The Canuck language throws up some interesting definitions: suckers are lollipops; noodles means pasta; a loonie is a dollar; a parkade is a multi-storey car park; a gas bar is the petrol station; and hydro means electricity (as in hydro-electric).• Ice hockey, known simply as hockey in Canada, and lacrosse are the country's national sports.• Mail is not delivered on Saturdays in Canada.• Winnie the Pooh originally comes from Canada. Well, sort of. AA Milne's son Christopher Robin visited London zoo and fell in love with a bear that had been exported from Winnipeg in Canada.• Famous Canadians include Pamela Anderson, Leonard Cohen, Avril Lavigne, Keanu Reeves and Jim Carrey.Karen Brooks, 27, and her partner Nic Ollier, 26, moved to Whistler in October 2010 after completing a winter sports season at the resort in 2008-09. "Nic and I did a winter season and we fell in love with the place," Brooks says. "The people, the outdoor lifestyle and breathtaking scenery: we came back for a more permanent stay." Ollier adds: "There are endless adventures to be had and never a dull day. You can't decide whether to go mountain biking, hiking, swimming in the lake, fishing or all of the above."The two were living in Surrey when they decided to migrate. Brooks now works in sales for an adventure tour operator called The Adventure Group, while Ollier works as a snowmobile tour guide in winter and a quad bike tour guide in summer, providing backcountry tours just south of Whistler village."The weather is a big factor in why we like it here – the snowy winters and hot summers," Brooks says."I also feel like I'm surrounded by like-minded people, and the scenery blows my mind continually," Ollier says. "The more time you spend here there more things you discover and the more a part of everything you feel."The couple say it is easy to meet other expats in Whistler because it draws in people from all over the world, but many of the Brits they meet are only there temporarily. "That's typical of resort life and doesn't reflect the rest of British Columbia," Ollier explains.If the pair were to give one piece of advice for people about to make the same move it would be to "try and establish as much as you can before you leave, but accept it will take a while to find the right job and an affordable place to live. You need patience to cope with the immigration system – it's very confusing, slow and frustrating."• If you're thinking of moving overseas why not enter our competition: we are offering £500 of travel vouchers to help you make the move.• Are you a UK expat in Canada? We want to see the view from your window. You can share it with us by adding it to our Flickr group tagged "Canada". Our selected favourites will appear in a gallery on guardian.co.uk/money.• Share your tips for expat newcomers to Canada in the comments section. 