The Union Jack currently occupies space on three of Canada’s provincial flags – by Friday all may be historical artifacts. The Scottish referendum is currently too close to call, but even if Scotland votes to stay, Britishness – as an idea and a way of being – has died in the process of debating it. Should the United Kingdom survive, it will survive out of economic fear. The lie that Britain deserves to survive as anything other than a bad arrangement handed down from history has been called out. And it brings me hope: if Scotland has the guts to reject the fundamental hypocrisy, vulgar classism and demand for self-contempt that Britishness demands, maybe Canada can work up the courage to do the same.Scots built Canada under the banner of Britain. Sir John A MacDonald, the father of Confederation, rejected Chinese citizenship exactly because, as he said, the Chinese immigrant “has no British instincts or British feelings or aspirations, and therefore ought not to have a vote.” Canada is its own country, of course, but British instincts and feelings and aspirations have been steeped into Canada, to the point where in some regards we are more British than the British. My nation’s motto is “peace, order and good government” – and each of those three principles is applied with the utmost sincerity. We really believe in those values.The anglo elite, clustered mostly in Toronto now, continues to ape British culture, as they have done for 200 years. When David Cameron went looking for the ideal British banker, he found the man in Toronto – the upright, clean-cut, sober Mark Carney. Mordechai Richler called them the “Westmount Rhodesians”. They still run most of the political and business institutions in the country, with all the widespread influence that comes with those positions. To live within Britishness is to live away from where the things that matter happen. Its cozy little markers – tea and biscuits, James Bond, all that playacting from the opening of the London Olympics – are covers for the ruthlessness of conquest and the dehumanizing hierarchy of class. Hypocrisy has been the defining trait of Britishness, in small and in grand things both. The rajas of India could not understand how the men Britain sent them could be so scrupulous in points of personal honour and then tell outright lies when it came to their treaty obligations. These grand hypocrisies are backed up by a million small hypocrisies, like saying “sorry” when you don’t mean “sorry” – Canada’s national verbal tic. The British call this manners.For Canada, the cost of Britishness has been the survival of the colonial mentality, the ineradicable belief that the real world is elsewhere and anyone who wants to make a mark must leave. The 1995 referendum on Quebec Independence was a crisis that nearly ended the country, but the problem with Canada has never been Quebec’s quite natural desire to preserve its identity. The problem is that the rest of the country is always looking elsewhere for its identity. Given the ethnic makeup of the country, not just in Quebec but in the rest of the country as well, Britishness – the subservient connection to England – is humiliating and degrading and just plain silly. Why is some old English lady still on my money?That is what the Scots have done – they have made Britain look silly. They have made it look silly because it is silly. What has become painfully obvious watching the campaign from here is the inability of the pro-British forces to articulate a decent reason for their continued existence. Talk of the “family of nations” is the blubbering sentimentality of the defunct bully. Talk of a “nasty divorce” is a final retreat into threat.There is barely a trace of republicanism in Canada, I should point out; mentioning Constitutional Reform here is a social gaffe roughly on the level of farting in soup. Nobody wants to fight battles here the way the Scots are fighting them over there. Quebec separatism is at low ebb. The Parti Quebecois is out of power, after a humiliating attempt to win the provincial election on immigrant-baiting. It has become clear in the past two decades that Quebec’s distinct culture can survive inside Canada. It has also become clear that in terms of the things that really matter – health care and education and which wars to go to – generally speaking Quebec and the rest of Canada are really very similar indeed. The reason we’re so similar isn’t that surprising: we built a country together.It is exactly that commonality that the British can no longer muster. The Union Jack may still fly over Scotland at the end of this week, but the ones that fly over Canadian capitals are already anachronistic embarrassments. Maybe if the Union Jack lowers from the masts of the United Kingdom, we can finally lower it from ours.