Over the last decade, there have been a number of surface-level parallels between Canadian and British politics. First, each country replaced a long-standing prime minister with his former finance minister. Then, when each of those in turn gradually drowned under a cascade of leftover grievances and his own failure to unite a divided party, both Canada and Britain turned to their respective opposition Conservatives – but even then, only just.In 2011, after five years of minority rule, Stephen Harper finally guided his Conservative party into majority territory, opposed and balanced in the House by a party that was once a political afterthought, pushed to prominence by a leader nobody took seriously only weeks before election day. Almost exactly a year earlier, in 2010, a similar narrative played out in Britain, ending with David Cameron's Conservative coalition government.Despite all of that, the realities facing each country when Cameron and Harper were respectively elected were very different – and remain so. On the one hand, the UK was, and still is, staring at the business end of an economic nightmare in the eurozone, to which so many of its decisions, like those of foreign policy, are weighted. It is also still recovering from the 2008 banking system implosion, suffering high unemployment and grappling with its own faltering economy. On the other hand, as Cameron highlighted in his speech to Canadian Parliament in Ottawa Thursday night, no Canadian bank has yet "failed or faltered" during the recession. Canada's economic relationship with the EU is currently focused on an upcoming free trade agreement, and it is determining the best way to handle a resource-rich export economy. On foreign policy, it looks not to Europe, but to the US.Even the two leaders seem to differ in their relationship to conservatism and politics: Harper, the wonkish tactician, bred into western Reformist ideology, and an active politician at a young age, versus Cameron, a former PR brain for a TV company, bred into the ethos of noblesse oblige at Eton. Yet, as Cameron spoke to a packed House of Commons, similarities seemed to outweigh differences. Cameron hit home ideas that have become familiar tropes for the Harper Conservatives: the threat of the global economic crisis to the success of Canadian private enterprise; the dangers of Islamist extremism, dampened by Canada's role in Nato missions in Afghanistan and Libya; and the fear of potential government overspending, solved only by continued austerity and deficit reduction. It was so much like a Harper speech, that despite the marked differences between the realities of each nation's relationship to various continued global crises, one could have been forgiven for mistaking the two leaders Thursday.In his rhetoric, Cameron sounded as if he'd been dipped in a Harper Prime Ministerial gloss and set on a shelf; or marked as the updated operating software of the ideology that finally, after endless processing, spat out a majority government this spring: a sort of Harper 2.0. He appeared just like all other "modernised" politicians, running on an iTunes approach to public policy – immediately detecting a blip of interest in themes and automatically offering up similar options you might also enjoy – only this time, smoother, younger, about an inch taller, wearing a pale blue tie, and flying in on a transatlantic commercial red-eye to Terminal 3 at Heathrow.Britons might take note.