The Scottish transport operator FirstGroup has been accused by Canada's government of acting like a "bullying multinational" by slashing rural routes on its Greyhound Canada bus network, in a cost-cutting move that risks leaving far-flung towns bereft of regular links to the rest of the country.Greyhound, which was bought by FirstGroup as part of its $3.6bn (£2.2bn) takeover of the US group Laidlaw two years ago, has announced that it intends to withdraw from a large chunk of Canada, including the province of Manitoba and north-western parts of Ontario. Without government support to cover losses, the company said it might go further by cutting services in western Canada, which could include routes to cities such as Vancouver, Calgary and Edmonton.Greyhound wants a public subsidy of at least C$15m (£8.5m) to cover losses on less popular routes, after a drop in passenger numbers in outlying areas of some 15% over a year. But its actions have sparked complaints from smaller towns which say that, hundreds of miles from the nearest city, they depend on bus services as a lifeline.In the town of Terrace Bay, more than 700 miles from Toronto on the north shore of Lake Superior, a Greyhound service has been the only mode of public transport since a rail link was discontinued 15 years ago. Daily newspapers and regular packages arrive on Greyhound buses and the nearest major airport, Thunder Bay, is two and a half hours' drive away.Michael King, the mayor of Terrace Bay, told the Guardian: "For us to lose buses through this whole area would leave us completely isolated with no rail, no air and no type of ground transport that people could use."The town is on a main Trans-Canada highway but not all its 1,800 residents have cars. King said: "We're not remote – we're on a main highway -– but a lot of our residents rely on the buses to get to doctors' appointments with specialists or to get to the major cities."Since taking ownership of Greyhound, FirstGroup has sought to modernise the famous long-distance bus brand. The company has pumped in capital to upgrade coaches and recently announced plans to bring Greyhound buses to Britain. But the business has suffered in recession – in January, FirstGroup revealed that Greyhound revenues were down 4.5% in the final quarter of 2008.Greyhound has complained that a highly regulated structure gives it little leeway in adjusting service levels in Canada. It said it has been left with an "all or nothing" choice of either eliminating all services in certain areas or running them at an unsustainable level. The company has asked the country's federal government to bring together provincial authorities in order to agree on a compromise within the next 30 to 90 days. But Canada's transport ministry has accused FirstGroup of brinkmanship. A spokesman said: "Greyhound is a multinational and their actions are heavy-handed. They're an attempt to bully the provinces of Manitoba and Ontario."A spokesman at FirstGroup's Aberdeen head office said the decision to withdraw services had been a difficult one: "At a time of falling passenger demand and a significantly weaker economic backdrop, it is neither economically nor environmentally sustainable to continue to run Greyhound Canada services on some routes."The firm's Canadian operation suffered a drop in passengers over security fears last year arising from a gruesome murder in which a passenger was beheaded and cannibalised by a schizophrenic man on a Greyhound bus near Winnipeg.• This article was amended on 9 September 2009. The original referred to Alberta when it meant Calgary. This has been corrected.