The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will arrive in Canada this evening for an eight-day visit, their first official overseas trip since their wedding and a trip that will "reaffirm the important role" of the monarchy in Canada, according to organisers.William and Kate land in Ottawa, Ontario, at about 2pm local time and will celebrate Canada Day in the city on Friday – the day William's mother, Diana, would have turned 50 – before seeing more of the country.The couple will visit the French-speaking province of Quebec on Saturday before travelling on Tuesday to Yellowknife in the Northwest Territories.Other activities include sitting around a campfire with young people and donning aprons to join a cookout in Quebec City.But it will not be all work. The couple will go canoeing and celebrate Canada Day as they survey their future realm, before jetting off to Los Angeles for further engagements that include participating in a polo match and a dinner.Expectations for the visit are high. An Ipsos poll for the Ottawa Sun said, contradictorily, that while 55% did not know what the fuss was about a further 55% were excited about the visit with 5% planning to go and see the royal couple. If true that would see more than 1 million people line the streets.Even 55% of Québécois say they are excited. The support for the royal connection is up 10% on the Queen's visit last year. Canada has just elected the most pro-royalist PM in Stephen Harper for 50 years.Canadian papers have been running special supplements in recent days, including advice on how to address the royal couple. A new flag has also been issued for Prince William, with a large W in the middle of a roundel of maple leaves and sea shells, to be his official standard in Canada, with large crowds expected in Ottawa for the Canada Day celebrations.Republicans are grumbling about the cost of the visit, paid for by the Canadian government an estimated C$1.5m (£950,000), excluding security – although that is much less than the $2.5m cost of the Queen's visit.Pro-monarchists are arguing that the visit is a chance to showcase Canada as a tourist destination. Kevin MacLeod, the Queen's Canadian secretary, responsible for organising the visit, said: "Through the lens of a camera, yes, we'll have the duke and duchess in the foreground but what's in the background? Is it the Rockies? Is it the beaches of Prince Edward Island? It is such a huge, unique opportunity for the world to look in … at a uniquely Canadian setting."There is no doubt the lure of celebrity is paramount, as is the matter of how the new duchess will perform on her first royal overseas tour? Around 1,500 journalists from as far afield as China and India have come for the visit, with 100 from the UK alone.