A few years ago I moved to the United Kingdom from the Canadian prairies. This was a luxury I was afforded via two grandparents who were born in Britain, ensuring my access to the elusive ancestry visa.Many Canadians still feel a greater allegiance to our colonial British roots than to our neighbours to the south; the monarchy is still represented on our money and most Canadians are well versed in singing God Save the Queen. We even toast Her Majesty at most fancy public events.Despite these and other symbols of allegiance, however, Canadians continue to hold on to some ambivalence over our British roots through our generally inconsistent use of language. While gazing at our commemorative Princess Diana spoons and watching the Queen's Christmas Message every December, we are still uncommitted when it comes to our geopolitical allegiance to language. Just as we often straddle international conflicts by playing the peacekeeper, most Canadians sit on the fence, moving interchangeably between American and British spellings. If there's anything notable about our use of language, it's that we are pretty lackadaisical about it.Before the American Revolution, everyone in North America was formally governed by the United Kingdom, except for a region in eastern Canada that was held by France. Following America's independence, there was a movement towards differentiating its unique culture from that of Britain. This was a major inspiration for Noah Webster, the man behind the dictionary that decisively set out a new order in American spelling and style. Some of the most noticeable differences Webster introduced to the language include the replacement of words ending in –our in Britain (honour, favour) with the American spelling of –or (color, harbor); and his replacement of –ise word endings (capitalise, familiarise) with the American usage of –ize (dramatize, visualize). His most comprehensive dictionary, An American Dictionary of the English Language, also contained 12,000 new words native to America.If politics propelled Webster to adapt the English language as one way of carving out a unique American identity, why do Canadians tend to treat linguistic choices with such ambivalence?The question doesn't have a simple answer. Though Canada is still part of the Commonwealth, our unique history of colonisation and the sheer geographic range of the country make the enforcement of consistent language rules difficult from coast to coast. Just as the United Kingdom has a variety of dialects, accents and even native languages, Canada has the languages of its aboriginal peoples, our physical proximity to the United States and a strong history of French culture as a result of a long occupation by France. Though our love affair with the United Kingdom continues, our language is surprisingly fluid, reflecting, perhaps, our comparative youth as a nation and our typical international position as mediator.Recently I was asked to write a comprehensive style guide for a UK-based company. The grammar nerd in me loved the task, yet I was surprised to find that even in Britain, where English language conventions are sacrosanct, there is still a great deal of flexibility in style. Beyond the basic rules of proper use, there is a great sphere of ambiguity.Decisions about language are actually very politically charged and the impact of embracing, rejecting or creating new conventions should not be underestimated. Webster's dictionary changed the culture of America. As a Canadian living in London I have felt my own relationship with culture change as I adapt my flighty linguistic allegiances to better align with those of my new country of residence.Amy Thibodeau is a freelance writer, photographer and content strategist based in London. You can find her on twitter at http://twitter.com/amythibodeau