On October 8 1973, the French director François Truffaut sat down in his suite at the Beverly Hills Hotel and scribbled a note: "Cher Monsieur ... What you are doing is unique in the world and unique in the history of film. I had tears in my eyes watching your films." The object of this knee-trembling tribute was Norman McLaren, a lanky, 59-year-old Scot with an outsized quiff and chalky fingers. McLaren was also, for a while, the second most famous animator in the world, after Walt Disney. Nowadays, though, McLaren is virtually unknown outside art-school studios, but a stage show that reaches Stirling this week should revitalise the reputation of one of the most original artists that modern Britain has produced.The show - called Norman - is presented by 4Dart, a company based in Montreal, where McLaren spent 43 years of his working life under the benign wing of the National Film Board of Canada. He produced 50 short films that won 75 awards (including an Oscar), and earned their creator 203 decorations. This is some achievement for the son of a Stirling interior decorator. "At last, something new in the world of drawing," Picasso exclaimed after viewing two of McLaren's films. The chipper Scot barely returned the compliment. "This stimulated me no end," he acknowledged to his parents in a 1946 letter preserved by his nephews, before adding, "even tho' [Picasso] is an old man now and of a school that is out of date."McLaren, who became a Canadian in 1952, never quite cared which school he belonged to. Born two decades after the invention of cinema, he flung himself - after a false start in drawing and interior design at Glasgow School of Art - into all the possibilities offered by the new medium. He satirised arms traders (Hell Unltd, 1936), crafted exquisite slo-mo ballet sequences (Pas de Deux, 1968), devised 3D pictures, drew, painted and scratched on blank film to produce extraordinary, kilometre-long ribbons of surreal and abstract spectacle. He manipulated the films' soundstrip with pins and paintbrushes to generate an early form of electronic music (Mosaic, Lines Vertical and Lines Horizontal, all from the 1960s). He invented the travelling zoom that allowed viewers to sink further and further "into" the screen (C'Est l'Aviron, 1944), and lived to see Stanley Kubrick adopt it for the closing sequence of 2001: A Space Odyssey. He was at various times a communist, a pacifist, a minimalist, a comic and a romantic, and always a hard taskmaster: at 24 frames per second, McLaren once declared (only half-jokingly) that he must have sketched over 50bn images in his career.Despite 70 years of construction in Stirling, it was still possible last week to see a snow-capped Ben More and the western Grampians from the upstairs bedroom of McLaren's former sandstone home in Albert Place. "I looked out windows and watched clouds roll across the hills," he told a Canadian interviewer, recalling his childhood. "The play of light on hills continued to affect me very much." That memory led him to the brain- and hand-numbing practice of modulating his pastel backdrops with thousands of subtle chalk strokes.McLaren, who died in 1987, was proudest of Neighbours (1952), a pixelated anti-war parable that, remarkably, won an Academy award in 1953. His greatest gift to us, though, may be the music video. His short, brilliantly syncopated compositions of colour, form, movement and music (of Ravi Shankar, Oscar Peterson, Pete Seeger and others) prefigure much of what we see today.Several of McLaren's films can be seen on YouTube. Alternately, you can buy The Master's Collection, a box set of seven DVDs issued two years ago by the NFBC, which has also named its Quebec headquarters building after him. Stirling, so far, has been more restrained: there is a 90-word plaque at the town museum, and a McLaren art prize at his former high school.· Norman is at the MacRobert Arts Centre, Stirling, April 17-19, and the Theatre Royal, Brighton, May 6-10