Noises off comes to you, this week, in the shape of a maple leaf. Canada has an impressive and thriving theatre blogs scene. Yet while South Park once famously sang "Blame Canada" it seems that in recent days Canadians, at least theatrical Canadians, have been intent on blaming each other.Praxis Theatre draws attention to the first example of these controversies - an argument over a promotional video for the SummerWorks theatre festival on the SummerWorks blog.Essentially, the film depicts a group of young female playwrights behaving as if they are slightly ditzy airheads. They are talking about how one of their number, Claudia, has "really, like, been a model, like, of how to be a really beautiful, hot playwright", and it ends with them all having a pillow fight. To this outsider's eye, it seems like amusing and cleverly pointed stuff - somewhat echoing this inspired video from The Onion.Yet the video has sparked a furious debate in the comments below the post. One response simply asks, "what the f?", and Laura M says that she finds the video "really quite misogynistic".Meanwhile, Tara Beagan, one of the playwrights featured, says: "I think it's absurd that we are being called out as offensive or irresponsible in some way ... What are you seeing that I'm not? What's so awful? Is it that we're admitting, as women, to being both sexual AND intelligent, and that admission is somehow beyond our capacities as a society as yet? Or is it that we're making fun of how some struggle to pigeonhole a creative female if she is also someone who some people think of as attractive?"But perhaps this degree of passion is no bad thing on either side, and as Mooney on Theatre says: "People REALLY care about this. They are raging, some at the video, some at the other commenters, some likely at the world. Is it bad that this makes me laugh a little bit, or does it just mean that as a member of the theatre community I can appreciate our quirks?"A far more serious controversy has broken out in relation to a show at the Winnipeg Fringe festival. The writer and performer Keir Cutler had a hit at the festival with his show Teaching As You Like It, which told the story of a teacher waiting to be arrested for seducing one of his teenage pupils. The show got very favourable reviews, but one audience member was not amused and reported Cutler to Child Find Manitoba - a child protection agency, claiming that the show "could be used as a textbook for the luring and seduction of young girls".The Next Stage blog has suggested that, "In a way, such a vitriolic outburst in response to this kind of play is a huge compliment". But as Cutler himself says in response: "I just want to stress that while a vitriolic outburst by an audience member can be expected from time to time; where the letter-writer attacking my play crossed the line is in contacting a child protection agency."She never posted anything on the plethora of sites available for Winnipeg Fringe goers. She waited until I left Winnipeg, then started a secret smear campaign. This is totally unacceptable, and does not fall into the area of 'compliment.'"And finally, as if all that wasn't enough, the Toronto-based actor Ali Momen is blogging about Simon Lee - one of the Judges on Canada's version of How Do you Solve a Problem Like Maria? After asking why he was missing from the final two episodes, he reveals that it was because Lee has just been charged with assault. Momen's response? "Awesome!"And there was me thinking that Canada was a gentler place than America.