Since the days of pulp paperbacks, the French Minitel and beyond, the pornography industry has developed in unison with media innovation. Porn producers backed VHS in the video wars of the 80s, and in the 90s they blessed the world's lonely motel rooms with pay-per-view. They then carried the internet on their sweaty backs until every man, woman and child had unlimited access to as much porn as they could ever want.But the internet has proven to be the porn industry's very own Judas goat. Since social networking surpassed porn as the web's premier draw in 2008, the proliferation of amateur content and "tube" sites offering user-uploaded videos has crippled DVD sales and online subscriptions. Worse yet, Apple has in effect hogtied further innovation by blocking porn apps from the iPhone and iPad, and has gone so far as to ban unnecessary instances of the female nipple. Last week Steve Jobs, now apparently the Franklin D Roosevelt of consumer technocracy, hinted at his company's broader vision by stating that the iPad will offer its users "freedom from porn".With parasitic pirates on one side and anti-porn iconoclasts on the other, just how rough is it out there for adult entertainment professionals? Well, you know the industry is in a tight spot when it starts releasing heartfelt pleas from Ron Jeremy intended to appeal to his audience's moral fibre.After years of pushing hardcore to its physical and ethical limits, all the sordid, comic and absurd possibilities of human intercourse have been thoroughly exhausted. And like any pop-culture fin de siecle, porn's lustre of excess has faded into something entirely banal. A sneaky glance at Pornhub, the leading tube site that currently gets more traffic than CNN, reveals a backlog of neatly categorised niche fetishes that would take years to consume, with new videos being uploaded on the hour.While the hardcore wing of the porno-industrial complex may have entered into unavoidable decline, softcore television programming continues to flourish. What this suggests is that contrary to what Jeremy says, pornography's dilemma is one of content, rather than copyright.In order for porn to move into the 21st century, the productions should be made to appeal to a wider audience and be able to hold a viewer's attention longer than say, two and half minutes. The most obvious move for the modern pornographer would be to create content aimed specifically at women, who have until recently been all but ignored. Indeed, many women enjoy what's currently available, but the vast majority of today's porn is still produced only with male tastes in mind. And though there is no shortage of diversity in terms of the sex acts that appear on screen, racial and gender stereotypes continue to be encouraged by the industry's status quo, allowing porn to remain one of the only mediums where racism and misogyny are still openly tolerated.However, the incentive for change is not likely to come from within. The industry's reaction to Jobs's crusade and the rise of tube sites has been to push for more technological development, specifically effects-driven megaproductions a la Avatar. Which is great, if you're into that sort of thing. But for anyone interested in the development of new or less caustic forms of adult entertainment, the government of Canada may prove to be a more effective catalyst than the advent of giant 3-D genitals.In April it was announced that the Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission approved the licensing of Canada's first porn channel. Known as "Vanessa", it will begin to air in October and will be required to adhere to Canadian content regulations, which mandate that programmes featured on the channel include "equitable portrayals" of the sexes and uniquely Canadian themes and settings. If it proves to be profitable, Vanessa could set the tone for the production of more culturally relevant and socially progressive pornography. If it's a flop, at least anyone out there with a Canada fetish will no longer have to subsist on decades-old Kids in the Hall skits.