I have just emigrated from the UK to Canada – a country where banking is not free. This is something British banks have threatened will become the norm should this week's appeal on the legality of overdraft charges go against them.I've found that you get charged for a legion of things here that you don't in the UK. The bank I'm with, CIBC, is typical. For my "chequeing" or current account I am charged $3.90 (£2) a month, plus 60¢ (32p) for each transaction above a maximum of 10 a month. Unhappy? It also costs $19.50 (£10.34) to move your account to another bank, or $12.50 (£6.68) to close it if it was opened fewer than 90 days ago. Credit interest is also minimal (though these days, that is expected).But don't these just replace the charges UK banks levy for going into the red? Well, those are present here too – $42.50 (£22.70) for a bounced cheque and overdraft interest is 21%. A monthly overdraft service fee is only $5 (£2.67), which is not so bad. But I opened my account a couple of days before the end of the month, was charged a few cents of the monthly fee pro-rata before I deposited anything, and suddenly I was the proud owner of a minus sign. Five bucks, please. Gah!Fees are not popular here and people try hard to dodge them. Banks advertise on the basis of rewards and waiving some of their other fees. For example, RBC promises "three free uses" of a non-RBC ATM a month – because you usually get charged whenever you make a withdrawal from a cash machine that isn't your bank's. Unlike in the UK this particular salami-slicing is not a hot consumer issue.So why are fees tolerated? I think the answer is that people get service and local relationships in return. I was introduced to the staff at my local branch by my (Canadian) wife who knows them by name. Instead of a phone on a table connected to customer services there are real, live people. I have a bank manager as well as her business card and direct line. And I had to scrape my chin off the floor when she called me after learning I was British and said she would answer any questions I had about bank fees. Here a bank is a different concept – it is a group of local professionals you get to know personally who look after your money and advise you.So I do pay to bank, but I get service in return. If British banks were to charge fees just for keeping an account, what would you expect to receive?