 2.21pm GMT The Commons home affairs select committee has published some details of the session on Tuesday 3 December at which the Guardian's editor, Alan Rusbridger, will be questioned about the paper's Snowden revelations. The session, billed as a "counter-terrorism evidence session", will begin at 3pm.3pm: Alan Rusbridger, editor, the Guardian 4pm: Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, Metropolitan police commissioner, and Cressida Dick, assistant commissioner, Metropolitan policeI'll live blog the whole session here.  12.41pm GMT He added:I never said that all the documents in my possession that haven’t yet been published are ones that shouldn’t be published. In fact there’s a lot more reporting that I intend to do that other media outlets intend to do in publishing these documents. There are a lot of these documents that are extremely newsworthy.How much more is to come?I haven’t counted. I don’t have an exact count. But I can tell you that, if I had to guess, we are still in the first part, the first half of the reporting. The majority of reporting on these documents for sure is reporting that has yet to be done but that will be done. 12.34pm GMT Greenwald was also asked who currently had Snowden’s published and unpublished documents.Myself, Laura Poitras, the New York Times has a large number of documents, the Guardian has a large number of documents, and the Washington Post does as well. So basically the world’s largest and most respected western newspapers are in possession of a large number of these documents in addition to myself and Laura Poitras … Myself and Laura Poitras have the full set of documents and others have portions of them. 12.29pm GMT Former Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald, one of the key reporters of the Snowden revelations, appeared on BBC World News’s Hardtalk yesterday.In the interview Greenwald explained why he felt the NSA’s surveillance of metadata – who spoke to whom, and when, rather than what was said – was intrusive – in some cases more intrusive than the content of the calls itself.Think about for example if your daughter decides that she wants to get an abortion, or your best friend has HIV and wants to consult a doctor. If someone is listening to their telephone calls that they make, they will only hear those people calling and making an appointment with some doctor whose specialty they won’t probably even know.But if they collect that person’s metadata they will see that that woman has called an abortion clinic, or that friend has called a doctor specialising in HIV treatment, or that someone has called a suicide hotline or a drug addiction clinic. 11.37am GMT Welcome to our hub for all Edward Snowden, NSA and GCHQ-related developments around the world. As arguments rage over how much of our day to day life should be monitored in the name of security, we'll be tracking the growing global debate about privacy in the digital age. We'd like to know what you think about the whole NSA story, what you're worried about – and any new areas you'd like to read more about.Good morning. Here are the headlines:• Canada allowed the NSA to conduct widespread surveillance during the 2010 G8 and G20 summits, according to a Canadian Broadcasting Corporation report citing documents from former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. It was already known that the 2009 London G20 meetings were monitored, on that occasion by Britain’s GCHQ.CBC reports, in a story co-written by former Guardian journalist Glenn Greenwald:Top secret documents retrieved by U.S. whistleblower Edward Snowden show that Prime Minister Stephen Harper's government allowed the largest American spy agency to conduct widespread surveillance in Canada during the 2010 G8 and G20 summits.The documents are being reported exclusively by CBC News.The briefing notes, stamped "Top Secret," show the U.S. turned its Ottawa embassy into a security command post during a six-day spying operation by the National Security Agency while U.S. President Barack Obama and 25 other foreign heads of state were on Canadian soil in June of 2010.The covert U.S. operation was no secret to Canadian authorities.An NSA briefing note describes the American agency's operational plans at the Toronto summit meeting and notes they were "closely co-ordinated with the Canadian partner."• The Indonesian foreign minister, Marty Natalegawa, has signalled that the rebuilding of relations between Australia and Indonesia in the wake of the phone-tapping revelations is only at “step one” in a long process he hopes will result in the signing of a binding code of ethics between the two nations, report Oliver Laughland in Sydney and Karima Anjani in Jakarta.Speaking to reporters at a special parliamentary hearing in Jakarta over the phone-tapping revelations, Natalegawa confirmed he would contact the Australian foreign minister, Julie Bishop, following the president’s call for a new deal between the two countries to be forged in six steps.Last Monday, Guardian Australia and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation revealed that Australian spy agencies had targeted the personal mobile phones of Yudhoyono, his wife and eight other senior ministers in 2009.I’ll have live coverage of all developments here throughout the day.Updated at 9.45am GMT