For a man who may be on the verge of revolutionising the urban cycling experience, Michel Dallaire has spent relatively little time on two wheels.Dallaire, who designed the Bixi bicycle sharing system due to launch in London this summer, regards himself as a skiier rather than a cyclist. His longest ride was a "really painful" 36 miles, and negotiating London's traffic seems a terrifying prospect."The traffic in London with these huge buses, two storeys high and they drive so fast," he said. "The bicycles sometimes are just in front of these big buses and they ride 40km, 50km in the city and of course on the wrong side of the street."But Dallaire's Bixis, the frames marked with their disinctive silver swoosh, seem unstoppable, moving on to Boston, London, Melbourne Australia and Minneapolis after its hugely successful debut in Montreal.The sharing scheme registered more than 1m rides in its first four months in Montreal. The Montreal parking authority, which runs Bixi, put 2,000 more bikes on the streets and added more docking stations. The bike system could end up being the most widespread design of Dallaire's 43-year career."I saw people I knew who I never imagined would be on a bike in town, and some people cycling for the first time," said Suzanne Lareau, the president of Velo Quebec, the cycling advocacy organisation. Many users have their own bicycles but are afraid of getting them stolen if they ride into town, she said.Others say the Bixi gives them a sense of freedom. They can duck out of their offices for a quick lunch, ride into work without fear of being caught in the rain on the way home. In the summer months, it's another transport option along with buses, and metro. "It's part of a cocktail of transport," said Catherine Mayor, spokesman for the Angus Technopole, a green redevelopment project on the site of an old locomotive shop.Membership costs $78 for a year, or $5 a day. The first half-hour rental is free, with prices rising thereafter. Dallaire attributes at least part of the success to the uniform design of the Bixi, which turned the bicycles and docking stations into part of urban landscape. He said the sturdy look of the bike inspired confidence - and prevented vandalism.Dallaire, who worked with a local manufacturer DeVinci as well as Velo Quebec, also hid the cables inside the bike's main frame to prevent them bind tampered with.London's bicycle sharing scheme will not be identical to the original Bixi, which uses solar power and modular design for the bicycle docking stations, which are shut down during the winter months.The docking stations, which hold six bicycles, are mounted on alumnium plates which can be picked up by cranes and plunked down on pavements, allowing the authorities to easily shift bicyles to areas of high demand. London's docking stations will be permanent, and use power from the electrical grid.There were setbacks too. In July last year, La Presse reported that one in five bikes had been vandalised. Roger Plamondon, the head of the parking authority, refuses to release figures for theft or vandalism, saying he does not want to encourage copycats. But he admits the early days were a challenge."We had people trying to sell them in a garage, we had people trying to sell them for the aluminium," he said. "But we had people calling us and telling us come and pick up the bike, the bike is not supposed to be there."A spokesperson said thefts in the early days were at 3% to 5%. About 50 of the 5,000 bicycles are under repair at any given time.Dallaire was called in to modify the locking system, and the authorities say the changes cut down on thefts. He now thinks he can tame London commuters - if not the city's streets - predicting the same response to the Bixi as in Montreal."It has really changed the dynamic of the social community," he said. "It has changed Montreal. It's more friendly, people are more together - and it is so practical."Paris, Cardiff, Blackpool, Reading, Copenhagen city bike, Lyon, Hammersmith and Fulham and Nice and Vannes.