Britain — and the Tories in particular — have long enjoyed strong links with Chile.A British admiral, Thomas Cochrane, was hailed by Margaret Thatcher as the man who liberated Chile from Spanish rule.Thatcher herself did her bit for Anglo-Chilean relations when she took tea with the former dictator, Augusto Pinochet, after he was arrested in Britain in 1998. The former prime minister, who was repaying Pinochet's support for Britain during the Falklands War in 1982, glossed over the 3,000 Chileans who disappeared during his dictatorship.But Anglo-Chilean relations entered a new phase this afternoon when Chile's socialist president — a symbol of the modern democracy after she was tortured by Pinochet's forces in 1975 — inadvertently waded into British politics.Without realising it, Michelle Bachelet endorsed the Tories' central criticism of Gordon Brown's handling of the financial crisis. This is that Brown failed to "fix the roof while the sun was shining" — the Tories' way of saying that the prime minister failed to prepare Britain's public finances during the benign years for the inevitable economic downturn.Bachelet committed the diplomatic faux pas this afternoon as she stood alongside Gordon Brown at a press conference at the presidential palace, known as La Moneda, which was bombed by Pinochet's troops on the day he seized power in a coup in 1973. It was the first visit by a serving British prime minister to Chile.Asked about Chile's strong public finances, the president innocently spoke of how she had acted as a prudent saver. "I would say that because of our decisions during the good times — we decided to save some money for the bad times — I would say that policy today is producing results. We developed our fiscal stimulus. We could make one of 2.8% of GDP. That is pretty hard for a country like ours."David Cameron will no doubt be chuckling. But he should be careful about claiming Bachelet as an ally.The socialist is a formidable political fighter who will probably be mortified that she may have embarrassed a fellow centre left leader. She made a point of echoing New Labour's famous line yesterday about the importance of focusing on "education, education, education".Bachelet showed her mettle during the 2006 election campaign when her conservative opponent Sebastian Pinera tried to patronise her as being too nice. The single mother of three said during a live television exchange: "I've been through labour three times, so I'm in really good shape for the months ahead."