'Trust to your feet, Jossy,' yells Guido, as I scrabble for a foothold with my crampons in the hard-packed ice below me. I can't even feel my feet. I can't look down or sideways. I am clinging, frozen, to a near-vertical wall of rutted, windblown ice at 3,000m, in a 40mph wind, on the side of a volcano in Chile. My backpack, with my skis strapped to it, feels like it's pulling me backwards off the mountain. Finally we reach the summit, and peer over the icy lip of the crater, from which sulphurous smoke is billowing. I am choked up and it's not just the smoke. We have just conquered our first volcano, the magnificent Llaima, all 3,125m of it.For a diehard skier, it's an age-old problem: when the snows melt in Europe and North America, where do you go to get your skiing kicks? I'd often wondered about heading south, to Chile, but the resorts there, such as Valle Nevado and Portillo, didn't seem to offer much more than I could find summer-skiing on the glacier in the French resort of Tignes. Then, on a winter ski trip, I bumped into Phil Smith, owner of tour group Snoworks, who told me about the skiing and climbing trip he runs to Chile. The 15-day tour would involve climbing up and skiing down nine of the volcanoes in Chile's southern Lakes District. Something different, something challenging - it sounded too good to miss.So, several months later, I found myself in the town of Temuco, capital of the Araucanía region, with Phil and four other experienced skiers - all of them men. A local company, Amity Tours, was to look after us for our two weeks: Cristiàn the owner, Guido our guide, and Milton the driver, who would ferry us and our gear between the hotels and volcanoes, each of which lay roughly three hours' drive apart. It soon became clear that skiing down the volcanoes would be the - relatively - easy part. Ascending them was where the real challenge lay; a mix of ski lifts, climbing, walking and 'skinning' - walking uphill on skis. The first volcano was Antuco, in the Laguna del Laja National Park. It was a far cry from Val d'Isère's groomed slopes and armies of piste bashers, but that was exactly what we'd come for. Chile has some of the world's best off-piste skiing, with untracked snowfields as far as the eye can see. The only problem can be the weather: the rain came down so heavily on Antuco that we had to cut the day short and head off to Corralco mountain lodge in the Malalcahuello National Reserve, from where we would attempt the 2,865m Lonquimay volcano. When we arrived the wind had whipped up and Guido told us we wouldn't be able to begin the climb until midday. Frustrating, but it gave us the chance to appreciate the setting: the dramatic sight of Lonquimay, its gleaming white flanks adorned with the extraordinary araucaria (monkey puzzle) trees that are native to the region. Breathtaking.As was the climb, when it finally began. The hotel's tank-like Ecotrack vehicle took us as far as it could - to the bottom of the first chairlift, which was buried in snow. Chile had had record snowfalls, which meant most of the lifts weren't running. This was my first real introduction to skinning; we attached 'skins' to the underside of our skis, synthetic strips whose fibres all go in one direction so the skis will slide forward but not back, and began the hike upwards. It was incredibly tough: my new boots dug into my shins with every step, and I was sweating buckets. Phil told us that we needed to get into a 'plod mentality', but I didn't feel I could realistically go any slower. We climbed for two hours and were still nowhere near the summit. My thoughts were alternating between 'why am I doing this?' and 'God, it's so beautiful up here'. The scenery is incredible - great jagged snowy peaks against a deep blue sky. And even though, by the end of the climb, my legs had turned to jelly, the ski down made it all worth it. The high altitude meant the snow conditions were perfect - soft and powdery over a firm base. Not being an experienced off-piste skier, I got the chance to appreciate the way the sunlight sparkled through the araucaria trees - as I ended up on my back in the snow several times during the descent.Fortunately, although this was an adventure holiday, we were hardly roughing it. Accommodation ranged from simple but comfortable to the seriously luxurious - and all of it came with warm, Chilean hospitality. At the lakeshore Marina del Puy hotel, in Huilo Huilo Biological Reserve, we were royally wined, dined and entertained by a troupe of local dancers brought in specially to welcome us, while at Los Pioneros lodge we each returned from dinner to find a crackling fire had been lit in the small wood-burning stoves in our rooms.Each day brought new adventures. 'This is puma country,' Cristiàn told us cheerily as we prepared for the climb up Sollipulli in Villarrica National Reserve. 'Never run away. They attack from behind.' Although thrilled to think we might see a puma, I was a little nervous on that 2,282m climb. It was fairly straightforward, but I had developed painful blisters - due in no small part, according to Guido, to my poor sock choice. This time it was the descent that proved trickier: I felt a little like Bridget Jones as I careered out of control through heavy wet snow. Once we were at the bottom, Guido collected water from a mountain stream. 'It tastes like the best wine when you've been climbing,' he said. Oddly, he was right.At El Mocho, in Huilo Huilo, we were glad to get towed up behind a Snowcat almost to the top of the 2,422m peak. The run down was through fabulous powder, and it was all going rather well, I thought, until I hit a massive rut left by the Snowcat tracks. By this time I had started to get the hang of skinning and even though the next peak, Casablanca, was a straight skin all the way up to 1,990m, we made it up and down by lunchtime. I was increasingly determined to make it up Osorno, our last climb - at 2,652m not the highest, but it's near-vertical ice-capped summit made it by far the toughest.'Look at me, smile, and let go of the rope,' yelled Guido, as I hung beneath the icy white summit of Volcano Osorno. I took a deep breath, took my hands off the rope and dug in my crampons. From somewhere below, Cristiàn was directing me, 'left a bit, no...left, LEFT', as I bounced in and out of huge ice troughs. Although my legs were like lead after the six-and-a-half-hour climb, the ski down - against the electric-pink glow of the sunset - was truly euphoric. I had made it to the top of Osorno, and I arrived at the bottom grinning from ear to ear, to a round of applause from the other guys. My joy was only slightly dampened by the fact they had already drunk all the beer.It was a spectacular end to an unforgettable fortnight. For experienced ski tourers, this would be the trip of a lifetime. For me, a novice, it was an incredible personal achievement. I had learnt to use skins, crampons and ice axes, and how to abseil. I almost mastered kick-turns, and I developed a taste for cake - for breakfast. 'I am NEVER doing this again,' I had shouted at Guido, when we were half-way up Llaima with aching limbs and sore feet. 'I'll see you at the top of Osorno, Jossy,' came his reply. At that moment I was convinced I wouldn't even try that ascent. But I did it. And now I want to do it all over again. Only this time with much better socks.Jossy Smalley travelled to Chile with Snoworks and Amity Tours (snoworks.co.uk; amitytours.cl). For 2008, the two-week itinerary has been modified to include seven, rather than nine, volcanoes: Lonquimay, Sollipulli, Villarrica, Mocho-Choshuenco, Casablanca, Osorno, and one other peak depending on weather conditions. The package costs £3,564, including two days' training, all meals, hotels and ground arrangements, but not international flights. Places on the 29 August to 14 September trip are still available.