In the Guardian on Monday, Peter Preston provocatively wondered "whether a triumphant President Sebastián Piñera of Chile would be in Britain… basking in praise for his mine rescue… if the Pinochet years hadn't happened." Preston didn't play down the brutality of the dictator's rule from 1973 to 1990 – this was the Guardian not the Daily Telegraph, after all – but he did suggest that Pinochet's "malignity" had acted as the main catalyst for the creation of the more benign, politically moderate, technologically sophisticated Chile, which the world's media are currently admiring.I'm not so sure. Ever since it gained independence from Spain in the early 19th century, Chile has, in fact, been periodically acclaimed abroad for its industriousness, democracy and stability. This praise has sometimes been a bit broad-brush, neglecting to mention the country's 1891 civil war or its intermittent periods of authoritarian rule – even before Pinochet seized power from Salvador Allende. But this characterisation of Chile, with the country sometimes called "the England of the Pacific", has always had a degree of truth to it.State-of-the-art mining enterprises – many of the original ones set up by English immigrants – have been making parts of Chile rich for two centuries. Mild Chilean statesmen are not a purely post-Pinochet phenomenon, either. Forty-five years ago, a predecessor of Piñera's as president, the Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei, who was overseeing a cautious programme of nationalisation and land redistribution in Chile called the "Revolution in Liberty", made an official visit to London and was hailed in the British press as "A Key Figure In Latin America". For a few years in the mid 1960s, western governments alarmed by Fidel Castro's revolutionary regime in Cuba promoted Frei's reforms as an alternative model for the region. Today, with the South American left again wielding considerable power, the sudden western enthusiasm for the centre-right Piñera is following a similar pattern.In Chile in 1970, famously, the Frei government was succeeded by the much more radical and controversial Allende administration. But even that had its middle-of-the-road and technocratic aspects. Allende was solidly bourgeois by background, a freemason and a former senior doctor, and often a political compromiser – too often, said his critics further to the left – rather than a dogmatic Castro-style leader. And the Allende government, despite its mounting troubles, oversaw projects as complex and daring as the recent mine rescue, such as the installation of an experimental but functioning "socialist internet", with the help of the British cybernetics pioneer Stafford Beer (an episode I described in the Guardian in 2003).Chile did not need to undergo the horrors of the Pinochet era that followed to get to where it is today. The Chile that foreign commentators are presently so impressed by is the one that has long been there.