Around 20 families were today refusing to leave their homes despite an order for all residents near an erupting Chilean volcano to be evacuated.Lava began spewing from the Chaitén volcano, in southern Chile, yesterday, prompting authorities to demand the immediate evacuation of all those remaining in a nearby town.However, some families were refusing to leave their homes in the town of Chaitén despite of the order.The eruption has not been reported to have directly caused any deaths or injuries, but a 92-year-old woman died of a heart attack as she was evacuated on Sunday.The volcano, in Patagonia and around 760 miles south of the Chilean capital, Santiago, began erupting on Friday, sending plumes of ash into the sky and covering an area of more than 60 square miles.Chile's government ordered the evacuation of Chaitén, near the Gulf of Corcovado and six miles from the volcano, and Futaleufú, about 37 miles south-west of Chaitén.Rodrigo Rojas, a national emergency official, said: "Today the volcano is erupting with pyroplastic material on a different scale. We ... have ordered the immediate precautionary evacuation of all civilians, military and press in Chaitén."The National Emergency Office said the volcano was spitting pieces of lava and rock. "We hope the evacuation happens in an optimum way," Chile's president, Michelle Bachelet, said. "I hope this evolves in the least harmful way possible."Luis Lara, a government geologist, said he did not expect a catastrophic collapse of the volcano, but warned that a cloud of dense and very hot material could coat the surrounding land."This produces a more complicated scenario," he said. "A dense cloud of pyroplastic material could move down its slopes, and that causes much more damage [than a spray of lava]. "The entire volcano will not [collapse], but the eruptive column could, and that is sufficient material to be displaced down its sides and into areas nearby. Lava flow would not reach Chaitén but hot fragments, ash and gas could."The contamination of the area is likely to devastate the economy of a region that is mainly agrarian. Around 25,000 cattle and sheep are at imminent risk of dying from eating contaminated plants and drinking water. The Chilean navy has shipped feed to the region, and animals have also been evacuated to uncontaminated areas. Some civil engineers predicted that soil and plant life may not recover for several decades. ''The soil in the area covered by this volume of ash deposits will be practically lost," Wilfredo Vera, an engineer from the University of Chile, told a Chilean radio station. "Agricultural production will be virtually nil."Chile has the world's second-most active string of volcanoes, behind Indonesia, but this is the first time the Chaitén volcano has erupted in at least 2,000 years, according to geologists.