The World Cup kicks off in June 2014, and though plenty of fans will travel independently, many tour operators have packages to make things easier (though more expensive). Journey Latin America has limited availability on its World Cup trip, arriving in Rio on 7 June for three nights, then including Iguaçu Falls, Manaus and the Amazon, Salvador and Praia do Forte. The trip coincides with games in Manaus and Salvador, so the atmosphere will be great in those cities, and travellers can apply to buy game tickets through the official Fifa website from 20 August. The holiday costs from £4,295pp for 15 days, excluding international flights.Between July and November each year, whales congregate off the Colombian Pacific coast to breed. The appearance of humpbacks is an increasingly popular attraction, seen on boat trips and by scuba diving. Chameleon Travel has a new 13-day trip that takes in the country coast to coast, incorporating two days of whale watching, a visit to Chicamocha canyon and two days on the remote Caribbean island of Providencia, from £2,995 including international flights.Those who've already been to South America but want something more challenging and wildlife-focused could explore Guyana, a little-visited, deep-jungle destination that's amazing for nature spotting. Free of typical tourist infrastructure, visitors will experience mountains, savannah and jungle-canopy walkways, and may spot exotic birds, caiman, giant river otters – and, if they're lucky, jaguars – and learn about local life from Amerindians. G Adventures is offering 25% off one trip for this autumn, now £1,762pp (was £2,349pp), departing 1 September 2013 for 12 days, excluding international flights.The highlights of central and southern Chile are covered in a new "complete Chilean Patagonia" trip with Rainbow Tours. It follows a few relaxing days in Santiago with a flight south to the forested and hilly island of Chiloé, for hiking and horse riding. Then it's off to the Lake District and the Torres del Paine national park. From £4,095pp for 13 days, including international flights and some meals.