With the death toll unchanged at about 800 and aid flowing to southern cities, Chile today began to assess the industrial and economic cost of its earthquake.After meeting business leaders, President Michelle Bachelet announced a grim summary of damaged industrial plants, ports and destroyed bridges. The cost could be as high as $30bn.The earthquake on Saturday destroyed major parts of Chile's central valley, home to many of the country's exports, ranging from fish meal to merlot. All major fishmeal and paper production operations were halted while plants were inspected.Southern ports were closed and inside dozens of bodegas, or wine stores, a river of wine soaked into the soil, raising concerns about damage to the industry. Initial estimates put the quantity of lost wine at 100m bottles, or roughly a sixth of the country's annual export. Antonio Larrain, general manager of the Chilean Wine Corporation, estimated that 20% of Chile's stored wine may have been lost. He calculated the value at $300m, which did not include the widespread damage to infrastructure ranging from underground irrigation tubing to warehouses.Wines of Chile, an industry group, held an emergency meeting today and announced that 12% of the country's wine production had been lost. Reports from individual wineries suggest that does not represent the true scale of the disaster. "Many wineries that lost 80% of their production are publicly saying just 15% was lost," said one wine executive who asked not be named, citing the fear that distributors would terminate distribution contracts with wineries most heavily damaged. "This is an incredibly touchy subject," he said.Grant Phelps, chief winemaker at the Casas del Bosque winery, said: "The vineyards still have no electricity in Maule so they have not watered their vines since Saturday, so already we are talking five days. It is a hot time of year ... the fruit is going to raisin."Casas del Bosque, in the Casablanca Valley, close to Santiago, was not severely damaged and lost only an estimated 5,000 litres. Phelps said wineries further south were much worse off. "These guys could not do anything as they had no [electrical] pumps [so] they had to watch it go down the drain."[On 5 March, after this story appeared, the UK director of Wines of Chile, Michael Cox, contacted the guardian to say that the figures of 125m litres lost, representing about 12.5% of stock, "is an accurate assessment of the situation. The data was collated and assessed in a very robust way with contact being made with all the major wineries and companies".]Chile's fruit industry is an important source of employment for the central valley: thousands of pickers flood into the region every March. With tonnes of apples shaken to the ground, roads and workers' housing destroyed, the fate of this year's harvest is unclear.Much of the damage in the wine industry came when big storage tanks – stainless steel vats 5m high – toppled over. Wine stored in barrels was also lost as they rolled off the racks, cracked open or popped their seals, flooding bodegas with merlots, carmeneres and cabernet sauvignon."These big stainless steel tanks crashed to the ground. Wine was on the floor, it was very hard to look at," said Pablo Morande Jr, of Morande wines. An estimated 2.5m litres of wine was lost, representing 10% of production, he said.With the harvest just under way, Chile's wineries are scrambling to find electrical generators to keep drip irrigation systems running. Centuries old irrigation canals that bring fresh water from the mountains have collapsed, with water spilling down the hillsides.A scramble to buy grapes is expected as top producers seek to guarantee enough raw material to fulfil future orders. Exporters in central Chile are looking at shipping produce over the Andes and using the port of Buenos Aires.• This article was amended on 5 March 2010 to include a response from Wines of Chile.