For Todd Russell, the plight of the 33 Chilean miners trapped in the San Jose mine has brought memories of the ordeal he went through in 2006. Russell, 34, and Brant Webb, 37, were caught in a safety cage almost a kilometre below the surface when an earthquake triggered a rockfall in the Beaconsfield gold mine in northern Tasmania. The two men were feared dead until emergency crews using a thermal imaging camera located them five days later. Here he describes to Alison Rourke the two weeks they spent trapped underground."We were stuck underground for 14 days in a small pocket of air. We couldn't stand up or even sit up. We had to lie down on our backs. If one of us was on our back, the other had to lie on his side for 14 days. We were tossing and turning on sharp rocks and being cut to pieces. We were really worried about the cuts getting infected."We had no food or water for the first six days. The only thing Brant had was a muesli bar which we shared between us for that first six days. We were really worried about dehydrating because it was 29 degrees down in the mine day and night. We had to urinate into our helmets so we could collect something to drink."We were never confident that they were going to get us out alive. We just had to rely on each other and keep positive. That's probably the best thing those miners in Chile can do to keep themselves alive. They should think of their families and loved ones and rely on their mates around them to get them through."Brant and I relied on each other's strengths. We bounced off each other and relied on each other for the whole 14 days. We made up stories and sang songs just to take our mind off things and tried to put our minds into a positive state."It was very dark down there of course but we did have some reserve lighting. It was also very hot and humid down there but, because of the flow through of air from fans that were blowing through into the level we were on, we were also suffering from hypothermia (because of the cold air blowing on our sweat). We had to cuddle each other to keep our body cores warm. We didn't have any communication with anyone for the first six days. We just tried to remain positive and hoped that what they did on the outside wouldn't kill us. We knew that the guys were working their way towards us. We could hear everything that was happening outside us and we could hear the underground machinery operating. We knew that they were coming but whether they thought we were alive or whether they thought they were coming to do a body recovery was another thing. We weren't found alive until day six."I personally don't think the miners in Chile will recover from this. We will never recover from our experience either. Life for us now is easier than it was four years ago but you've always got the constant memory with you for the whole of your life. It's going to be very hard for those guys and also their families because the families don't know from day to day whether their loved ones are going to survive the four months or whether they're going to perish where they are."That's the same sort of thing that happened with our families. For Brant and me the first four to six days were OK because we knew we were alive but for the families on the outside they didn't have any idea whether we were alive or not."