The Chilean poet Gonzalo Rojas died on Monday morning aged 93, and the government has declared two days of national mourning. I met him in 2006 when, as a young journalist, I wanted to interview one of the most important Chilean poets of the 20th century – with Nobel prizewinners Gabriela Mistral and Pablo Neruda under Chile's belt, we have high standards.Rojas received me in his house in Chillán, a small city in the south of the country. The first thing I remember is his collection of 35,000 books. He told me he had read them all. He was not just a writer – he had also been a professor in the US, at Columbia and Chicago universities, as well as having taught in Germany, Venezuela, Spain, Mexico and, of course, his home country.His work has been translated into English, German, French, Portuguese, Russian, Italian, Rumanian, Swedish, Chinese, Turkish and Greek. He was awarded the Chilean national prize for literature, the Queen Sofia prize of Iberian American poetry, Mexico's Octavio Paz prize and in 2003, the Cervantes prize for literature.His home had four or five different bedrooms. He didn't like to wake up in the same place every morning. One had a sexy bed with mirrors. He bought it in China and wrote about it in his poem Bed of Mirrors. This mirrored bed is symbolic of two dimensions of Rojas's work and life. On the one hand, that eroticism – together with love and death – was an important element in his poetry and in his life: the anthology What Do We Love When We Love gathers 41 of his erotic poems.On the other hand, there is China and politics. In 1959, Rojas visited the country and managed to meet, and talk, for an hour and a half with Mao Zedong. He told me they didn't talk about politics and that he was impressed with "that colossal animal". He especially remembered Mao's hands: "thin, feminine". He said it was because of that meeting that President Salvador Allende asked him to be cultural counsel in China, back in 1970 (Rojas never belonged to any political party, but he was leftwing).He was in China for a year and was sent to Cuba afterwards. Rojas was there at the time of the 1973 Chilean military coup. Because of his previous political work for Allende, Pinochet's dictatorship stripped him of his nationality, and he and his family had to find exile in East Germany and Venezuela. He went back to Chile in 1979 thanks to a Guggenheim fellowship, but found he was not able to work at all, and because he was banned from teaching at any Chilean university, he went to live in the US.Coming back to Chile once again in 1995, Rojas refused to live in the capital, Santiago He chose Chillán, 400km to the south, which was the hometown of his second wife, Hilda May, and their son. Rojas himself was born in a southern small town called Lebu, into a coalmining family. He told me: "They have asked me a thousand times, 'Why don't you go to live in Spain? You have a job there, they awarded you. Why don't you go to US? You have a house there.' No, I like it here, the people from the provinces, this simplicity."At the Chilean National Museum of Fine Arts in Santiago, Chileans have been holding a wake over the poet's body. He is being taken back to Chillán, where he will be buried. The king of Spain, Juan Carlos, who is awarding the Cervantes prize to the Spanish writer Ana María Matutes on Wednesday, remembered when he met Rojas for the same awards ceremony years ago: "He liked to introduce himself as a coalminer's son, and to imagine Cervantes reading the world and rereading us."