Latin American leaders are to gather in Chile today in an attempt to end a political crisis in Bolivia that has seen more than a dozen people killed.Violent clashes between supporters of Bolivia's president, Evo Morales, and his opponents have led to concern among neighbouring countries. Chile's president, Michelle Bachelet, who is the temporary president of the 12-member Union of South American Nations, called the emergency summit late last week.The scale of the protests against Morales's plans to rewrite Bolivia's constitution and redirect gas revenues has forced the president to declare a state of siege in some opposition-led provinces. Bachelet said: "We can't remain impassive in the face of a situation that worries us all."The violence began two weeks ago. The government says at least 30 people have died in protests in the eastern province of Pando, while local officials put the number at 15.All the presidents of the continent's major nations are expected to travel to the summit in Chile today except for Alan García, the president of Peru. He is understood to be sending his foreign minister and has issued a statement supporting the elected Morales government.Also attending the meeting will be José Miguel Insulza, the secretary general of the Organisation of American States.The Brazilian president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, could prove the key mediator. Brazil imports half its natural gas from Bolivia. Lula warned last week that the summit could only be effective if proposals from both the Bolivian government and the opposition were represented."If the two sides haven't asked us to meet and we make a decision that neither side will respect, the meeting will end up being useless," Lula said.Venezuela's president, Hugo Chávez, a close Morales ally, hailed the gathering as an "extraordinary summit". "Fascism must be stopped in Bolivia. A tragedy must be avoided," he said.Chávez has backed Morales in accusing the US of supporting the anti-government protests in Bolivia. Both presidents expelled US ambassadors last week. Washington responded in kind while calling the allegations baseless.Several other Latin American presidents have defended Morales in the diplomatic spat with America. In a statement published on Sunday in Cuba's communist youth newspaper Juventud Rebelde, Raúl Castro accused Washington of meddling in Bolivia's internal affairs.