To ensure our children get the most value from studying science, we must move beyond traditional teaching methods. And that’s what Chile’s El Programa de Educación en Ciencias basado en la Indagación (ECBI), (Inquiry-Based Science Education Programme) offers. ECBI is a joint initiative between the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Chile, Anglo American and communities in Chile’s Catemu and Panquehue districts, inspired by the belief that high quality science education is important for all children.Our approach focuses on the fundamental question – why? It places scientific questioning at the heart of the learning process and in this way, children experience an education that respects their individuality, without compromising their freedom to develop and solve problems with classmates and adults. Being part of the ECBI team in Catemu and Panquehue has allowed me to witness the multitude of positive changes as a direct result of the programme, which has been hugely rewarding. For example, students have grown to such an extent that they are now able to examine the importance and effectiveness of what they are learning. They conduct investigations, make observations, and communicate their own ideas based on evidence.This process not only expands a child’s understanding of the natural and material world, but also stimulates their curiosity and prepares them for lifelong learning. It contributes to the full expression of their creative potential, improving their quality of life and enriching the community.But it doesn’t stop with the children. Our team acknowledges the need to connect a teacher’s professional development to student learning. In doing so, we have discovered that:To encourage maximum adoption of the ECBI approach, we encourage those teachers who actively conduct inquiry lessons to share their experiences and work collaboratively with those who only conduct pre-inquiry lessons. Meanwhile, we offer the 12% of teachers who show resistance to the approach a supervisor who has been specially trained to facilitate the adoption of the methodology.The ECBI mission is an inspiration to local communities and has been successful in both Catemu and Panquehue districts, with parents describing the many positive changes that they have seen in their children. However, as with any initiative, it’s not without its challenges. Therefore, to maintain momentum, we need to continue to communicate the benefits of ECBI, encouraging teachers and students alike to embrace this innovative approach to science education.Pilar Reyes is executive director for ECBICopy on this page is paid for and provided by Anglo American, sponsor of the social impact hubOther articles of interest from Anglo American: