We know that General Augusto Pinochet, the largely unlamented military dictator of Chile, ordered the murder of Salvador Allende, his predecessor as president. Yet now it seems that he also commanded the death by poisoning of Eduardo Frei Montalva, Allende's immediate predecessor. Six people have been charged in Santiago this week with killing him, and topical piquancy has been given to the news by the fact that Frei's son, also Eduardo and also a former president, is a candidate in the first round of presidential elections this week.Such Shakespearean bloodletting is uncommon in Latin America, and Pinochet's capacity for regicide will now be added to his existing reputation as a cold-blooded killer. Might he not also, perhaps, have brought about the death in 1986 of Jorge Alessandri, Frei senior's predecessor, who unwittingly created the opportunity for Allende to become president by intervening in the election of 1970 and splitting the rightwing vote? Alessandri died in his bed in 1986, at the age of 90, with Pinochet still in power.Pinochet, who died three years ago, still has powerful supporters both in Chile and in Europe, but the firming-up of the frequently heard accusation that he was behind the unexplained death of Frei in 1982 may cause a yet more negative appraisal of his long 17-year period in power.Eduardo Frei Sr was president of Chile from 1964 to 1970, supported by both his own Christian Democrat party and by the United States. He was an exceptionally radical president, embarking on the nationalisation of the country's US-owned copper mines and the takeover of its large estates. These were measures that were extended during Allende's government, with Allende enjoying the benefits of the legislation initiated during the Frei era.Halfway through his period in power, Frei lost the support of the US government, which concluded that he was "a weak reed" in the struggle against the left. Fearing that Radomiro Tomic, Frei's Christian Democrat successor, would lose the presidential election of 1970 to Salvador Allende, the Americans switched their support to the right-wing candidate, ex-President Alessandri. It was an error, since, in a three-horse race, the socialist Allende was the winner.Frei was an initial supporter of the Pinochet coup in 1973 that put an end to Chile's socialist experiment, although he was not aware of the machinations of the military. Allende died by his own hand, but Pinochet had planned for him to be murdered. Frei moved rapidly into opposition to the coup when it became clear that Pinochet loathed the Christian Democrats almost as much as he hated the Socialists. The austere and uncorruptible Frei became a unifying figure within the growing ranks of the opposition to Pinochet, posing a clear and identifiable threat to the dictator's power. His early death was always regarded as suspicious, both by his family and the country at large, but it has taken many years of investigation to bring the apparent perpetrators to public attention.Eduardo Frei Jr benefited from his father's reputation and became the Chilean president in the 1990s, at the head of the so-called Concertación of the Christian Democrats and the parties of the left that had once supported Allende. He is seeking re-election this week, to replace Michelle Bachelet, the existing Socialist president (though also a member of the Concertación). At present, Frei is second in the opinion polls to Sebastian Piñera, the rightwing candidate, although the news about his father's murder will surely improve his chances, specifically in a second round to be held in January.