We delve into the teaching diaries of those who've taken their careers overseas to find out what it's really like teaching English as a foreign language. This next article is from David Proctor, who went to teach in South America. Back in 2005 I chose to study Spanish and Geography at university, mainly due to my lack of a career plan, and also because spending the third year in a Spanish speaking country was a compulsory part of the degree. So when choosing where to go and what to do in the Hispanic world, I discovered that Leeds University luckily had a fairly flexible year abroad scheme regarding possible options and destinations. Instead of going for the boring and easy option that would be studying in Spain, I followed my adventurous, travelling instincts, and opted for Chile, to teach English with the British Council Language Assistant scheme.South America is an incredibly beautiful and diverse continent, but one that is often blighted by media reports of social divides, corruption, and drugs. Chile however is very different to its neighbours, the recent rescue of the 33 miners showed the country in its best light - organised and efficient. I was in Santiago, a spectacular capital city with hundreds of skyscrapers overshadowed by the mighty snow-capped Andes.For my first time living and working in Latin America, Chile was a great introduction to the continent. Getting used to things such as the different Spanish accent and punctuality, or the lack of it, is difficult at first, but Santiago is a developed, cosmopolitan city with fine bars, restaurants and museums to help you settle, just be careful what time you agree to meet people. Teaching in south America tends to be very different to what we're accustomed to in the UK. With a TEFL course, CELTA or equivalent, jobs are generally available teaching adults in language institutes or universities, although universities can vary enormously. Some fit the British concept, with thousands of students and superb resources, but due to a lack of public finance and student support in higher education, these will often be the most expensive and exclusive variety. Consequently there are lots of more vocational universities offering a wider range of 'cheaper' courses, such as where I taught, at La Universidad Tecnología de Chile, or INACAP as it's more commonly known.Financial constraints also mean most students usually live at home, which has an effect on their life experiences and maturity, making teaching in a university feel more like that of a school, rather than a higher education establishment. I had a few nightmares trying to set a fixed date for exams and assessed work, never would I have thought negotiation to be an essential skill for an English teacher.Obviously a big attraction to living abroad is the opportunity to travel. Depending where you are in Latin America, holidays can be up to three months, as in Chile and Argentina. I made the most of this time by travelling to the wilderness of Patagonia, where I rafted the clear blue water of the Futalefú river, one of the fiercest in the world, and trekked between the jagged peaks of Torres del Paine, surrounded by lakes and glaciers. Long weekends allowed me to visit Buenos Aires, a crazy city with a very European feel, and witness the incredible passion and hostility of a Boca Juniors and River Plate derby. After my contract ended I trekked to Machu Picchu in Peru and cycled down the world's most dangerous road in Bolivia to complete the adventurous theme of the year. My fascination with south America had begun.Graduating into recession in 2009 was a blessing in disguise. I took the chance to return to the continent with the British Council scheme, this time to Colombia, a country that makes most people immediately ask about drugs, then about kidnappings or guerillas, while in your mother's presence. I'm pleased to say this is nothing like the Colombia I experienced.Working in a university again, but with more confidence this time round, I was responsible for the running of the Conversation Club which gave me complete freedom in deciding what to teach, or talk about, and so kept the job lively and interesting. Colombia also has fewer native speakers than other places, but this means you can be a man in demand with a bit of effort. I ended up teaching in a private school once a week, although school starts at around 7am, which can be a challenging day with a rowdy class of thirty 10-year-olds.Calí, Colombia's third city, was my home this time, and it's famed for beautiful women, an all year round semi-tropical climate and the self-proclaimed salsa capital of the world. Life there revolves around salsa, so naturally, I had to learn, socialising with any Caleñas is near impossible without it. By the end of the year, I'm proud to say I reached an "advanced beginner" level, according to my friends.Colombia is a truly beautiful country, and unlike other places in south America, has yet to be exploited by the commercial tourism that is so prevalent in places such as Peru. Its drug cartel reputation precedes it, but the national image is improving. Colombians are all too aware of what the world thinks of them, and on the most part, are only too keen to try and alter that perception with endearing generosity and friendliness that would be inconceivable in Britain.After enjoying my two years abroad immensely, I have now just completed a CELTA, and plan to return independently to Colombia again in January 2011. Living abroad is not for everyone, but if you want an adventure and a different experience, I recommend looking into TEFL and seeing the wealth of opportunities that can arise.You can read more of David Proctor's Latin adventures on his blog.