Myrella Arcelis's family were at the heart of the dispute over the El Mauro dam near Caimanes, Chile, for eight years. While she and her son Angelo fought against the project, her other son worked for Antofogasta Minerals. For more than a a year, she refused to speak to him."For four and a half years I didn't speak to my brother. We had fistfights," said her son, Angelo Herrera, a local restaurant administrator who battled against first the mining project and then his own brother. "When we saw each other in the streets, we yelled insults like 'sellout' and 'traitor'."What happened in her family reflects the strength of feeling about the dam in this remote community, 186 miles north of Santiago.Describing her sons' fights, Arcelis said, "It was terrible, this is what most hurt me. We are such a united family and for years we didn't talk because of the mining conflict."When local activists first started opposing the mining project, Arcelis was convinced they could win. "Our mission was against the dam, we never accepted any money, but sadly the power of money is so huge," she said. "This was not about the money but about saving the valley … Ohhh! Did that change."A controversial settlement between the mining company and local landowners led to a $5m (£3) payout to be divided among 117 local activists opposed to the mine. Given that the town has a population of barely 1,000, this generated major conflicts."People put their children, their brother, their sister on the list! These were people who had no role in the fight. The money was supposed to be divided among those who fought against the project. So I filed a lawsuit and we had the money frozen for five years."In September, after five years of legal wrangling, the money was released. A lawyer with a suitcase of cash, escorted by Chilean police, went through town disbursing part of the $5m.Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox