As the market searches for direction amid continuing fears about the next eurozone country to face a crisis following Greece and Italy, there were contrasting fortunes for two of the major mining companies.Anglo American has added 70p to £24.23 after it confirmed the sale of a 24.5% stake in its southern Chilean projects to Japan's Mitsubishi for $5.39bn. However there could be problems with Chile's Codelco, which wanted to exercise an option to buy a 49% shareholding in Anglo's assets in the country. It was already making unhappy noises about the Mitsubishi deal and talking of possible legal action. But Dominic O'Kane at Liberum Capital said the deal - which valued Anglo's Chilean assets at around $22bn - was a clever one:Almost a week ago Anglo agreed to pay $5.1bn to buy South Africa's Oppenheimer family out of De Beers and take control of the diamond company. At the time there was speculation it could use the Chilean money to help fund the deal.Meanwhile Vedanta Resources is down 61p to £11.89 after its half year figures. Headline earnings at the Indian mining group rose by 27% but underlying profits dropped 34% to $186.3m, partly due to aluminum losses, rising costs and the depreciation of the rupee.Initially the UK market followed Wall Street and Asia sharply lower, but has since recovered some poise, with the FTSE 100 now down 26.36 points at 5434.02 after falling as low as 5360.The focus is again on Greece - where once more we await news of a new prime minister - and Italy - where ditto. The latter's bond yields have eased slightly but remain over the danger level of 7%. Worryingly, Spanish yields are edging up and are not far away from 6%, as investors worry about the damage to the rest of the eurozone if Italy's problems cannot be contained. Talk of a two tier euro if Italy cannot be saved is adding to the uncertainty. An Italian bond auction later will be widely watched.There is also speculation the European Central Bank may be forced to act, perhaps by increasing its bond buying programme, issuing a statement of support or countenancing an emergency interest rate cut.Meanwhile the outcome of the latest Bank of England meeting is due a midday, where investors await to see whether it will authorise further quantitative easing in the light of the growing European turmoil. Simon Denham at Capital Spreads said:Kathleen Brooks at Forex.com said:Back with the FTSE 100, Experian is the leading riser, up 26.5p to 810.5p as the credit information specialist unveiled a better than expected 20% rise in first half profits.But Admiral fell another 40p to 847.5 in the wake of the car insurer's profit warning on Wednesday.Among the mid-caps Homeserve recovered some ground after its recent plunge following misselling worries and fears of compensation claims. Its shares rose 31.3p to 249.8p as it said its priority was to tackle the problems it had encountered and was in "constructive and regular" dialogue with the Financial Services Authority.