Beijing's Securities Times knew what to make of it. State-owned Chinalco's $20bn investment in Rio Tinto would "contain and control pricing power monopolised by the multinational companies," it said. Quite; that's one reason why the deal sucks from the point of view of Rio's shareholders.Rio, naturally, tried to allay these fears by talking about "clear governance arrangements and continued commercial marketing of joint venture product." It spoiled the effect, though, by saying that one of two non-executive directors nominated by Chinalco would be regarded as "independent". When the language is being strangled on day one, the shareholders are right to be afraid about the influence of the biggest customer, China.Rio made two other defences. It pointed to the premium prices Chinalco is supposedly paying for its investment in nine mines. But nobody really knows a decent price these days for, say, a copper mine in Chile. Maybe Chinalco is paying over the odds, but the analysts were not blown away - good, but not a knockout, was the general verdict.Rio's other argument is that a rights issue to raise $20bn would have been impossible. That is probably right. You don't have to be David Mayhew, top-drawer JP Morgan Cazenove corporate broker and Rio non-executive, to know that assembling £14bn of underwriting capacity is a non-starter. But, Rio doesn't need $20bn at this stage. Half that sum would do - and a rights issue of that size looks do-able. And, if a drawn-out rights issue doesn't offer sufficient certainty, why not offer the convertible bonds to the shareholders? A coupon of 9.5% is attractive. Throw in the disposal of a few non-core mines and Rio would be a long way towards financial security.Will the rebellion succeed? Brave words are one thing; voting down a major fundraising, and presumably sacking half the board, is another. This time, though, the anger may last. At Barclays, fund managers had no choice but to hold their nose and back the Middle Eastern fundraising because the bank would have been in a pickle without its cash. Rio, by contrast, would have time to make alternative arrangements.In fact, Australian politicians may present a more formidable obstacle. Chinalco would own 18% of Rio if its convertible bonds become equity, breaching a 15% cap imposed only last year. That's plain cheeky on Rio's part.Pay rises all round at the Financial Services Authority, then? Well, not exactly. A pot of £10m will be set aside to recruit "quality supervisors and supervisory support". The FSA thinks it has a few individuals who fit this description but would like some more. Not too many, mind - the emphasis will be on quality not quantity, says chief executive Hector Sants.The FSA's timing - in the middle of a row about the supervision of HBOS - is not perfect, but it is hard to dispute the sense of what it is doing. If we want better financial regulation, we have no choice but to pay for it. Strictly speaking, the FSA's coffers are filled by the firms it regulates. But, given that most of us are investors in the biggest firms, either as taxpayer-owners or through pension schemes, it amounts to the same thing.However, regulation on the cheap, - a rough summary of the FSA's first decade - has to end. A bigger budget won't guarantee a better performance, but it's part of the package. Nor do pay levels at the FSA seem excessive by City standards. A salary of £100,000 or thereabouts for a lead supervisory manager should not cause jaws to drop.Sants did not venture far into the dangerous territory of Sir James Crosby's departure as vice-chairman. But Crosby should never have been appointed to the board in 2004 since he was chief executive of HBOS, a major regulated firm, at the time. And it would be dumb to conclude from the saga that ex-bankers should not serve at the FSA. Somebody has to provide the financial expertise. As long as there is also proper consumer representation, that should not be controversial.It's only roughly true that BT's shares yesterday hit their lowest level since privatisation in 1984, since the price ignores the demerger of O2 a few years ago. But a sub-100p share price still feels awful. Surely it can't go lower, you might think. Unfortunately, the uncertainties pile up. We don't know the size of the (inevitable) dividend cut, the size of the next write-down on IT contracts or the size of the rise in pension contributions. A quarter of a century after flotation, the outlook remains cloudy.nils.pratley@theguardian.com