The results of an inquest into the death of Chilean president Salvador Allende during the coup of 1973 has established that the socialist leader committed suicide, bringing to a close a controversial chapter in the history of the Latin American nation.Aside, perhaps, from the death of Ernesto "Che" Guevara, no other political death has come to symbolise both the brutality and idealism of the socialist movement in Latin America in the 1960s and 1970s. A physician by profession, Allende was the first openly Marxist politician to win office in Latin America in 1970.A moderate socialist, Allende galvanised and united the Chilean left, and once in power he set out ambitious processes of nationalisation, angering the right wing and raising eyebrows abroad. In September 1973, a coup, led by general Augusto Pinochet overthrew Allende's government, leading to a ruthless military dictatorship that spanned nearly two decades and was responsible for thousands of deaths.Allende died in the presidential home, La Moneda, while it came under attack from Pinochet's army on 11 September, 1973 – and the cause of his death was immediately ruled as suicide. Allende had killed himself with an AK-47 rifle, a personal gift from Fidel Castro. However, with Allende's words in his last radio transmission of "Long live Chile! Long live the people! Long live the workers!" still echoing loudly in Chileans' minds, the official version was immediately repudiated by Allende's sympathisers and family, and more brutal accounts surfaced.For his supporters the image of the president committing suicide never rang true, and a story that he had died fighting to the last became increasingly popular. This account was subsequently captured by Gabriel García Marquéz, who years later wrote in homage: "Allende died in an interchange of fire with a military patrol. Afterwards, all the officials proceeded in a bloody rite to shoot one bullet each into his body. Finally, an officer destroyed his face with the butt of a rifle."And it was that version of events that took hold of the imagination of the Latin American left, creating a martyr out of Allende, whose death came to epitomise the subsequent brutality of Pinochet's regime. That chain of events, however, has now been dismissed by the inquest led by the Chilean government minister Mario Carroza, which included input from experts across a number of different fields and nationalities. The autopsy confirmed Allende committed suicide.Doubtless, the range of contributions to the inquest sought to legitimise its findings and to close the chapter of Allende's death once and for all. Chile's opposition suffered greatly under Pinochet, losing hundreds, if not thousands, to forced disappearances and killings. Pressure has been mounting increasingly since Pinochet left power for ever deeper and more exhaustive investigations into this part of Chilean history. This inquest marks, perhaps, the starting of that process of healing and it was very important that its findings could be seen as legitimate across the board.Allende's daughter, Senator Isabel Allende, has welcome and accepted the findings, stating that her father's memory would still be untarnished since he had decided to take his own life rather than fall into the hands of the rebellious soldiers. It is a sentiment echoed by the Chilean communist party, with their lawyer and spokesperson Eduardo Contreras stating that "it was important to establish the truth". He added: "I will not ignore the other investigations that [minister] Carroza will carry out, this isn't the last word but only a very important first step."And this is where the significance of the inquest's findings lies. Now that Allende's suicide has been established beyond all doubt, Carroza's inquest can turn to the deaths of hundreds of political activists under Pinochet's regime, helping the country to come to terms with its past.The first chapter of this story can finally be considered closed, but the end is still far into the future. Chile will need these findings to go deeper and finally find the sense of closure it has been looking for from the events that followed Allende's suicide at La Moneda in September 1973.