A massive hydroelectric project was approved last Monday in Chile after three years of evaluations and big controversy. The project involves the construction of five hydroelectric power stations in two of the most untouched and wildest rivers in the world – the Baker and the Pascua rivers.HidroAysén project will dam around 6,000 hectares in the remote southern Chilean Patagonia. This will have a deep environmental impact in a place as pure as that. The Aysén region is the less populated region in the country and is famous for its beauty and isolation. An interesting ecotourism industry has been developing in the area lately, which would be damaged by the dams. The project also includes the construction of a transmission line from Aysén region, all the way to the capital Santiago. This will mean power cables and 5,000 towers of 50 meters tall, one every 400 meters, along 2,200km. The effect will be the deforestation of 23,000 hectares, and six national parks as well as 11 national reserves will be damaged. The visual impact would be massive.The social impact would last for years, bringing thousands of people to live and work in Patagonia. In 2007 I lived in Chile Chico, a small city in Aysén region, and know how apprehensive and reluctant Patagonia residents are when it comes to admit new people or big changes into their lives. Most of the families there arrived in Patagonia many years ago, when there were no even paths, let alone roads. They built their lives without any help in those unexplored areas. The Chilean Patagonia without Dams group, which gathers 79 national and international groups – from Greenpeace to Aysén's bishopric – has displayed a strong campaign.HidroAysén is a corporation formed by Endesa Chile, subsidiary of the Spanish-Italian Endesea and Colbún SA, which belongs to Matte group, owner of one of the biggest fortunes in the country. Together, these two companies control 74% of the Central Interconnected System (SIC). With HidroAysé's approval, this will grow to 80%. A virtual monopoly of private companies operates this strategic industry. Energy in Chile is some of the most expensive in the world and HidroAysén won't change that.People who support HidroAysén say it is necessary to fulfil Chile's growing energy requirements. Indeed, it will generate 2,750MW of electricity – but none of them will be used in Patagonia. The transmission line will take all that energy to Santiago to be used by the SIC, which provides energy for 90% of the Chilean population. The country imports 97% of its fossil fuels and depends largely on hydropower for electricity. It has been said that if Chile wants to keep growing it has to duplicate its energy grid during the next 10 years, and that HidroAysén would be essential for that – although there are studies that say the opposite. Beyond the environmental and social impacts that this specific project may cause, the problem that underlines is the lack of a coherent and sustainable long-term energy policy in the country.Besides HidroAysén, this year rightwing president Sebastian Piñera approved the construction of three very pollutant coal thermoelectric plants, one of which will be the biggest in Latin America. Thankfully, after Japan's earthquake, it seems that nuclear energy is out of the picture. Chile is as seismic as Japan and we had an 8.8 earthquake followed by a tsunami in February last year.Previous leftwing coalition governments did no better. They never opposed HidroAysén and former president Eduardo Frei approved the construction of Ralco central on Bío-Bío river. This destroyed the indigenous community of Pehuenches that used to live there; the former cemetery flooded and the bones of their ancestors floating will be an image hard to forget.It is difficult to understand why this social and environmental destruction happens in a country that has such big potential for non-traditional renewable energy sources – such as solar, wind, geothermal, biomass and tidal – that could diversify energy production and make it more sustainable. According to the UN, these energies could fulfil almost 80% of the world's energy demand by 2050. Only about 3% of Chile's energy is produced by these means.After HidroAysén's approval was announced, thousands of people protested on the streets and were violently suppressed by the police. Twitter and Facebook showed signs of big discontent and HidroAysén's website was hacked yesterday. People are calling for massive demos as well. In the meantime, HidroAysén's opponents will have recourse to justice to stop the project. I sincerely wish them luck.