President of the University of Chile Student Federation, 23-year-old Camila Vallejo has led a campaign for better access to education that began in April 2011. She was voted person of the year in a poll of guardian.co.uk readers.We never in our dreams imagined it would grow so big so fast. We had plans for protests and for mobilising students, but what happened last year was surprising even to us. Historically, the University of Chile students' union has had an important political role. Today more than ever. We've put hundreds of thousands of people in the streets for months. There have been marches filled with colour, costumes and original music with really funny lyrics. There have been videos, flash mobs and Thriller protests [in which thousands of students re-enacted the Michael Jackson video]. We're not just disputing the ideological nature of the education system. All the basic services are privatised here and priced to the market. The consequences of this are very violent.The police tortured many students during the protests and continue to do so. It is systematic repression. I'm not just talking about what happened this past year – just the other day, a march was brutally repressed. The abuse of power is very common among the police and there is no regulation. It is a system of repression that has not disappeared in the post-Pinochet era. There are attacks against all kinds of human rights – the right to gather, the right to protest, the right to organise. They don't let us walk freely in the streets, they have even attacked our offices, high schools, universities. We are young – we did not live through the dictatorship – but we're aware of what happened from our parents, from books. We thought that this repression had gone, but by questioning the political order, we discovered that they are willing to use these weapons again.We still have the legacy of the military dictatorship. Chile has a very weak civil society in terms of social organisations and unions. Our social fabric is shredded. And there is a kind of individualism that we are seeking to overcome. This year the people woke up. Lost their fears. Questioned the model. There is enormous potential to mobilise. Maybe the student protests will not be the same as last year with a march every Thursday, but there is going to be a huge development.