Although anticipated for some time, a symbolically important milestone has now been reached. China has officially overtaken Japan as the world's second-largest economy. Its rise has the potential to boost world growth, but also to increase tensions.China is still poor, so has the potential to grow quickly from a low level. But, as a developing country, it is likely to continue to focus on exports, though its latest economic strategy suggests it could begin to rebalance its economy towards domestic demand.If China is compared with the world's other largest economies, the differences are clear. It may be the second biggest in size, but ranks at 119 in terms of average incomes, according to World Bank data. Although Japan's $5.5tn economy is smaller than China's ($5.9tn), its average income is 10 times greater at $40,000. The US, at $14.9tn, is the largest economy and per capita incomes are similar to Japan's at $47,000, according to IMF data.China still practises export-led growth, a strategy that has served other developing countries well. Exports have accounted for 40-60% of Chinese GDP, while it is about 15% for the US and Japan. This has been a source of conflict, particularly as other developed economies seek to recover through exports.But China plans to rebalance its economy towards domestic demand, that is, shifting away from exports. It is in part a reaction to expected weaker imports from the west as consumers repay debt rather than spend at previous rates. The Chinese government also wants to avoid the protests at factory gates that occurred in 2009 when exports collapsed and workers were laid off en masse. China can make this shift because it has its own emerging middle class, which has achieved a reasonable level of income in the first three decades of the reform period.China has been talking about these reforms for a while, but notably changed its policy last autumn. The 12th Five Year Plan adopted then, which comes into effect next month, will be centred on developing the services sector, increasing urbanisation and improving incomes. Services comprise 40% of Chinese GDP, which is comparatively low. A number of services are non-tradeable, which helps to achieve the rebalancing aims. Also, just over half of the Chinese population is rural. The urbanisation drive will improve the livelihood of migrants by offering better employment opportunities and the chance to settle in cities. That will help to increase incomes and expand the consumer base. And improving incomes of urban workers is a key part of the strategy too. Wages may have been growing rapidly, but the share of income going to workers has declined, which partly explains the decline of consumption to 40% of GDP, which is lower than in other major economies.The overall aim, an ambitious one, is to sustain the next 30 years of growth. China is wary of the so-called "middle-income country trap" under which few countries join the ranks of the rich because growth slows in the absence of technological and productivity improvements. This means China will want to continue to integrate with the global economy so its firms can learn while competing on the world stage. But it also means it needs to reform its domestic economy to improve conditions for private firms and remove impediments in the labour market. This is crucial to sustain economic growth and help maintain social stability.These policy shifts suggest China has perhaps begun to realise it can be a major trader even when its economy is largely driven by its own consumers and firms, as is the case in the US and Japan. Rebalancing away from exports could also help to alleviate tensions with its trading partners. But other countries will want to see the 12th Five Year Plan earnestly implemented – sooner rather than later – in the world's now number two economy.