Chinese media coverage of the Lima climate change talks included comments by the country’s top climate negotiator who described the deal reached as “balanced”. Xie Zhenhua told the state news agency Xinhua that the outcome was “within” the Chinese delegation’s expectation. However he said: “we’re not very satisfied with the outcome, but we think it’s a balanced and nice document”. Xie added that the summit is an important step towards next year’s summit in Paris but that those “negotiations will be more challenging and require parties to show greater flexibility”.China’s role going into the talks was buoyed by its recent climate deal with the US. In the agreement announced in November, China committed for the first time to cap its output of carbon pollution by 2030 and to increase its use of zero emission energy sources to 20% by 2030.However, while there was much progress on commitments, the issue of historical emissions has once again proven to be a sticking point that China is not willing to let go. “Developed countries should honor their commitments and shoulder their responsibilities under the Convention to do more in support of developing countries in terms of mitigation, finance, technology and capability building,” Xie was quoted as saying.A critical opinion piece in the English edition of the state run China Daily newspaper criticised the developed countries’ “double standards” and that they have “blurred the difference between responsibilities of the rich and poor nations to fight climate change”.“Why does the developed world even pretend to help save the planet?” it adds. Li Shuo, climate campaigner with Greenpeace said the issue of common but differentiated responsibilities is “the most challenging issue” for next year’s climate change summit in Paris. “It has to be resolved in 2015 to achieve a robust agreement,” Li added. Another difficult negotiating point during the talks was on a method of accounting emission cuts. “The Lima conference ended up with a weak decision on this issue,” said Li. “Largely as a result of opposition from China and India, there will not be much top down scrutiny that the multilateral process can put on the offers from different countries,” he added. Alvin Lin, the China Climate and Energy Policy Director with the National Resources Defence Council writes that China “is moving in the right direction and should be pro-active in providing the details needed to evaluate its actions, so that other countries can have confidence in China’s actions and in turn step up their own efforts to reduce the threat of global climate change”. 