China begins three days of mourning for the victims of last week's earthquake with many of the most moving tributes being made online.One of the survivors of the disaster was Tang Gouping, a science teacher and blogger from Beichuan middle school. A link to his last post seems to be redirected to a general memorial site for the victims. But his story is told here. This picture was taken at a sports day, held before the earthquake struck. Now 80% of the buildings have been destroyed in the area.Today's three minutes silence was marked, if not observed, by users on Twitter, the microblogging site where news of the quake and its aftermath spread so fast. The Shangaiist has a round up of memorial tweets. "That was the loudest three minutes of silence I have ever heard," said one who like many was struck by the sound of sirens and car horns to mark the occasion."Seemingly everyone in Dalian beeped their horns and rang bell[s]" said Alex Bowman. "It is literally impossible not to be deeply, deeply moved," writes blogger Peking Duck. Everyone in his Beijing office stood silently when the clock struck 2.28pm, exactly a week after the quake. "I will never make the mistake again of falling for the generalisation that the people here 'only think about themselves'," he writes."China came to a virtual standstill," says blogger Zhongnanhai."This is the first time that the flag has been lowered for ordinary civilians in Chinese history, ever," writes Paul Denlinger on the China Vortex, who sees this as a key moment.He adds: "For the first time, a Chinese government has embraced the idea that any human life, even that of ordinary human lives, has value. Actually, this is a very western concept, and is a very important step on the road to democracy."Green Bamboo describes how the silence was broken in his English class. "One of the girls started crying and I could sense the emotional undercurrents in the class, especially afterwards. Then the class gradually got really noisy in a good way. Perhaps it was some sort of release for them after the serious start to the lesson."Banyue looks at how the Chinese press covered "mourning day". The post says: "All Chinese newspapers nationwide all are printed only using black ink on the front pages today. Most big Chinese websites including Sina, Sohu, TIanya and Tudou have also removed color from their logos and home page." Image Thief says it was inappropriate of the government to temporarily black out the internet as a mark of respect. "It is," the post says "the kind of thing that would remind everyone that, 'Grandpa Wen' or not, the recent openness might have just been a brief honeymoon."Denlinger suggests such a view is a misreading of China. "Sure, the government has an agenda and is spinning and exploiting this to make themselves look good. And in some ways, they are doing it in a clumsy way. But the government is now accountable to protect the lives of ordinary Chinese," he writes.Meanwhile, there still seems to be a lot of anger at the authorities whether its the response of the army, or corruption that allowed corners to be cut on school buildings. YouTube was one of the sites shut down for at least three minutes. Since then, state TV news footage of this noisy crowd in Beijing has been posted to the site.When was the last time such a large crowd shouted slogans in Beijing?, asks the Opposite End of China.