A Chinese court has jailed a Tibetan filmmaker for six years after he made a documentary critical of Beijing's policies, friends and campaigners said today.Dhongdup Wangchen and his friend Golog Jigme, a monk, were detained shortly after completing Leaving Fear Behind, which highlighted Tibetan anger with Chinese policies before the Olympics. The tapes had already been smuggled out of the country.The films featured interviews with ordinary Tibetans who expressed their love for the Dalai Lama, their exiled spiritual leader, and said the Olympics would do little to improve their lives. "The Chinese say they have made improvements in Tibet. But we don't see any improvement at all," Wangchen said in the documentary. "The truth is that Tibetans are not free to speak of their suffering."A statement placed on a website promoting the film said the 35-year-old filmmaker was sentenced on 28 December in Xining, provincial capital of Qinghai, where there is a large Tibetan population. His family said he was jailed for subversion. They found out about the sentencing only recently, Wangpo Tethong, a friend living in exile, told Associated Press.Calls to the Xining Intermediate People's Court were unanswered.Li Dunyong, a lawyer hired by the family but replaced with a government appointee by authorities, told AP the filmmaker had appealed. In a statement posted on the film's website, Wangchen's wife, Lhama Tso, who is living in exile in India, said: "I appeal to the court in Xining to allow my husband to have a legal representative of his own choosing."My children and I feel desperate about the prospect of not being able to see him for so many years. We call on the Chinese authorities to show humanity by releasing him. My husband is not a criminal, he just tried to show the truth."Wangchen was arrested in March 2008, shortly before riots erupted in Lhasa and spread across other Tibetan areas outside the autonomous region.A Chinese foreign ministry spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, said that while she had not heard of the case, all Chinese citizens enjoyed basic rights, including freedom of speech. She told a news briefing in Beijing: "You will only be punished if you break the law."