A few days before the lunar new year holiday in early February, southern China was hit by the fiercest snow and ice storms in half a century. The lives of over one hundred million people in 21 provinces were thrown into chaos and about one 10th of China's forests were destroyed or damaged. According to official figures - and we can assume they underestimate the scale of the devastation - there were 129 deaths, 1.66 million people made homeless, 151 billion Yuan in losses and 15.8 million livestock killed. What made the storm into the "perfect storm" is that it hit at the peak travel season, as tens of millions of migrant workers were heading home for the annual new year festivities. The heart-wrenching images of nearly one million migrant workers stranded in Guangzhou's train station were beamed the world over.Much of the western reporting - prior to the Olympics, foreign journalists have been given the right to travel around the country without restrictions - focused on the possibility of social unrest and mass mobilisation against the party. It was noted that the gathering of migrant workers in Guangzhou was the largest gathering of people since the pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square. Such headlines as "Cold Chinese grow angry over lack of preparation" suggested that the Chinese government may not be able to manage the potentially explosive scenes in Guangzhou and elsewhere. Yet the government seems to have emerged relatively unscathed. At the very least, they defused the anger of the crowds without the sort of violence deployed on June 4 1989. Why the different outcomes?Needless to say, the snowstorm is a natural disaster that can't be blamed on the government. The Earth is supposed to be getting warmer, not colder, and yet southern China was hit by an almost unheard of cold spell. Perhaps the worst hit city was Chenzhou, a city of 4.6 million at the southern most tip of Hunan province that was covered in snow and ice and had no access to water, electricity, or heat for 10 days. The ice made it particularly difficult for public authorities: think of the Great Ice Storm in Montreal ten years ago in a relatively poor city twice the size. In normal times, Chenzhou is known for its vast, subtropical forests and year round temperatures of about 18 degrees celsius. Governments need to plan for emergencies, but it's hard to imagine any government not being caught offguard by such unlikely scenarios.Still, the government's reaction to such disasters can undermine its legitimacy. Chicago was hit by a huge snowstorm in January 1979, and the slow snow removal combined with the mayor's careless approach to the media is widely believed to have led to the mayor's defeat in the Feb. 27 election. The Bush administration's seemingly indifferent and incompetent response to Hurricane Katrina's devastation of New Orleans led to widespread outrage. Of course, China is different. The government is not subject to democratic accountability and the state-controlled media won't report too much bad news, especially if it implicates government officials. But authoritarian politics isn't the only reason for the lack of political payback.For one thing, the media isn't as tightly controlled as it used to be. The Hong Kong media was openly critical of the government's response to the natural disaster - blaming the railway ministry for blockage in Guangzhou and the lack of coordination for problems elsewhere - and people in Guangdong province often have access to Hong Kong TV and newspapers (even in Beijing, the South China Morning Post newspaper is sold in restaurants, hotels, and here on the Tsinghua campus). Some critical reporting also filtered through the mainstream media. And the internet was filled with horror stories that blamed weather forecasters and government officials.Perhaps the key point is the government seems to care about public opinion more than it used to: or at least, it knows how to project a caring image. Prime Minister Wen Jiabao spent the lunar new year going to various disaster sites and apologizing for the disruption caused by the winter storm (the last apology by a Chinese leader to disgruntled crowds was delivered by then premier Zhao Ziyang when he apologised to pro-democracy students in Tiananmen Square shortly before he was deposed; Wen Jiabao was at Zhao's side at the time). President Hu Jintao ventured into minus-20 conditions in an underground mine to encourage miners to work through the holidays so that energy could be restored in the disaster-affected areas. Other Politburo members and lower-level government officials cancelled their own holidays to coordinate relief efforts. Over 300,000 People's Liberation Army soldiers were deployed to help deal with the disaster, including 80,000 troops sent to de-ice part of the highway that runs through Chenzhou. One million militia and reservists as well as half a million police were dispatched to key railway and highway points to maintain order and ease ten kilometre long traffic jams. As with most things in China, the numbers boggle the mind.The caring image extended to the Spring Festival Gala, the variety television show watched by about half of China's population on the eve of the lunar new year. Normally the skits are prepared and rehearsed long in advance, but this year's show featured some of China's biggest entertainment stars in a song honouring those affected by the "merciless snow" as well as shots of migrant workers forced to stay behind during the new year holiday (12.5 million workers in Guangdong alone). The government also took concrete measures for such workers, such as capping the prices of basic foodstuffs and subsidising new year parties for those who could not make it home.Let me conclude with two observations. It could be that government control of the media explains the lack of social unrest in response to the "perfect storm". But even if the Chinese political system opens up - as I hope it will - at least two features will continue to mark it off from western-style liberal democracies. First is the need for a highly centralised state to deal with such "natural" catastrophes. The country's dependence on coal was manifest during the crisis, and the consequences for global warming are ominous. What will happen once the oceans begin to flood Beijing and Shanghai, as predicted in Al Gore's film An Inconvenient Truth? It's hard to imagine a response that doesn't involve massive mobilisation of manpower and resources. Half a century ago, the German thinker Karl Wittfogel argued that water control and distribution had spawned authoritarian centralised regimes and sprawling bureaucracies in China. Perhaps it's possible to combine more democratic forms of rule with highly centralised regimes. But it's an argument that needs to be made.Second is the need for the media to portray moral exemplars, appeal to people's better nature, and help to generate sympathy for the disadvantaged. The importance of moral education is perhaps the least controversial part of China's Confucian heritage (and its "communist" updates) and it has implications for the way for think about the role of media in Chinese society. Yes, there can and should be more independent and critical media in China that tells the truth about social problems and blames the government when it's at fault. But it doesn't follow that complete separation of media and government is the best way forward. Privatisation might just lead to titillating news reporting that diverts attention away from real problems. So the task will be to steer between an authoritarian model of media control and a free market model that doesn't take sides with anyone. The resulting model - perhaps looser constraints on private media combined with a government-funded service that has the mandate to strive not for the party's interests but for widely endorsed social values like concern for the poor and filial piety - may strike westerners as moralising and paternalistic, but there are areas of justifiable difference that need to be tolerated, if not respected.