Google's shock announcement that it may quit China has refocused attention on internet censorship in the country and raised the issue of industrial espionage there.Most of the attention in the standoff has focused on human rights and censorship, but little attention has been paid to Google's claim that it was the victim of cyber-crime. David Drummond, the company's chief legal officer, said:In mid-December, we detected a highly sophisticated and targeted attack on our corporate infrastructure originating from China that resulted in the theft of intellectual property from Google.Someone, allegedly traced to China, broke into Google and stole corporate secrets. Furthermore, the search engine's investigation revealed they weren't alone. Drummond continued:As part of our investigation we have discovered that at least 20 other large companies from a wide range of businesses – including the internet, finance, technology, media and chemical sectors – have been similarly targeted.Google has refused to implicate the Chinese government. However, in March 2009, security researchers announced that a cyber-espionage network it called GhostNet had broken into government, corporate and private computers in 103 countries. The computers used in the attacks were almost exclusively in China. As Thomas Crampton, the Asia-Pacific director of Ogilvy PR, pointed out, Google mentioned both the GhostNet report and a public source security review by US defence firm Northup Grumman of China's "Cyber Warfare and Computer Network Exploitation". (You can download the 88-page report in the PDF format and read it for yourself.) The report was written for the The US-China Economic and Security Review Commission. The US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, issued a terse statement, saying: "We look to the Chinese government for an explanation." Business senseTechnology analysts were trying to read the tea leaves to understand Google's move. Why would a company choose to walk away from one of the most important internet markets in the world? As Larry Dignan, of ZDNet, said, on the surface the decision seems to be business lunacy. He then looks at reasons why Google might have made the threat:• Google needs goodwill with Western governments as concerns mount over its market dominance. (It was an explanation supported by internet political commentator Evgeny Morozov, who said that he doubted "the sincerity of Google's threat".) • Companies rarely admit to cyber attacks, even unsuccessful ones, and Google was making a statement that it takes security seriously as it hosts more and more of its users' data. • Lastly, Google doesn't have as much to lose in China today as it does in other markets.China is one of a handful of countries where Google doesn't dominate the search engine market. Homegrown search engine Baidu holds the kind of dominant position that Google enjoys in the US, Australia and most of Europe. Regardless, Google still managed to capture a third of search revenue in China last summer. However, Goldman Sachs analysts estimate that the loss of Google's China earnings are likely to be "immaterial" for the company, as it's estimated to draw just about 1% of its total revenue from mainland China. But if Google pulls out of China, that doesn't mean that it won't have a virtual presence there. Even if Chinese authorities block it, getting around the Great Firewall isn't difficult for Chinese internet users who want unfiltered information. James Fallows points out in the Atlantic how easy it is for Chinese users to get what they want:In terms of information flow into China, this decision probably makes no real difference at all. Why? Anybody inside China who really wants to get to Google.com – or BBC or whatever site may be blocked for the moment – can still do so easily, by using a proxy server or buying (for under $1 a week) a VPN service. Google.com will still be available to those who want it. Regardless, Fallows was still concerned that China was entering its "Bush-Cheney era". However, the focus on the issue of human rights has masked some very real reasons why Google threw down the gauntlet. With the theft of its corporate secrets, combined with worries not only about human rights activists, but also about the safety of its own employees in China, Google's decision starts to make more sense. Chinese nationalist responseChinese internet watchers know that criticism of the country is often met with a strong nationalistic response. The excellent China blog EastSouthWestNorth highlighted comments from Chinese bloggers and even one senior employee at China's top search engine, Baidu. Blogger Xiang Ligang called Google's decision "psychological warfare" and said that like other American companies, Google had failed to adapt to the Chinese market, failing to respect copyright and allowing people to search for pornography. Jiang Baijing at People's Net said, "Ho ho, Google is just throwing a 'hissy fit' now!" and called the search giant "the capitalists Google". In the context of the allegations of cyber-espionage, it's interesting to read between the lines of this particular post. EastSouthWestNorth also highlighted the missive posted by the "chief design officer" at Chinese search king Baidu. He called Google a profiteer and added:The tone of the top Google legal adviser disgusts me. He could have said that they are withdrawing for economic reasons, plain and simple. Instead, they have to make themselves look good by saying that Google was attacked by Chinese people, that Gmail accounts of Chinese dissidents were attacked, and so on in order to explain why they are withdrawing from China. This type of tone is an insult to the intelligence of the ordinary Chinese citizens. But it may just appeal to certain supercilious Westerners who have never been to China, know nothing whatsoever about China but like to criticise China all the same.Upset with negative responses, he closed comments on the post and added, "If you want to whine, go to Twitter". Twitter is one of the sites blocked by the Chinese government. The China Digital Times collected the response from Chinese users on Twitter. Unspurprisingly, the comments are broadly supportive of Google. A taste of the comments they gathered and translated:• @qhgy RT @Lyooooo: If Google leaves I won't use Baidu or let my children or grandchildren use it (If I have them) #GoogleCN• @miyafan Now begin doing two tasks 1. Quickly use Google to search censored material 2. study how to scale the wall #GoogleCN• @mranti Withdrawal of Google means: 1 Scaling the wall is now an essential tool 2 Techies, you should immigrate. Really #GoogleCNInternational blog-watching network Global Voices said that Chinese internet users feared the country would now become a closed network. Global Voices' Bob Chen found this quote on Twitter from pzhtx: Google热榜中"天安门"上升到第一了，中国网民在送Google最后一程In the list of pop tags, "Tiananmen" rises to the first place. The Chinese netizens are saying goodbye to Google in this way.