For my work, I need to check websites for news and information regularly. And every time I travelled to mainland China, I would often do the same, until I saw the blank page or time-out error message on the screen. Not being able to access some sites reminded me of where I was. Last month, when I was back in Hong Kong after a month spent in Beijing reporting the Olympic games, I found I automatically didn't visit those sites, and even when I did, I half-expected a blank screen to pop up.I believe many people who travel frequently to and from China have similar experiences. When I was stationed in Beijing for two years, I found the inability to access information freely often hindered my work. I felt helpless when my manager demanded to know why I hadn't reacted to certain news because, even if the news happened nearby, I had no way of knowing. My journalist colleagues shared the same burden. Eventually our HQ had to accept using material from foreign media to report domestic events in China.Many people in Hong Kong who complain about aspects of their daily lives would recognise that the country provides two fundamental things for ordinary people: security and freedom. People feel secure because they trust law and order and they feel free because information flows freely here.So if a law is used in such a way that it violates the freedom of citizens to access information, then we have the right to question whether that law is necessary, even if we trust the lawmaker's intention to protect. Earlier this month, the Hong Kong SAR (special administration region) government published a consultation paper on the comprehensive review of the control of obscene and indecent articles ordinance (COIAO). In the section concerning new media, it proposes that ISPs place filtering software to block obscene and indecent materials. It sounds reasonable: a government seeking to protect children and young people from pornographic and violent materials. But the proposal prompts many questions. Who is to decide which contents are pornographic or violent? How do you distinguish between adults and the under-aged? How do you protect adults' freedoms? Most importantly, how do you prevent this power being abused for political motives?The government insists the consultation is transparent and welcomes citizens' input. However, reading the proposal, one can't help but think this is a document giving the administration the power and convenience to establish an order whenever it deems it necessary. What worries people is the government mentality behind this. Clearly, it doesn't trust its own citizens. People fear this attempt to impose regulation on the internet is just the beginning. The government is behaving like a parent who has lost confidence in communication and education, and chosen instead to impose strict rules. At the beginning of the chapter New Forms of Media, the consultation paper claims:Given the emergence of new forms of media, particularly the growing popularity of the Internet, members of the public consider it important that measures are taken to protect youngsters from the dissemination of obscene and indecent materials on such new media systems.Who are the "members of the public"? Can the government claim they speak for the public? Do the public, especially children, as the government imagines; need new protection imposed by the authorities, from indecent materials?The authorities would be better advised to surf the internet more often and learn how people in Hong Kong use the web. People can seek and find the real obscene and indecent materials themselves, or through their circles. But do the same materials spread so quickly only because of the existence of the internet? In reality, similar materials are already easily available in Hong Kong. There are special fengyue (erotica) sections in some of the newspapers. There are adult magazines, wrapped in black plastic bags, available in most newsagents. There was no way to avoid them, even before the internet age. If the government wants to protect children and young people, they should equip our youngsters with the ability to make better judgments themselves with the help of communities, parents and schools.As a citizen of Hong Kong, what I don't want to see is, one day, when I click a link to a website, a blank page. We may not like certain sites, but we don't want to give the government the right to decide for us which sites we should and should not visit. If even this right is removed, what is the justification for "one country, two systems"?This article first appeared, in Chinese, here.