Due to the Beijing Olympics and a string of unexpected headline-grabbing events, from the Tibet riots and Sichuan earthquake to the melamine milk scandal, this year has seen China garner an extraordinary amount of attention in the western media. There has been a clear contrast even with 2007, when China was also in the news a lot but there were still short periods without international headlines. In 2008, that just didn't happen.If this represents a departure from past precedent, there are two things about English-language discussions of China this year that carried forward ongoing traditions. One represents a disheartening long-term pattern, the other an encouraging recent trend.Let's get the bad news out of the way first. Much western commentary on China, especially as purveyed in media that depend heavily on sound bites and sensationalism, continued to fall into a familiar trap. Simplification of complicated Chinese phenomena was often the order of the day, as much coverage, especially of the Beijing games, swung between romanticising or demonising the country and its people. On the positive side, though, the year saw a bumper crop of unusually illuminating books of reportage. The four works I have in mind take widely varying approaches to contemporary China. What they have in common is that each is by someone with good Chinese language skills, has a long-term commitment to understanding China on its own terms, and has hit upon an interesting way to frame a book. Each offers readers a valuable opportunity to move beyond simplistic visions of China that downplay the diversity of the country and the complex nature of the social and cultural shifts its people are experiencing.Factory Girls by former Wall Street Journal correspondent Leslie T. Chang offers moving life stories and highly individualised portraits of workers the author befriended during visits to the massive industrial boomtown of Dongguan made over several years. The Last Days of Old Beijing, Michael Meyer's poignant, historically minded work, looks at life in a Chinese alleyway neighbourhood slated for destruction. It is based on the former Peace Corp volunteer's extended stay in the district, where he rented a cramped room that lacked indoor plumbing (but had an internet connection) and taught English for free (mostly to the children of migrant labourers) at a local elementary school.Out of Mao's Shadow, a model work of investigative political journalism by the Washington Post's Philip P Pan has many virtues, including that of introducing readers to the work and life of the daring documentary filmmaker Hu Jie and a Sichuan graveyard devoted to victims of Cultural Revolution violence. And finally, Smoke and Mirrors is Pallavi Aiyar's lively set of reflections on her experiences as the first Beijing-based Chinese-speaking correspondent for an Indian daily. Filled with amusing anecdotes, one of its strengths is the author's nuanced assessment of the contrasting attitudes toward manual labour, political expression, and gender in China and India. The appearance in a single year of four books this good—and varied—supports a claim that China specialist Robert Kapp made in a blog posting linked to the reissue of Graham Peck's classic 1950 memoir, Two Kinds of Time. Writing for "The China Beat" (an online publication that I helped found), Kapp asserted that we've recently entered a "second golden age" of English-language reportage writing on Chinese topics.The "first golden age," in his view, began in the mid-1930s and ended with the appearance of Two Kinds of Time. The era witnessed the publication of many other memorable contributions to the genre, from Emily Hahn's China to Me, Jack Belden's China Shakes the World, and Annalee Jacoby and Theodore White's Thunder Out of China, to multiple titles by Edgar Snow, Agnes Smedley, and Carl Crow.I think Kapp is definitely onto something, even though it is possible to cite impressive works of China reportage that came out during the half-century following the publication of Two Kinds of Time. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, for example, journalists and freelance writers would sometimes follow up trips to or long stays in China by writing smart and stylish books that had important things to say.In the last few years, though, there has been a notable acceleration in how often such books appear. Take 2005: the year saw the publication of Ian Johnson's Wild Grass, a superb work of dissent-focused reportage. Also published that year was The Changing Face of China, the latest in a series of thoughtful books on Chinese themes by long-time Guardian correspondent John Gittings. In 2006, readers who wanted a deeper understanding of China could turn to three impressive books of reportage: Peter Hessler's elegantly turned Oracle Bones: A Journey Between China's Past and Present, John Pomfrett's often moving Chinese Lessons: Five Classmates and the Story of the New China, and James Kynge's wide-ranging China Shakes the World: The Rise of a Hungry Nation. The next year, 2007, was perhaps not quite as rich a year for works of China reportage, but the general trend continued. It saw the appearance of both former Guardian correspondent Duncan Hewitt's Getting Rich First and Rob Gifford's China Road, each of which offered engaging looks at shifts in the PRC between the mid-1980s, when their authors first spent time in the country, and the present. Even measured against the years immediately preceding it, however, this has been a special year. The sheer range of topics covered and varieties of personal experiences the authors bring to their projects makes the "Class of 2008" made up of Chang, Meyer, Pan and Aiyar stand out from any that comes to mind from either the first or second "golden ages" of the genre.There is also something that makes these publications especially welcome to academics like myself: many of the authors involved, including Ian Johnson and Peter Hessler, find it natural when doing their research to read widely in the historical and social scientific scholarship on the issues that interest them.A final optimistic note is in order. Despite my comments above about the flaws of soundbite-driven discussions of China in 2008, throughout the year some excellent reporting on and commentaries about the country appeared in English-language publications, including The Guardian's print edition and Comment is Free. It could easily turn out that some of the most talented writers in the latest crop of savvy and thoughtful China-based journalists—people like the New Yorker's Evan Osnos—will end up coming up with book project as original and interesting as those of the Class of 2008. If so, the "second golden age" of reportage that Kapp imagined could continue for some time to come.