China surprised markets on Tuesday with its first interest rate increase since 2007. What prompted the move and what does it mean for the Chinese currency, the yuan?Virtually no one had predicted the rate rise, which took one-year deposit rates to 2.5% and one-year lending rates to 5.56%. As Li Daokui, an academic adviser to the People's Bank of China, explained, the central bank was worried about rising inflation and property prices. Although there is no sign that inflation is getting out of control, consumer prices have been rising faster than Beijing's 3% annual target.The People's Bank of China made clear that it wants savers to lock up more of their cash in banks, rather than invest in stocks or property.Many economists believe this is the start of a cycle of rate increases. But this is likely to be gradual. For example, UBS expects three rate hikes in 2011, Mizuho Securities forecasts two by the middle of next year and Deutsche Bank believes there will be two over the next 12 months.China already began tightening policy late last year. It has kept a lid on credit growth through strict lending quotas, and has also raised reserve requirements three times for all banks to lock up more of their cash, while pushing through a fourth, targeted reserve increase for six major banks last week.Some economists believe that with inflation set to peak soon, Beijing will prefer to rely on lending controls and reserve requirements rather than further interest rate rises.In a fully open economy, higher rates would normally push up the currency. The yuan gained almost 3% against the dollar in the two months before the rate increase, but Beijing sent the yuan's exchange rate sharply lower yesterday. Some traders believe that the government will put the brakes on its appreciation to ward off capital inflows.However, China still faces heavy pressure from the United States, Europe and others to allow the yuan to strengthen.China – which never fell into recession – has enjoyed a rapid recovery from the global downturn. Its economy grew at an annual rate of 10.3% in the second quarter, compared with 1.7% in the US, although China's growth is set to have slowed in the third quarter. The figures are due on Thursday.The rapid growth has pushed up wages, food and property prices in the country. Consumer prices rose 3.5% in August, led by a 7.5% rise in food prices.