Rebranding China has been key to much debate among the several thousand Asian and Asia-facing business executives, politicians and officials at this year's World Economic Forum meeting in Dalian, one of China's greener cities. But what brand would suit China's reinvented world role?Will its inspiring commitment to a harmonious, "ecological civilisation" – underpinned by policy, finance, the rule of law and a growing community of innovative and responsible businesses – mature into a trusted, global brand? Or will its profile as an economic and military giant, powered by an environmentally bankrupt and increasingly unequal society, come to dominate China's reputation?Liu Changle, Phoenix Chairman and CEO, speaking on a panel beamed live on his own Chinese TV network, compared China's challenge with the branding success of the World Economic Forum itself. "Davos was once a village", he declared, "but it is now a global brand", explaining that Klaus Schwab's genius lay in the fact that the brand now had nothing at all to do with that little place hidden away in the Swiss Alps.Actually, this view is pretty much on the button, notably as the WEF event in China has been branded successfully as the Summer Davos. But Liu's insights are a cause for concern for those who believe that credible branding needs to reflect what is true, whether the substance concerns the quality of Nike's running shoes, or the individual freedom trumpeted by the American dream. His view is all the more worrying when applied to China, as its approach to sustainability issues will be this century's defining driver.Richard Edelman, president and CEO of Edelman, and creator of the annual Edelman Trust Index, offered a different perspective. "The China brand has to evoke images of transparency," he said, proposing that leading Chinese companies adopt an electronically-enabled product-based label allowing customers to view information about the company and the way in which the product was made. By my count, my enthusiasm for the proposal put me in a very small minority in what was an extremely crowded room.Later, I asked a leading Chinese business journalist why he thought that no Chinese companies had grasped the opportunity to provide high quality, and higher priced, food to higher income Chinese consumers, given the almost daily number of food scares. Offering first a personal response, he explained that when he wanted vegetables he would pick up the phone to a specialist, organic supplier. Milk on his table at home, he said, was most definitely of the imported, and expensive, variety.Then, rather than offering a business-focused answer, he provided more of a political analysis. Delivering cheap food to the hundreds of millions of urban migrants, he explained, was key to maintaining stability. Fears that higher quality food would raise food prices to unaffordable levels to this crucial constituency was slowing the pace of change. Eventually, he argued, China would sort out its supply chains and deliver safe food, but right now cheap and piled high was the order of the day.Richard Edelman bemoaned the fact that China was known more for its government's actions than its business community. And he is right, but the importance of China's government is not going to fall away any time soon. Premier Li Keqiang was the centrepiece of the formal opening event of the Summer Davos, taking up the tradition of Chinese leaders' patronage of the event, fulfilled by Premier Wen Jiabao in previous years. His message was clear: China was open for business, but the rules of the game might need to evolve from past experience.Clearly, the time has passed when multinationals will receive preferential treatment in return for investment into China, as I pointed out in a recent article. Beyond that, Li Keqiang emphasised the importance of reciprocity, that Chinese business should be welcomed by countries whose businesses might want to operate in China. He confirmed China's continued support for the multilateral trading system, while pointing out the pressures that this has placed on the business community, and warning against evidence of protectionism blocking China's market access.China's brand, unlike Schwab's Global Davos, cannot be separated from its true self. Its brand will be determined by what is done in its name, for and by its people, businesses and government. Shaping its image to deflect the evidence that it is better or worse than it is, will not work. China's leading businesses, and now also multinationals operating in China, understand that their image and that of China are inextricably linked.Simon Zadek is currently a Visiting Scholar at Tsinghua School of Economics and Management, and a senior fellow at the International Institute for Sustainable Development and the Global Green Growth Institute. This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Become GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox