This January the outgoing Bush Administration filed yet another suit at the World Trade Organization (WTO) against China's trade and industrial policies. In its first 10 days, the Obama administration came close to charging the Chinese with currency manipulation. Rather than trying to beat back the Chinese growth miracle, the US should look to the Chinese for guidance on how to recharge our economy.In his new book, Bad Samaritans: The Myth of Free Trade and the Secret History of Capitalism, Cambridge university economist Ha-Joon Chang writes that the US didn't slacken support for industry until after the US became a dominant industrial power.Readers will be intrigued to learn that in 1791 it was none other than US Treasury secretary Alexander Hamilton who wrote an influential report calling for policy to shield US firms from foreigners in order to build national companies. Though solidified later by Abraham Lincoln, writes Chang, Hamilton charted the course of US economic policy until the end of the second world war. Chang shows that Japan, South Korea and Taiwan went on to adapt such policies in the second half of the 20th century, leading those nations to prosperity by the century's end.China's growth miracle eclipses all those before it. It is the result of strategic trade and industrial policies largely borrowed from the policies in the US and other East Asian nations that Chang describes. The Chinese have put enormous support into strategic industries such as textiles, high technology and cars, as well as into research and development, and science and technology development. This orchestration of government policy has brought China from the hundredth most competitive high technology export economy to number one in just 25 years. Thanks to these policies, Lenovo, Haier and other Chinese firms are household names. Soon, you could be driving a car from China's First Auto Works.Following a WTO suit where the US successfully challenged a Chinese programme for car makers, in January the US challenged China's "famous brands" programme that fosters Chinese firms into becoming globally-recognised names. The US has to stop blaming the Chinese for its problems and learn from the Chinese what the Chinese learned from us. As part of the US plan to get out of the slump, the US needs to revive industrial and innovation policies toward strategic industries and work to make our products more competitive. At this writing, the proposed stimulus in the US amounts to 6% of GDP, with just 10% of the proposed $825bn going toward public infrastructure and technology development. China, which was not hit as hard by the US crisis, is spending 14% of GDP (or $585bn) on a stimulus, the majority of which will go toward infrastructure and technology.Learning from the Chinese by reviving strategic industrial and trade policy will also help end the deadlock in the never-ending WTO negotiations. One of the reasons why WTO talks have been stalled has been that the Bush administration wanted the negotiations to put an end to the strategic trade and industrial policy still permitted under the WTO. China, India, South Africa, Brazil and other emerging nations who have been successfully deploying such policies, saw US intransigence as complete hypocrisy and have halted the talks.A good place to start building productive capacity in the US is in green technologies like renewable energy, energy efficiency, and clean cars. According to a new report by the Political Economy Research Institute (PERI) at the University of Massachusetts titled Green Recovery: A Programme to Create Good Jobs and Start Building a Low-Carbon Economy, close to 17 jobs could be created for every $1m in green industry outlays (as opposed to 5.5 jobs per $1m in spending for the oil and coal industries). Thus, $100bn in green recovery outlays would not only stimulate the economy, revive industry, help slash pollution, and decrease our dependence on foreign oil, but would also create 1.7 million jobs.The Obama Administration should drop the Bush-era suit against China at the WTO and back off from calling China a currency manipulator, at least for now. All countries need all they policy space they can muster to get their economies back on track in the midst of the crisis, especially the US. Like the Chinese we should focus on boosting domestic demand and reviving our industry.