The Xinjiang Autonomous Region lies in China's north west, bordering central Asia. Covering a sixth of the country's total territory, it is a vast but sparsely populated area with around 19 million inhabitants. Around 8 million are Turkic-speaking Uighur Muslims, concentrated in the south of the region around cities such as Kashgar, known to the Chinese as Kashi, which lies around 2,500 miles from Beijing.Increasing controls on religious and cultural activity, large scale Han Chinese migration and economic marginalisation have all played a part, said Nicholas Bequelin of Human Rights Watch, who has researched the area extensively.The proportion of Han Chinese inhabitants rose from 6% in 1949 to 40% by around 2000 and migrants had begun to spread from cities into rural areas, where they found themselves in competition with Uighur communities for water and land. Many Uighurs complain that they have not benefited from the region's economic development, finding it harder to access benefits such as government grants or bank loans."The political reality of southern Xinjiang is that Uighurs don't see themselves as Chinese," added Bequelin. But while some seek a separate "East Turkestan", others merely hope for greater cultural freedom.Xinjiang has experienced sporadic outbursts of separatist activity and more general anti-government protest."It may be that as many as a couple of hundred have been killed by separatists alone [since the early 90s], and of course people have been executed or killed in police raids," said Professor Barry Sautman, a specialist in ethnic politics in China at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.Violence peaked in 1997, with fatal bus bombings and riots after a peaceful protest was suppressed. Experts believe the ensuing security crackdown halted the violence but exacerbated underlying tensions.Amnesty International alleges that as many as 200 Uighurs were executed between 1997-99. Mark Allison, its East Asia researcher, says Uighurs have been punished for peaceful protests — or even cultural expression — as well as violent activity."What we have documented in the past is a much broader crackdown — particularly after September 11 and the global war on terror," he said."It's the only place in China where political prisoners are regularly sentenced to death and executed."Most analysts believe that yesterday's attack was timed to maximise publicity. But few believe that separatists will attack venues, spectators or athletes directly particularly given the intense security in Beijing and other host cities.The Chinese authorities allege they have disrupted several Olympics-related separatist plots, but have provided little evidence. Last week the army official in charge of security said Uighur separatists represented the greatest threat to the games, while Xinjiang's vice-governor said there were "only a very small number of sabotage activities and many were nipped in the bud".Andrew Gilholm, senior China analyst at the Control Risks consultancy, said the raid resembled attacks in the 90s, and did not indicate a newthreat. He added: "Claims [of plots] have never been completely made up, but have probably often been exaggerated and misrepresented, at least from around 2002 until recently."As yet, no one has claimed responsibility. The state media reported that security officials suspected the East Turkestan Islamic Movement — often blamed for alleged plots — of planning pre-Olympic attacks. But Colin Mackerras, an expert on the region and emeritus professor at Griffith University, Australia, cautioned: "There are quite a few groupsand the Chinese usually lump them all together as ETIM."Earlier this year Beijing also accused Hizb ut-Tahrir of planning raids; the group denied the claims, adding that since 2001 autocratic regimes hadused the "war on terror" as an excuse to clamp down on political opposition. In a recent video, three men who said they represented the little-known Turkestan Islamic Party threatened Olympic attacks and claimed responsibility for recent blasts in Chinese cities, but both the government and independent analysts doubt their involvement in those incidents. Some experts believe ETIM and TIP are one and the same.James Millward of Georgetown University in the US, an expert on Uighur separatism, has said he has yet to see evidence of a large, organised separatist or terrorist group.ETIM has been deemed a terrorist group by the UN and the US. But while there is evidence of links between ETIM and al-Qaida, most analysts believe those connections are historic and several believe they were exaggerated. Gilholm said that while the TIP claims did not appear credible, the method and rhetoric used to deliver the threat were worrying in themselves: "Most of those [previous] groups have identified themselves as Uighur separatists, not as part of the wider Islamist terrorist agenda."