In March, as the uprising started in Tibet, I made my first visit to China. I was there to meet writers and translators, to try to understand what are euphemistically called the "challenges" facing my Chinese counterparts.As the crisis escalated, the gap between the accounts given by state media and the stories I was reading on the internet became ever greater. I got used to the television screen going blank every time CNN or the BBC played footage of the torch relay. I used proxies to view sites (including the Guardian) that were blocked by the authorities, and told myself that I was getting a feel for the absurdities of Chinese propaganda - the smiling Han children standing behind the reporter in Lhasa as he described how they'd been traumatised by the Tibetan rioters, the sinister fulminations against the Dalai Lama, the list of client states produced as evidence of "global support" for the Chinese crackdown.What I couldn't understand was the strength of patriotic feeling among ordinary Chinese people - not just those living behind the great firewall, whose access to information was heavily controlled, but international Chinese people living in places where they had every opportunity to learn about the repression, the executions, the torture. They were turning out in huge numbers to support their government, and to decry the anti-Chinese bias of the western news media. Why?I found an answer at the Wu Hou shrine in Chengdu, the city nearest the epicentre of the recent Sichuan earthquake. The shrine is an institution which has no exact parallel in the west, dedicated not to a supernatural deity or an unworldly saint, but to that most secular of things, an administrator. Zhuge Liang (AD181-234) was the prime minister of the Shu Han kingdom, a military strategist, scholar and statesman, whose tactical wisdom has become proverbial. Also known as Wu Hou (Marquis Wu) he's an important character in the Romance of the Three Kingdoms, one of the great Chinese classical novels.Just outside the shrine gate is Chengdu's Tibetan quarter, which at the time of my visit was locked down by riot police. Thousands of uniformed officers were patrolling the area, driving past the shops selling robes and other monastic paraphernalia, watched by sullen locals. Inside the tranquil precinct of the shrine hung inscriptions lauding Wu's many virtues - his insight, his bravery, his diligence, his inventiveness. However, I was struck that he was praised above all for the unity he brought to his people during a period of bloodshed and political turbulence. Again and again I was faced with calligraphic evidence, both ancient and modern, of a deepseated reverence for unity, harmony and territorial integrity. The fear of discord, evident in all cultures, is given cosmological importance in China. The shrine was a monument to the maintenance of political order in times of chaos.On another day, I attended a seminar where I listened to an argument between Howard Goldblatt, one of the most important translators of contemporary Chinese literature, and Jiang Rong, author of Wolf Totem, a hugely successful novel based on the author's experiences in Inner Mongolia, where he was sent during the cultural revolution. The novel describes the relationship between the Mongol herders and Han Chinese settlers who are disrupting the traditional ecology of their homeland. In its opening paragraph, a Mongol and a Han settler are in conversation. Jiang complained that in his version of this dialogue, Goldblatt had translated "Han" simply as "Chinese". This surely implied that the Mongols were not properly Chinese, or that China was in some sense a Han hegemony. Several members of the audience took umbrage at this, detecting sinister political insinuations. Did the westerner wish to imply that China had no legitimate right to the territory of its ethnic minorities? Was this yet another attack on national unity?By now over three million people have watched a bombastic youtube film called "Why Tibet was, is and always will be part of China" . Made by a 22-year-old Chinese Canadian student, it's a good document of Chinese ultra-nationalist sentiment, which sees in western support for Tibetan autonomy, and for human rights more generally, an attempt to undermine the harmony, integrity and unity of China - what in the jargon of the "war on terror" has become known as an "existential threat". Against this must be set voices like that of the novelist Ma Jian, whose recently published Beijing Coma looks set to become the definitive fictional account of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. Ma's unsentimental short stories about Tibet, and his profound disgust with the hypocrisy and cruelty he sees at the heart of the Chinese system have made him persona non grata in his home country, where much of his writing is banned.The spectrum of Chinese opinion is broad, and Western observers would do well to pay closer attention to its diversity. Above all we must accept the profound disconnection between international opinion, which sees respect for human rights as the foundation for a functional society, and that of Chinese nationalists, who view all appeals to human rights as a threat to sovereignty.It's sadly clear that in the era of "humanitarian intervention", there is some justification for this nervousness, as the human rights agenda has been degraded by its use as rhetorical support for US and UK foreign policy aims. I found out in Chengdu that it's not good enough to dismiss Chinese popular nationalism as the result of clever propaganda, let alone brainwashing. Nor can we see human rights as a self-evident set of truths, to which everyone would uncritically assent, were they allowed to do so by their governments. I believe it's vital to carry on making the case for human rights and freedom of expression as forcefully as possible in this Olympic year, but my visit to China showed me that in order to make that case, we need a more sophisticated dialogue, based on greater understanding of Chinese culture and history.• Hari Kunzru will chair Chinese Whispers, an event with Ma Jian, Diane Wei Liang and Liu Hong Cannon at 7pm on June 3 at the Guardian Newsroom, 60 Farringdon Road, London, EC1R 3GA.