How many executions does China carry out each year?Almost three times as many as the rest of the world put together, according to the most conservative estimate by Amnesty International. In 2008, the group confirmed 1,718 executions through news reports and public documents, but many others are not reported. Some analysts say the figure may be above 6,000. The exact number is a state secret.How often are foreigners executed? According to Reprieve, Akmal Shaikh could be the first national from a European Union country to be executed in China in decades. But with few public records, this is hard to confirm.How are executions carried out?There are two possibilities. China is in the process of shifting from death by firing squad to lethal injection. The former can be messy and public affairs. Convicts are taken into a field where crowds watch as they are shot in the back of the head by rifle at short range. Since 1997, however, judicial killings have increasingly been carried out with the same lethal drugs used in the US.What are conditions like on death row?This too is shrouded in secrecy, but the condemned are said to be kept at least part of the time in shackles. Stays tend to be a lot shorter than in other countries. Once a sentence is confirmed, the law states that the execution should be carried out within a week.How worried are the Chinese authorities about drug trafficking?This is one of the few offences that carry a mandatory death sentence. Drug abuse is rising. Heroin is a growing problem, particularly in Xinjiang, near the Afghan border. The heroin trade has dark associations for China. The nationalist Global Times said the case was sensitive "because it brings back the black memory of the opium war started by the British more than a century ago that dragged our country through a lengthy nightmarish period". A Chinese embassy spokesman in the UK also stressed this point: "China has the bitter memory of drug problems, and is still facing severe situations which undermine the social stability," he said.Why didn't the judges accept requests by the defence that Shaikh be evaluated to assess claims that he had bipolar disorder and delusional psychosis?This is the question that will hang over this case and do the most damage to relations between China and the UK. Under Chinese law, punishments can be reduced or voided if criminals are unable to recognise or control their misconduct. Yet this was ignored during Shaikh's initial 30-minute trial. At a second trial, judges were said to have laughed at the erratic 50-minute speech given by Shaikh, but they refused requests by UK consulate-appointed lawyers for a mental examination. By contrast, an American man who killed his Chinese wife a few years ago was given a reduced sentence because the lower court accept that he was a paranoid-schizophrenic. By the time this became an issue in Shaikh's case, it may have been too high-profile for the authorities to do anything without looking like they were backing down.