I'm sorry too that the Chinese have just executed Akmal Shaikh, an apparently mentally ill Briton. He was clearly an expendable drugs mule, cynically exploited by traffickers who are still alive and well today.But I'm also sorry about the international clamour to denounce China, which sounds at least as hypocritical and insensitive as the act itself. Can Gordon Brown and David Cameron – to name but two – hear what they sound like?Let's start with the basics. Most of us (not all) deplore the drugs trade – from cultivation to distribution and sale – which is illegal in most countries (not all) and has spawned a huge and lucrative global industry.Some think the "cure'' – the worldwide campaign against the trade – worse than the disease since it underpins major criminal enterprises on all continents. It has long been the case, though I would personally hesitate to risk legalising it and hoping for the best.Different countries tackle the problem in different ways. China, which has a rising drugs problem as it enters the modern consumer era, is one of those which takes a tough line. As the Guardian's Q&A points out today it is one of the few crimes to attract a mandatory death sentence.Enter poor Akmal Shaikh, who seems to have gone off the rails in middle age after leading a quiet family life as a north London taxi driver. Someone who struck acquaintances as very odd after he emigrated to Poland with grandiose ideas, he falls into bad company which exploits his gullibility.So he ends up landing in Urumqi, northern China, in 2007 and being caught at the airport with 4kg of heroin in his luggage. He told police he knew nothing about it. It's a tragically familiar story and, in his case, it's probably true.In the wake of his execution the Chinese authorities sound quite angry at criticism of their judicial system. Shaikh had a fair trial, complete with interpreter, they say. He was deemed fit to plead.Mental illness? Ah, that's a tricky one. But it's easy to see how the Chinese might take a very different view of how it is defined. So do many jurisdictions – as we all know – on this and many other legal issues: "self defence", "crimes of passion", "third degree homicide", "honour killings", lots of scope for moral relativism in all of them.Reprieve and other admirable campaigns which fight for the rights of prisoners in foreign jurisdictions have the virtue of consistency. Thus they oppose the death penalty wherever it exists, including the US, where it was abolished as a "cruel and unnatural punishment'' in 1972 – and restored in 1976 when the supreme court changed its mind.Though they are pretty half-hearted about it compared with China's 1,700 or so known executions (they are reported to sell body parts for medical use) a year, southern US states are keenest.As governors both George W Bush and Bill Clinton – whom so many of us admire – signed off on questionable executions of vulnerable, marginalised people like Akmal Shaikh. A high proportion of the 3,000 or so Americans on Death Row – few actually executed – are black. Britain? We last executed a man called Peter Allen at Walton jail on 13 August 1964 for murder  – three years before the final abolition of the death penalty.Not so long ago really (our last Etonian PM, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, was in No 10) and, as China's very smart UK ambassador has probably told Beijing, capital punishment still commands as much enthusiasm here 40 years later as it does in China, ie lots.So there's a sovereignty issue. China – like the US – has the right to pass and implement its own laws and governments, governments-in-waiting in Cameron's case, should pause before getting too mouthy. Apparently 27 representations were made to China by Britain over the past two years – mostly quietly, I assume, which is always the best way.But the execution took place during the Christmas news lull: hence the sudden high profile. Thank goodness Ivan Lewis, the junior foreign office minister put up to talk about it today, saidL "I'm not going to make idle threats" – or we might be starting 2010 going to war with China.Talking of which, the really toe-curling fact, of which neither Dr Gordon Brown with his PhD in history, nor David Cameron with his 1st in PPE should be ignorant, is Anglo-Chinese history.When Europeans started forcing the reclusive China of the late Ming and Qing dynasty to open its doors to trade in the 16th and 17th century the visitors wanted more Chinese goods – all that tea, silk and lovely porcelain – than the Chinese wanted of ours.Sounds familiar? What the Chinese would accept was silver, a better bet than the US dollars they now hold in such vast quantities. This was unsustainable and in the 19th century the British East India Company hit on the idea of importing Indian opium to China – though it was banned by imperial Chinese law.I hope you've spotted where I'm heading. If not here's Wiki's starter kit on the Opium Wars of 1839-42 and 1856-60 which culminated in the so-called "unequal treaties" and the eventual overthrow of the Qing in 1912.Result: China was forced to accept the trade with devastating social consequences. In fairness I should add that the stuff was legal in Britain at the time – as readers of Victorian novels can confirm. The Chinese governor Lin Zexu became a hero for opposing the trade – as did young William Gladstone at Westminster.All the same, it is a pretty shameful story. Perhaps it slipped your memory? It certainly hasn't slipped theirs and is still unravelling: they only got Hong Kong back in 1997 and have never rebuilt the burned Summer Palace at Beijing – their Windsor.So, one way or another, poor Akmal Shaikh was the wrong man in the wrong place. But China is likely to be impervious to lectures from Europeans on the morality of the drugs trade.As the world's rising power it's unlikely to be lectured anyway, but that's another story – one we'll rapidly have to get used to. No declaration of war this week, please Ivan.