Thousands of Chinese troops have been airlifted to the disaster zone to search for survivors of Monday's earthquakes, as the death toll continues to mount.Scroll down and refresh for news and reaction. Leave your comments and updates11amThe official death toll has risen to 14,866, according to a news flash on the state-owned Xinhua agency. It is unclear whether this includes the 7,700 confirmed dead in Yingxiu in Wenchuan county, at the epicentre of the quake. A further 18,645 are believed buried under rubble in Mianyang, 60 miles from the epicentre.11.25amState television CCTV broadcasts harrowing scenes from a primary school in Mianyang.11.40amThe Telegraph reports that almost 60,000 people are missing.The confusion about the number of dead and missing is illustrated by the latest update from Xinhua. It reads: "Li Chengyun, vice-governor of Sichuan, said at a news conference that the death toll, based on incomplete figures, tallied 14,463 by 4pm on Wednesday. He said another 14,051 were missing, 25,788 buried in debris, and 64,746 injured."12.10pmNews of the disaster has been spreading rapidly on the microblogging site Twitter and its Chinese equivalents. News is coming via Twiddeo (a new one on me - it appears to be a video sharing/microblogging site). A clip here shows the problems caused by extraordinary landslides.12.25pmTwitter user Starry Forest says there has been an explosion at a chemical works in the city of Dujiangyan, according to a Google translation. 12.45pm100 parachute troops have landed in the cut-off Maoxian county, north-east of the epicentre, according to one of the latest updates from Xinhua, and 50 foreigners stranded in the Wolong panda park have been contacted. 12.55pmA collapsed bridge has left 100,000 people stranded in Sichuan's Beidu mountains, according to Sina.com.1.10pmHundreds of distressing photos of the earthquake and its aftermath have been posted to Flickr [warning: disturbing content].2.10amThe UK's ambassador to China, Sir William Ehrman, has praised China's fast and open response to the disaster. He told Sky News that as many as 100,000 troops have been deployed. 2.15pmJust as Sir William was praising China's openness, it was announced that the authorities have arrested two people for "spreading quake-related rumours" on the internet.One of them is accused of speculating that a department store had collapsed when it hadn't, the other is accused of passing off pictures of crowds running to see the Olympic flame as people fleeing the quake. "Citizens should support the disaster relief work rather than create and spread rumors," ordered Liu Kun from Chongqing Public Security Bureau.2.30pmThere are 70,000 people missing in Wenchuan, Fanfou users 6 Health reports.2.50pm2,000 troops have been sent to plug holes in a dam above Dujiangyan, where 500,000 live.2.55pmEmergency services should continue to look for survivors in the rubble for weeks, according to UK Fire Service Search and Rescue. It also criticises the media for describing the rescue of survivors as "miraculous". In a briefing on Earthquake Rescue it says: "To the trained eye of firefighters and members of urban search and rescue teams, it should be assumed (until proven otherwise) that many collapsed buildings will be honeycombed with void spaces.It adds: "Emergency officials should be planning to pull live victims from the rubble up to three weeks after catastrophic earthquakes, and they should be prepared to sustain non-stop search and rescue operations until all hope of locating viable victims has passed. The public has the right to expect this level of response to devastating quakes."3.30pmTheres are extraordinary before and after pictures of Bei-chuan on this post on Global Voices.3.35pm The Chinese authorities are clearly anxious to impress the foreign media in their response to the earthquake, judging by this clip from the state broadcaster CCTV. For more information on the earthquake, including audio reports, pictures, video and an interactive guide, go here