While promoting Disney hit Maleficent in Shanghai, Angelina Jolie has upset some Chinese people by naming her favourite Chinese director as Ang Lee, who was born in Taiwan."I am not sure if you consider Ang Lee Chinese, he's Taiwanese, but he does many Chinese-language films with many Chinese artists and actors," Jolie said. "I think his works and the actors in his films are the ones I am most familiar with and very fond of."By suggesting that Taiwan and China are totally separate countries, Jolie has angered Chinese communists who feel that Taiwan is a rogue state that belongs to the People's Republic of China (PRC). Taiwan is instead governed by the Republic of China, who were ousted from governing the whole of China in 1949; the PRC doesn't recognise its sovereignty, and claims Taiwan as its own province. Relations are frosty but calm between the two powers, but culturally there remain deep divisions."In a moment of excitement, a brilliant woman became a stupid laughing stock," wrote one user of social media service Weibo, while another described her as a "deranged Taiwan independence supporter". Another suggested that anyone seeing Maleficent would be "traitorious". In Taiwan meanwhile, she received support, with one person writing: "Her comment about Ang Lee being Taiwanese shows she fully deserves to be the goodwill ambassador for the UN. She is not afraid to tell the truth."Her husband Brad Pitt also faced the ire of China after he appeared in the film Seven Years in Tibet, which gave a sympathetic portrayal of the Dalai Lama, who repudiated China's ownership of the region. Pitt was allegedly placed on a travel blacklist that banned him from visiting the country (along with Martin Scorsese following his Tibet film Kundun), though he accompanied Jolie on her current promotional trip.Jolie also appeared in London this week at the End Sexual Violence in Conflict summit, where she met with victims of rape. "I've met survivors and spent time with them. I'd heard their stories and became very emotionally involved and I thought, What can I possibly do to help?" she told Women's Hour on Radio 4. Jolie founded the Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative with foreign secretary William Hague in 2012, and the pair will now launch a set of guidance notes on how to strengthen prosecutions in rape cases from conflict regions.