I wake to near-silence. This is not what I had expected in this city of 20 million. I can hear the tat-tat of builders renovating (and gentrifying) courtyard homes, and the toot-toot of electric bikes as they navigate through the lanes.We are living in one of the 22 remaining hutongs in Beijing. The word means water well in Mongolian – a linguistic remnant of the centuries when Beijing passed between several rulers. Life on these streets has probably not changed all that much in 800 years: there is a local market, a man squats with his tools as he fixes bicycles, pigeons jostle in their coops, and there are public toilets for the older homes without sanitation.Our siheyuan (literally four-sided courtyard) is hidden behind a plain red door, but opens into a little oasis where three generations would have shared the common space but which is divided into the rooms around the courtyard. A Chinese date tree drops its sweet red fruit on to the rooftop terrace where we sit for breakfast each morning. I could be lost in this history, but through the ever-present haze of air pollution I can see modern China at the end of my street.I love these hutong mornings. Recently, we have added a new menu option to our breakfast. Instead of our usual fresh pork and chive dumplings and yoghurt in clay pots – to be drunk in situ and returned to the stallholder immediately – we are trying another hole-in-the-wall eatery. It is inconspicuous, but always attracts a long queue. We gesture at the cook's pots and speak in our "survival" Mandarin, and are soon sitting at the tiny roadside tables to enjoy a western Chinese broth with tofu balls, accompanied by warm, sweet buns. This comforting and filling meal costs us a couple of dollars.This simplicity and affordability are a contrast, however, with the European cars that edge their way through these narrow streets.There is a huge irony in the fact that after the painful years of Mao's attempts to achieve equality, the disparity of wealth here is now extreme. Luxury cars are plentiful in Beijing, while in the same streets labourers sleep beside the building sites where they work in makeshift shelters made of plastic sheeting stretched over bamboo structures.Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com