All revolutions are fragile coalitions. The people unite against a government they hate, and then, all too often, they proceed to fall out over what they want in its place. That, unhappily, is what is happening in Egypt today, and all those who have power and influence in that country need to be shocked into the realisation that they collectively bear the heavy responsibility of pulling the country back on to an agreed path. Agreed, not because agreement is an end in itself, but because agreement at such a juncture in a nation's history is vital if the future is not to be a repetition of the flawed past.Leave aside for a moment the rights and wrongs of the legal arguments over the manoeuvrings in the constituent assembly and the courts, and the controversies over who triggered the violence, who died and who was most to blame. What is indisputable is that most responsibility for rescuing the situation lies with those who have most power, which is to say that it lies with President Mohamed Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood, the political movement from which he has emerged and the one which, for a variety of reasons, has since Mubarak's fall had more of a say in Egyptian politics than any other. What is now beginning to be called "the opposition" bears a responsibility, too, but it is a lesser one, if only because they have less power.The essential problem of Egypt's post-revolutionary politics has been that the forces which played the greater role in bringing down the Mubarak regime, which is to say liberals, secular Egyptians and middle-class youth, could not translate that into success at the polls. The Brotherhood, which had been in second place on the streets, took first place when the time came for voting. It was more organised, disciplined and united, and it had earned the loyalty and respect of many ordinary Egyptians over many years of patient political and social work. The outlines of the grand bargain which could resolve this contradiction, between the mandate of the streets and the mandate of the polls, were clear. The Brotherhood would prove its claim to be a modern and democratic political movement by reaching out to accommodate the values of more secular Egyptians and to soothe their fears, while the secular forces would accept that an Islamist party would for the foreseeable future be the main pillar of the new republic. There needed, too, to be a second, overlapping bargain between those who believe in the Egyptian tradition of a strong state, and those who want a freer, looser, less regulated nation. Both bargains implied that the Brotherhood not press too hard the advantage of its majority, whether at the level of the presidency, parliament or constituent assembly.Unfortunately, that is exactly what it is perceived to have done. The withdrawal of liberals and Christians from the constituent assembly, the resignations of some of Morsi's key advisers, the appearance, and perhaps the reality, that the president consulted unelected senior members of the Brotherhood rather than his own cabinet when he made the decisions that have led to the present unrest – all these suggest a leader, and a movement, which has lost sight of the need to bring along the whole spectrum of the forces which made the revolution. Some of it, but far from all, can be put down to inexperience, some to the unwillingness of elements of the opposition to compromise and, perhaps, in a few quarters, to a hope of unseating the president.None of it can be ascribed to the machinations of outside forces. The "foreign hand", Morsi should remember, is the last resort of the unscrupulous, or irrational, politician everywhere. His withdrawal of his controversial decree is not going to be enough to restore the calm and the trust Egypt needs, as the opposition's rejection on Sunday of the constitutional referendum proposal showed. He should now be exploring what will be enough – and working to convince the alienated that the constitution whose making is at the core of this crisis will not be a winner's document but a charter that all Egyptians can accept.