Nearly two years on, the revolution in Egypt has reached exactly that point it should have tried at all costs to avoid – a deep and perhaps insurmountable divide between two forces that both claim to be its sole inheritors. Mohamed Morsi's supporters say that after months of obstructionism, boycott and delay, and a constitutional court about to undo all his actions, the Egyptian president had no choice but to push through a final constitutional draft, which halves his power as president and which anyway will be put to the popular vote.His opponents – secular, liberal and Christian – united as never before by what they see as an Islamist power grab – scream: "Hands off our revolution." Both can put thousands on to the streets, as we saw this weekend and will see again this week.The first point to make is that the process has been more contentious than the result. Human Rights Watch called the constitutional draft both flawed and contradictory in that it provided for basic protections against arbitrary detention but failed to end military trials for civilians. But it noted that the final draft dropped the stipulation that equality for women should be subject to conformity with the rulings of Islamic law – a provision promoted by the Salafis. However, there is some broad wording justifying limitations on key human rights, which appear to place the "true nature of the Egyptian family" above and beyond them.It is a mixed bag, and, like so much of this debate, contingent on future interpretation. But does this draft merit walkouts, months of paralysis, or indeed a constitutional court decision annulling the drafting committee itself? It is not clear that it does. No country, let alone a bankrupt one, can tolerate an endless merry-go-round of partisan court decisions. There is no doubt that the constitutional court's original annulment of the whole of the Islamist-dominated parliament – when the objections were to only one portion of the seats – suited the supreme military council's purposes. And there was nothing to assume the court would not have annulled the constituent assembly that was appointed by that parliament, rendering the draft invalid as well. Both sides have forgotten what happened 22 months ago when Egyptians put aside their sectarian identities on entering Tahrir Square, and waved the national flag instead. In the name of that flag, those who claim to be democrats need to rediscover the long forgotten art of compromise.