Egypt's heir-apparent, Gamal Mubarak, seems, on the face of it, to be an ideal ally for the US and western governments. A western-oriented economic reformer, he espouses free-market capitalism in a country that was ruled by socialism for decades.Egypt's economic growth rate rose by 4-7% between 2002 and 2008 – in response to Gamal's appointment to the ruling National Democratic party's (NDP) general secretariat in 2000, and promotion to head of the policy secretariat in 2002. The formation of prime minister Ahmed Nazif's cabinet (with several members close to Gamal) was also a factor. The World Bank's publication Doing Business named Egypt the world's top global reformer for 2007 for its liberalisation policies.Indirect democracy promotion, by supporting economic development, has been the new trend in American Middle East policy, especially after the direct pressure for democratisation in 2004-05 was linked to a growing Islamist threat. The hope in some US circles now is that Gamal-led economic reform will eventually prompt political reform, since a wealthier, well-educated population is more likely to demand democracy.However, there are profound risks surrounding this assumption. It's unrealistic to predict an improved quality of life in a country where corruption prevails.According to Transparency International – which ranks Egypt 115th out of 180 countries in its 2008 Corruption Perception Index – "corruption in Egypt is pervasive and … has infiltrated all aspects of … society."A 2007 poll conducted for the cabinet recorded that 75% of Egyptians say corruption is prevalent. Public opinion singles out the ties between the regime and businessmen. With Gamal's entry into political life, a group of businessmen gained momentum – many got appointed to senior positions in the NDP or became ministers in the cabinet, labelled "Gamal's cabinet" in opposition papers.Incidents such as the 2006 sinking of an overcrowded ferry in the Red Sea, where a thousand Egyptians died, symbolise for many Egyptians "the corruption and cronyism that mingles between the government … and well-connected businessmen", the LA Times reported in March. "The ferry owner … was a Mubarak appointee to … parliament, and was related to the owner of a company licensed by the state to inspect the safety of ships." He was later allowed to leave the country.Although he is not directly related to or empowered by Gamal, other businessmen accused of corruption are. The steel tycoon Ahmed Ezz, a member of parliament and the policy committee known for his closeness to Gamal, came under fire for modifying an anti-monopoly bill for the benefit of "his monopolistic steel conglomerate, which he had built by acquiring a state-owned steel manufacturer allegedly at a fraction of its real value", according to the liberal opposition leader, Wael Nawara. He wrote last month that "corruption reached new heights as many members of the NDP policy committee reaped the rewards for their loyalty to Mubarak Junior".Nazif defends the role of businessmen in his cabinet: "Businessmen have the privilege of mixing administrative experience with a forward-looking and global mentality," he stated in a 2007 parliamentary speech, citing as evidence the increase in economic indicators, such as the GDP.This increase is paradoxical, however, because it is accompanied by a growth in poverty. "The proportion of Egyptians living in absolute poverty has risen despite relatively rapid economic growth this decade," Reuters reported in 2007.Thus the neoliberal economic reforms led by Gamal and his aides have harmed ordinary Egyptians and benefited well-connected entrepreneurs – 20% of Egyptians own 80% of the country's wealth, according to the United Nations human development report.The opposition attributes poverty to the corruption of some of Gamal's aides. And they warn that the gap is widening between the two worlds of Gamal and elitists allied to him, and the millions of marginalised Egyptians.The isolation of Gamal's circle was signified by a recent controversial statement by Ezz – that the increasing numbers of cars and cell phones in the country indicate that Egyptians are living in luxury. He failed to mention the 43% of Egyptians are living on under $2 a day.This figure was revealed in the 2009 Arab Human Development Report (pdf), along with other shocking facts – such as a 28.6% illiteracy rate. This discredits Gamal's economic vision and undermines the assumption that his succession to Hosni Mubarak can improve Egyptians' quality of life, leading them to demand their right to democracy.Even if Egypt's democratisation is no longer a priority to Washington, the junior Mubarak is leading the country along a path that is increasing risks of instability.Egyptians' dismay is growing: 73% view the economic situation as bad, and 41% think it will worsen, according to a 2009 Pew report (pdf). The past few years have witnessed clear signs of popular anger, such as the labour strikes now frequently held. And the regime's crackdown on opposition continues unabated, threatening to leave only extreme Islamist conservatism as a political alternative (It is the Saudi dictatorship that bred Bin Laden.).It is unclear if Gamal is accepted by the military – from where Hosni Mubarak and his predecessors came. Some analysts fear that Gamal's rise could trigger dangerous resistance from the military, who would see their influence being challenged by a peaceful succession, marking the beginning of a new era of civilian rule.Also to the junior Mubarak's credit would be his relative open-mindedness due to his western education – this and his relative youth can win him popularity among young people. Then again, unemployment and poverty are deepening the alienation of many young Egyptians, hundreds of whom have drowned in illegal immigration attempts: while millions pursue legal immigration. They have no hope for their future in a country they find to be doomed to corruption, suffering, and authoritarianism.A country in such conditions cannot be deeply and truly helpful to the US, and unless the Obama administration takes a reasonable stance in this regard, its interests in the Middle East's most populous country are under threat.