On a sweltering night shortly before the start of Ramadan, the Muslim Brotherhood convened a political rally in the Nile Delta town of Shibin El-Kom. Most Cairenes wouldn't even drive through the capital of Monufia province unless they had family there. Agriculture is the only business in this marshy area at the start of the maze of canals and river branches that marks Egypt's breadbasket. The peasants, or fellaheen, who till the land are religious, nationalistic and socially conservative. The elites who rule Egypt have their roots in such places – the previous two presidents, Hosni Mubarak and Anwar Sadat, were born in Monufia – but once in power dismiss them as backwaters. Among the nation's power players, though, the Muslim Brothers are an exception; their leadership comes largely from the educated working classes and boasts an easy familiarity with the fellaheen.The rally in Shibin El-Kom officially launched the parliamentary election campaign of the Muslim Brotherhood's new political wing, the Freedom And Justice party. Informally, the Islamists were striving to distinguish themselves from the revolutionaries who had upended the country's crusty political order in January and who were again occupying Tahrir Square – and naming the Muslim Brotherhood among their counter-revolutionary enemies. Activists had set up a utopian tent city in Cairo's central plaza, trumpeting their vision for a civil state and decrying the fact that half a year after Mubarak's resignation the nation was still governed by a military dictatorship. After a month in the square, however, they were drawing fewer people every day, their message drowning in a stream of dictates from an increasingly nasty Military Council and criticism from increasingly acerbic Islamists.The scene couldn't have looked more different in the Delta. The Brotherhood had selected for its rally a dirt track off the town's main bypass. Several thousand people, mostly professionals, merchants or farmers, came with their families; volunteers were encouraged to donate blood at ambulances. On stage, party leaders paid tribute to the local families of the martyrs of the revolution – protesters killed in January and February – then moved on to business. A women's committee chief outlined the jobs women held in the party; a farmer spoke about its agricultural cooperatives. Finally, party head Mohammed Morsy gave a rousing speech. "The people gave their revolution to the military to protect," he thundered. "The only legitimacy in this country today comes from the people." In closing, he ordered his audience to demonstrate the party's discipline and breadth in their neighbourhoods – by picking up the garbage.Six months after Mubarak surrendered to millions of Egyptians, the same generals still rule. Arbitrary detention and allegations of torture are commonplace, if less widespread than before. State media still demonises critics of the junta, and the military – without public consultation – will decide exactly what process is supposed to lead to democratic elections and a civilian government. Reformers and revolutionaries fear the military, stronger now than under Mubarak, will outmanoeuvre them. And they fear Islamists will sweep the elections and control the writing of a new constitution, leading to a democratic Egypt that's neither secular nor liberal.In short, the problem is this: idealistic revolutionaries dream of an Arab democracy that reflects popular values but opens its arms to Muslims, Christians and people who want a secular state. But they look outgunned by the religious right, which wants majority rule, and whose force was apparent on the last Friday in July when a million people flooded Tahrir Square demanding "Islamic state, not civil". Above the fray, the generals rejoiced: the more profound the divisions between Islamist and secular opposition, the better for them.The summertime scenes in Tahrir Square belie the sense that the revolution is increasingly marginalised and under threat. At its core, the revolution represents a force that is much more willing to criticise authority, and tolerate diversity, than perhaps mainstream public opinion. The original throngs that fought riot police drew on at least three major and messily overlapping constituencies. First were the activists – organisers of all political and religious stripes who had come to trust each other over years of strikes, tiny protests and mass arrests. Second were the politicised people previously afraid to challenge the regime but who brought to the protests a distinct agenda – labour unionists, socialists, liberal NGO workers and more conservative religious activists. Finally, there were the hundreds of thousands of angry and apolitical Egyptians sick of Mubarak's police state.The protesters who flooded Tahrir Square until Mubarak resigned on 11 February never returned in quite the same numbers. Since that day, the military junta has balked at any significant reform. Only after massive protests in the spring did it reluctantly agree to schedule parliamentary elections this autumn, and to postpone writing a new constitution until an elected civilian government was in place. More importantly, Mubarak remained at large until crowds returned to Tahrir and the military finally ordered his arrest. He then lived in comfort in a new hospital in Sharm el-Sheikh until renewed outcry prompted authorities to begin his trial, which many suspect might still end up a whitewash.This pattern of military recalcitrance and renewed protest has exhausted the revolutionary movement and strained its camaraderie. Some activists, like the street-savvy leaders of the 6 April movement, whose roots lie in working-class labour strikes, have sought to keep the focus on protesters' key demands and away from politics. Others, like the founders of new centrist parties, fret that all the time squatting in tents in Tahrir could be better spent campaigning."I'm afraid we're losing the people," says Moaz Abd El-Kareem, a 29-year-old pharmacist who cut his teeth as a teenage street activist for the Muslim Brotherhood. In recent years he has made common cause with friends such as Sally Moore, a Coptic Christian socialist, secular labour activists, and political veterans, and in January he defied the Brotherhood leadership to help lead the initial protests. In spring he went even further, founding a new party, the Egyptian Current, with a disaffected group of Brotherhood youth leaders who believe in a civil rather than a religious state. They promised members would determine the party platform in a grassroots democratic process. Thousands signed up – and found themselves joining a party that had no officials, goals or leaders, because its members hadn't had a chance to vote. When Tahrir was reoccupied last month, the Egyptian Current leadership decamped there, ineffectually preaching to the converted. "We have to be here," Abd El-Kareem says. "We can't be anywhere else. We're the revolution, after all."Tahrir Square in July, before most of the protesters gave up for Ramadan and the die-hards were chased out by the military, had a desultory air, a siege mentality. The political leaders, such as Abd El-Kareem, had little in common with the intellectual youth setting up impromptu schools for street kids, who fought with the tea sellers and pedlars they accused of stirring up violence and working as police informants. Hundreds of self-appointed security men patrolled the square, warning of infiltrators and sometimes stripping and beating suspects; veteran demonstrators began to suspect that they were agents provocateurs dispatched by the state, or simply hooligans with nothing better to do. And as the Egyptian Current and other prime activists have policed these disputes, their rivals have been busy marshalling public opinion and plotting to take the lion's share of the next parliament.What is the Egyptian revolution now? Who speaks for it? Egypt these days is anyone's game, and everyone claims the mantle of 25 January, no matter what his agenda. One thing that's clear is that the military is in charge. When General Mamdouh Shaheen announced the opaque rules governing the parliamentary elections, he dismissed both critical questions from journalists – asking who the generals had consulted and how the integrity of the vote could be assured in a country where vote buying and fraud have long been endemic – and complaints from political parties that the rules were confusing. "We decided what's best for the country, and acted on it," he said with a smirk.The exchange bodes poorly for long-term reform, and the problem is twofold. First, the military feels entitled to write the script for the transition away from Mubarak, and it has mostly illiberal interests: a vast empire of businesses, most of which have nothing to do with national security; the privilege of unfettered power; and a belief that only the military is a disinterested custodian of the nation. Second, the military council seems genuinely to believe that the protests arise from a disgruntled minority, and are largely the work of foreign spies – a propaganda line whose impact can be seen in the growing xenophobia among the wider public and the wary eye protesters turn on international aid groups. The military has banned international election observers, told banks to report any international money transfers to NGOs and activists, and recently accused the 6 April youth movement of being a pawn of foreigners.On 23 July, in the first demonstration aimed directly at the military, a group of revolutionary protesters set off to march on the defence ministry. Counter-demonstrators attacked, more than 300 were injured, and military police appeared to stand by as organised groups of plainclothes thugs took after the demonstrators.That showdown led quickly to the fizzling of the month-long occupation of Tahrir. The protesters had vowed to stay until their demands were met, but when the Muslim Brotherhood bowed out, there never seemed to be enough people to hold the square and when, on the last Friday in July, the Islamists organised their own million-man march, the secular revolutionaries went home.Yet it's far too early to caricature the revolution as a lost cause. Mubarak's trial is a case in point. The Egyptian people remain united in their desire, as car parts dealer Nasr Abbas says, to see Mubarak hanging in Tahrir Square; the military seems determined to spare its former leader. Thus his appearance in court last week, on a hospital bed, in a cage like every other humiliated defendant in the Egyptian justice system, gratified public opinion. Many revolutionaries worry the military will stage a show trial that lets him off lightly, but it's clear the military wanted to avoid this moment entirely.Abbas embodies the frustrating challenge of public opinion. He's not educated, and he works hard for a pittance. He supports the revolution and mistrusts the military, brushing off its fear-mongering that crime is spiking and the economy collapsing. "The people were like a genie in a bottle," he says. "Now we are free. It's like planting a tree. We've put down the seed. It will take time."That's exactly what Abd El-Kareem and the other dreamers want to hear, as they start political parties that will take years to bear fruit and draft plans for popular sovereignty over the military and state. But Abbas, 53, isn't some liberal; he thinks Israel and America are plotting to recolonise Egypt, and derides Mohamed ElBaradei, the presidential candidate, as a Jewish agent. On the one hand, he embraces the revolution and swift punishment for Mubarak and his cronies; on the other, he wants a nationalist strongman as leader – someone like Gamal Abdel Nasser, the military officer whose 1952 coup ushered in the modern era of Egyptian martial rule.A few days before the Islamist rally in Shibin El-Kom, the Social Democrats held their own inaugural rally in Kafr El-Sheikh, another Nile Delta farming town. Bassem Kamel, an architect in his early 40s with a round baby face and a disarming smile, is a newcomer to politics and with his unpolished enthusiasm headlined the rally. At its largest, there were 150 people. One local supporter, an engineer and artist named Khaled El Barky, voiced the fear that already the liberal revolutionaries were out of touch. "They still don't know how to work with people in the street. Here in the Delta, people face economic hardship and they don't like change."It was impossible to avoid comparing the sparse attendance at the Social Democrats' meeting with the crowds at Islamist events. The Muslim Brotherhood has repeatedly sharpened its message and tactics since its founding in 1928; the revolutionary liberals are making it up as they go along, struggling to articulate a yearning for something better. They have the best intentions, but theirs is a long game and by the time their seeds have taken root, a new government – one elected in a climate of military dominance and Islamist ascendance – will have written Egypt's next constitution and seated its first civilian post-Mubarak government.On stage, Kamel was exhorting his small audience. "We have such a horrible government but such talented youth. Every time I see them, I renew my optimism." After, in the party's new branch office, he talked of recruits and candidate lists."This was a great beginning," he said at midnight as he finally got in a car for the ride back to Cairo. "Now I have to go back to Tahrir."• Egypt: What now? - in pictures.