Omar Suleiman is the man to watch when it comes to Egypt's most sensitive national security interests. But President Hosni Mubarak's trusted intelligence chief prefers the shadows to the limelight as he tries to manage the dangerous conflict between Israel and the Palestinians — and its alarming propensity to spread trouble elsewhere.General Suleiman, 73, is bald and moustachioed and despite his military bearing has a penchant for discreet dark suits and striped ties. In 1995 he saved the president's life during an assassination attempt in Ethiopia. Now he is working quietly behind the scenes to keep the violent crisis in the Gaza Strip from exploding again - as it did so spectacularly in January with a mass breakout onto Egyptian soil. Prospects for success are not looking good — and the frustration is starting to show.Three months ago, with hundreds of thousands of Palestinians pouring through a breach blown in the border fence, and the pace of events being set by the Islamists of Hamas – blockaded by Israel, the US and the international community - Cairo could only watch helplessly.Mubarak's initial response was to allow the Gaza escapees to stock up on food and fuel on the Egyptian side of the divided border town of Rafah and in El Arish, the capital of Sinai. But the mood hardened rapidly and a crackdown followed, with angry accusations that the Palestinians, some of them armed, were not only abusing Egypt's "hospitality" but endangering its security. "It was a disturbing wake-up call," says analyst Ezzedine Choukri of the International Crisis Group. "It was a reminder of the limits of Egypt's ability to influence Hamas." It also, in the words of one foreign diplomat, "reinforced just how dangerous it would be" if – as the Israelis mischievously suggest – Egypt was forced to take back responsibility for Gaza, which it ruled from 1948 until its occupation in the 1967 war. "It certainly concentrated minds in Cairo."One result is that a 13-foot-high concrete and rock wall is now in place in the middle of Rafah, with Egyptian policemen manning watchtowers every 100 metres and plainclothes security agents working overtime to keep tabs on the locals. Another is that deliveries of certain goods have been banned to remove any incentive for another exodus.Within a few weeks Egyptian teams will be operating specialised US equipment to detect and destroy the tunnels used to bring supplies, money and weapons into Gaza – the subject of heavy diplomatic pressure by Israel and some nasty spats between Cairo and Jerusalem.The mission facing Suleiman is threefold: to secure a "tahdiya" – a period of calm that halts both Hamas rocket fire and Israeli attacks but falls short of a formal ceasefire; to promote reconciliation between Hamas and Mahmoud Abbas's Palestinian Authority in Ramallah, which Cairo still sees as the legitimate Palestinian government; and to re-open the Gaza border crossings — vital to relieve the catastrophic humanitarian crisis in the strip."It's mission impossible," admits a senior Egyptian official, "but we keep trying to convince both sides that this is the only way out." Israel, the Egyptians complain, make things difficult by attaching vague conditions designed to stop Hamas building up its military strength during a ceasefire. (There is particular concern that it might get hold of anti-aircraft weapons as well as longer-range rockets). And Hamas is demanding that any cessation of hostilities must include the West Bank, where the Israelis insist on maintaining their freedom of action. "Hamas are being greedy," said the official. "And there's a thin line between being greedy and torpedoing the whole thing."Egypt's approach is strictly pragmatic — reflecting its real anxiety about the fate of the 1.5 million Palestinians living in desperation next door. Yet Cairo has made no secret of its dislike for Hamas since it won the 2006 elections. "Overnight, across the border from us, three and half hours from Cairo, there was this extremist government that some of its leaders even called an Islamic Emirate," recalled Hassan Issa, who negotiated the final details of Israel's withdrawal from Sinai after the 1979 peace treaty.The ties between Hamas and the banned Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood — the most powerful opposition movement in the country — are a source of special irritation to the government. It reacted badly when Khaled Mashal, the Hamas leader in Damascus, phoned Mehdi Akef, the Brotherhood's "supreme guide", during the January crisis. And it was furious last week when Hamas hinted that anger at the siege of Gaza could explode across the border again. This, fumed Cairo, was "blackmail", suggesting that the idea was linked to bread riots and strikes in the Nile Valley.Mubarak is getting the worst of both worlds: he does nothing to promote a relationship with Israel and says he will only visit Jerusalem – like his predecessor Anwar Sadat in 1977 – when there is peace with the Palestinians. Ordinary Egyptians are actively discouraged from travelling there. Egyptian newspapers regularly publish articles and cartoons that blur the distinction between hostility to Israel and outright anti-semitism. Antipathy to Israel is as strong in Egyptian liberal and leftwing circles as it is among Islamists. Yet the freedom to attack it has done nothing to defuse criticism of Mubarak's shortcomings vis a vis the Palestinians."Egypt is involved in the Palestinian issue but it is impotent and this impotence is part of the problem that the state is facing internally and externally," argues one veteran Cairo analyst. "The regime is stagnant. The president was cautious when he was 30. Now he's almost 80 and his willingness to try new things is limited. We pretend we are doing things but in reality we just linger."Mohammed Sayyid Said, editor of the left-wing opposition paper al-Badil, is harsher. "Mubarak has been blackmailed and has jumped onto the Israeli bandwagon to get credit from the Americans and reduce the pressure to democratise at home. Now the Palestinians are not really Egypt's allies any more." This view is shared by Abdel-Wahhab al-Massiri of the opposition Kefaya movement. "The Egyptian government has lost its role as the centre of Arab unity," he complains. "The American government just dictates and they buckle under its pressure."Even for a legendary backroom operator like Omar Suleiman, this is a tough environment in which to defuse the ticking Palestinian time bomb in Egypt's backyard.