Eleven European tourists and eight local guides kidnapped 10 days ago in Egypt have been rescued by troops and special forces, officials said today.The five Germans, five Italians and one Romanian were rescued in an overnight operation by Egyptian and Sudanese forces near the Sudan-Chad border, an Egyptian security official said.The Egyptian defence minister, Hussein Tantawi, said half of the kidnappers were killed in the rescue operation, according to the state news agency Mena. The report did not give a precise number or details on the rescue.The Italian foreign minister, Franco Frattini, suggested Italian and German special forces were involved. He told the Sky TG24 news channel that Sudan and Egypt carried out "a highly professional operation" with the "intervention of Italian intelligence and experts from the special forces" from Germany and Italy.The tourists and local guides and drivers were taken to Cairo and were understood to be in good health.The group disappeared on September 19 while on a desert safari trip in a remote corner of south-western Egypt. The breakthrough in the hunt for the tourists came yesterday when Sudanese forces in north-western Sudan fought a gun battle against a group of the kidnappers who had been sent out to get fuel and food, the Egyptian security official said. Six kidnappers were killed in that fight, and two captured. The two told the authorities where the rest of the kidnappers and their captives were hiding, the official said.The Sudanese and Egyptian militaries, using two helicopters, launched the assault that freed the captives, two security officials said. One said there was an exchange of fire and that the hostages were freed inside Chadian territory, but there was no confirmation of where exactly the assault took place. Yesterday, a Sudanese military spokesman, Sawarmy Khaled, said Sudanese soldiers had been combing the Jebel Oweinat region near the Libyan border when they came upon a white sports utility vehicle carrying eight gunmen."The armed forces called for it to stop, but they did not respond and there was pursuit in which six of the armed men were killed," he said. The dead included the leader of the group, whom Khaled identified as a Chadian named Bakhit.German officials had been negotiating with the kidnappers, who were demanding millions of dollars in ransom, according to Egyptian officials, while Sudanese and Egyptian forces were searching for the abducted group.The kidnappers were believed to be desert tribesmen. Tour operators working in Egypt's western desert have reported several robberies of tourists in the area by heavily armed gunmen in SUVs and expressed fears that the violence could be a spillover from the conflicts in eastern Chad and Darfur.The vast majority of Egypt's 9 million tourists each year visit pharaonic sites along the Nile or Red Sea beach resorts, far from the Western Desert and the Gilf al-Kebir. The Gilf, a desert plateau 500 miles south-west of Cairo, draws adventure tourists with its sand dunes and desert cliffs, as well as a trove of prehistoric cave art. Around 2,000 tourists visited the area in the past year, up from only a handful less than a decade ago.