Thousands of Gazans have rushed to the southern border in past week since Egypt said it would open the Rafah crossing daily following international pressure to relax the blockade of the tiny Palestinian territory.For many who have been penned into Gaza by walls and fences, Israeli gunboats at sea and drones overhead, it has been longed-for opportunity to reconnect with the outside world.Streams of taxis have deposited countless loads of people and luggage at the first checkpoint. Once through that, there is a long and frustrating process, with the Egyptians determining who and how many are permitted to cross the border.The Egyptian authorities have restricted passage to Gazans who also hold foreign passports, those needing medical treatment and those trying to pursue studies abroad. No Hamas official is allowed to cross.For the most part, people are waiting, sometimes for two or three days, with impressive stoicism. "The process is very slow from the Egyptian side," said Adel Zoub, spokesman for Gaza's borders and crossings authority. "People feel tired and exhausted by the waiting."Egypt has reportedly said the border will be open permanently. No one on the Gaza side had any idea if that was correct."We have no information on how long Rafah will be open," said senior Hamas figure Ghazi Hamad, director of the crossings authority. "Only God and Egypt know that."The Guardian spoke to several of those waiting in the queue:Samira Damemlji is crammed with her husband, five children and a pile of luggage into a taxi, waiting to get over the first hurdle on the obstacle course out of Gaza.Before she even gets to the border with Egypt, she needs permission from Hamas officials to cross a checkpoint to the area where hundreds of Palestinians are hoping to board buses heading south.In the late afternoon heat, with the children becoming fractious after three hours of waiting, Samira is resigning herself to return to her home in Middle Camps to try again the next day.Originally from Algeria, Samira is desperate to attend her brother's wedding there next month. She has not seen any of her family for two years. "It's very important for me to see my family," she says as her youngest, a six-month-old boy who has yet to see beyond the walls and fences that surround Gaza, grizzles in her lap. "We don't know how long we'll have to wait. Maybe today, maybe tomorrow."The children are bored with waiting, she says, and are "becoming aggressive".Samira has lived in Gaza for 12 years, since marrying a Palestinian man. "I would like Gaza to be open all the time," she says, adding that the psychological problems the siege brings are the hardest thing to deal with.She is not hopeful about the blockade being lifted under pressure from other countries. "Israel is a superpower," she says. "They don't care about international opinion."Is she worried about whether she will be able to return to Gaza once she finally crosses into Egypt? She laughs. "To come back is easier than to get out."A chic teenager, sporting sunglasses with a diamante motif beneath her bright headscarf, Kholoud Jwefil sits with nine members of her family on plastic chairs in the sand, waiting with remarkable patience, given that they have been here for 12 hours.Kholoud is hoping to see her extended family, who fled to Cairo during Israel's war of independence in 1948.The wait, since 5am, has not dimmed her excitement. Cairo, which she visited a year ago on a rare excursion from Gaza represents "freedom", she says in English. "There are wonderful places that children can visit. And the electricity is on all the time." The daily power cuts of eight hours' duration are, she says, the worst thing about the blockade of Gaza.As a young man hawks bags of nuts from a plastic crate, Kholoud says: "It's hard growing up in Gaza. We cannot live as children do elsewhere."She has set her sights on leaving permanently. "I want to study in America. I love America – it's a wonderful country and culture." English and business studies would be her preferred subjects. "I'd like to have my own business, but it cannot succeed here so I need to go abroad." More than 80% of Gaza's businesses have collapsed in the past three years as a result of the siege.But that, for now, is a dream. Reality is trying to escape Gaza temporarily. "No one is telling us whether to wait or whether to come back tomorrow." Another long day sitting in the sand of Rafah seems in prospect.For Jayzia and Mohammed Zomlot, it is their first trip out of Gaza. But the occasion is not a happy one: Jayzia has breast cancer and the couple are leaving behind their four young children to seek treatment in Cairo.The cancer was diagnosed six months ago and their doctors urged them to leave Gaza for the medical treatment Jayzia needs.They first tried Israel, knowing of its world class hospitals. The Israelis refused permission.Now they are staking their hopes on the Rafah crossing staying open long enough to allow them through."Of course it will be good to have time outside Gaza," says Mohammed. "But we're going for medical reasons. We're leaving because there aren't enough drugs and medical equipment here. If it wasn't for that I wouldn't go – I like Gaza."Jayzia has been in some discomfort while waiting for permission to cross, but after a while she is taken to a waiting ambulance to make the short journey into Egypt.Her children will be in the care of their grandmother for at least two months while she undergoes tests and surgery. It was sad saying goodbye to them, she says."They are willing their mother to come back to them in good health," says Mohammed.Ayaat Saleh, a shy girl waiting with her mother and two of her brothers, is excited about seeing her father for only the third time in her seven years.He has worked in a factory in Algeria for the past 10 years, and has three grown-up sons living with him. The family, already split between Gaza and Algeria, faces further separation for the next two months as two older girls are staying behind.Ayaat last saw her father a year ago and the only previous occasion was four years before that.She says life for children in Gaza is hard. "There are no places to play and often there is no electricity." Algeria, she admits, is pretty similar: "But it's better because my father is there."Her mother, Um Mkhaled, 41, has grown used to the family separation, but says it is hard for the children. "The father is the main person in a family," she says. "The children would be better behaved if there father was here, and would do better at school. We don't know how long he'll stay there."Struggling on crutches through the Rafah departure terminal, Nael Natour, is making his journey to Egypt alone. His mother, father and sister were killed in 2006 by the Israeli missile which also took Nael's right leg. The one surviving member of his immediate family, a brother, is staying behind.Nael needs a prosthetic limb fitted. There are an estimated 6,000 amputees in Gaza, nearly all a result of military assaults by Israel, and an acute shortage of prosthetic aids.The Arab Doctors Union is sponsoring his trip, says Nael, but he has no details beyond a first appointment in a Cairo hospital whose name he cannot remember.He will be away for at least a month, and hopes to resume school when he returns. "Jobs are very hard to find in Gaza," he says.He is philosophical about his injury. "I've got used to having only one leg. But of course I feel hatred deep inside towards Israel for killing my family."Clutching an envelope of x-rays and his prayer beads, Fathi Nahhal is trying to leave Gaza for the first time in 24 years to get medical treatment for a spine condition. He needs an operation, which he is afraid to have done in Gaza."Treatment in Egypt is better than in Gaza," he says. "There is not enough equipment and drugs and the doctors are not as professional." It has got much worse since the tightening of the blockade three years ago, he says.It was the second time he had tried to leave this week, waiting from 7am until 4pm only to be refused permission by the Egyptian authorities. "I will get through today, inshallah," he says.Amneh Khater is waiting with her son, daughter-in-law and two grandsons to get out of "the big prison"."Gaza is our home but we don't have the freedom to leave. We want to be able to go wherever and whenever we want," she says.The Khater family were also here the day before, waiting from 5am until 1pm. "But we weren't chosen," she says.They want to visit Amneh's brothers in Cairo and also obtain treatment for a knee problem which makes it hard for her to stand and walk. She is also hoping to get an Egyptian passport while there – "I have done all the paperwork – which would make exit from Gaza easier in the future.But, she insists, she doesn't want to move to Cairo. "Palestine is my home," she says.The cancer that attacked Tariq Lubbad's kidneys six years ago, causing him to have part of one removed, needs urgent specialist treatment that is not available in Gaza."I'm a critical case," he says. "I need dialysis, drugs and a nuclear [renal] scan. I can't get that here."For Tariq, who is heading to Jordan, this is his third attempt to leave Gaza in the past two months. Now, forced to stand on an overcrowded bus to take him across the border, he is finally on his way.He has left behind his wife and five children. "It's very difficult but I have no choice," he says. "I blame Israel for the fact I can't get treatment here. They won't let medical equipment in and they won't let the doctors out to go abroad to improve their abilities."The blockade affects everything – health, education, the economy, social behaviour."