It is no surprise that the Egyptian revolution has turned into a farce (Editorial, 15 August). Liberal democracy cannot be implanted into religious societies. Look what such attempts have produced in Iran, Pakistan, Gaza, Tunisia, Turkey and now Egypt. The inconvenient truth is that the flower of liberal democracy does not blossom in a religious soil. India is an exception, but Hinduism is quite compatible with secularism. Since the success of liberal democracy appears to be positively correlated with the decline or absence of religion, is it not time the west got its priority right by exporting secularism rather than democracy around the world?Randhir Singh BainsGants Hill, Essex• Mohamed El Baradei has resigned from his vice-presidency; he should never have accepted it. Barack Obama gave a guarded welcome to the coup which was not a coup. Tony Blair, still quite influential as a Middle East envoy, gave support to the ousting of Morsi. All these people should have known better from the start. That the elected Muslim Brotherhood had disappointed, and I believe it had, was no reason for illegality. As a rule, unpopular governments can be voted out of office; supporters of the military seem to have made the facile assumption that once ensconced, the MB would have made it difficult to dislodge. Under no circumstances can the ousting of a legitimately elected government be welcome. Nobody seems to have learnt the lesson of Algeria, when the military cancelled an election they did not like the result of, which has caused hundreds of thousands of deaths.San CassimallyEdinburgh• The events in Egypt are the inevitable consequence of the US giving the Egyptian military $1.3bn every year. The US response to the slaughter? According to the New York Times: "Mr Kerry announced no punitive measures, while President Obama, vacationing … had no public reaction." The report goes on to note Obama "appeared determined not to allow events in Egypt to interrupt a day that, besides golf, included cocktails at the home of a major political donor".Ian SinclairLondon