"Corruption and censorship are worse today than under Mubarak." So says Shahira Amin, who quit Egyptian state TV on 3 February at the height of the political unrest and mass protests in the Middle East. At the time of her resignation, there was optimism in Egypt and the west that the country's corrupt and censored media would be reformed.Following demonstrations from media workers and a shift in news coverage after the revolution – protesters were transformed from "thugs" to "heroes" – it seemed that the country's state media were becoming more open. Amin, however, believes they have gone backwards. "The army is in complete control. They have simply replaced Mubarak and they are even more intimidating."Every news item gets checked before it is broadcast, which wasn't the case before, they just had a monitoring system. Media channels still get press releases. Before they were from the presidency and interior ministry, now they're from the SCAF [supreme council of armed forces]. Threats and rumours have been spread to discredit me, which scares a lot of other journalists."But this hasn't scared Amin, also a CNN correspondent, who says she will not let anything get in the way of telling the truth of what is happening in her country. The tipping point for her resignation as deputy director and senior anchor at the state-controlled Nile TV came "when men raided Tahrir Square, which was full of protesters, on camel back"."They gave me the news to read which didn't even mention it," she recalls. "I asked them, 'Why isn't it in the bulletin?' I read the news but I was so furious and stormed out of the studio. The next day I never went back."Amin says it was only during the revolution that she felt she was sacrificing her credibility as a journalist by continuing to work for state TV. She would often discuss anti-government views on her talkshow when the Mubarak regime was still intact, much to the consternation of many of her colleagues, who weren't as willing to put their jobs at risk by not treading the party line.Today, Amin has one of the most influential roles in Egypt's media. With the help of Hillary Clinton, she was able in May to go back to Nile TV – but on her own terms. She now hosts a weekly interview programme called In the Hot Seat, broadcast to the whole of the Arab world, in which she quizzes high-profile figures. She refused to go back to reading the news."If it wasn't for Hillary Clinton, I would have been forgotten," she says. "She approached me about the show, which I then spoke to Nile TV about. My boss said she didn't want me back … I tried to talk to my colleagues but they don't speak to me any more. But in the end, I said 'This is free Egypt … I'll stay and whoever doesn't like it can leave.'"Her first interview on the new show was with Clinton. She has also interviewed the UN high commissioner for refugees, António Guterres, on the immigrants stranded at the Libyan-Egyptian border, and Michelle Bachelet, the former Chilean president, among others.Despite Amin's unique position, she still faces some obstacles. She is fully responsible for her content, but says she has to be wary of the fact that any reporting concerning the military or its leadership must receive prior approval from the morale affairs and intelligence directorates.Mubarak is gone, but the expensive media network he created and used as his propaganda machine for 30 years still exists. In an ideal world Amin would like to see the entire media system dismantled then pieced back together, but the reality is that while the old channels are still running, corruption continues to exist. "Under the old regime, I was threatened many times by state security," she claims. "My email was monitored, my phone was tapped … Even if I was outside the country, I was trailed the whole time. They told me they could make me disappear off the face of the earth."You wouldn't guess, from Amin's calm demeanour and light-hearted tone, that she has experienced a life under such surveillance – "I used to always have someone standing outside my house to report every time I walk through the door, an informant," she recalls.Currently based in Cairo with her partner and daughter, she has lived in many places abroad including the UK, Sri Lanka, Malaysia and Abu Dhabi, where she began her career as a radio DJ. She also has a son who lives away and admits the only time she really worries is for the safety of her family.The threats often followed her freelance reports, broadcast internationally on CNN, which revealed harsh truths about Egypt, tackling themes such as female genital mutilation, early marriages and Sudanese refugees.But she says it is was after her controversial investigation in May into the army's practice of virginity testing on female protesters camping in Tahrir Square – which was first broadcast on CNN – that she felt the most frightened, because it exposed the army in such a negative light. Since then, she claims that if she mentions the army in her show, it will not be aired.She even considered staying in the UK on a subsequent visit but says: "I decided that somebody has to air these things. I kept thinking about all the brave young activists who sacrificed their lives in the square. I'm not young, so I felt I had to do something – this was my way of fighting."Amin says she has always "pushed the boundaries" with her stories. Before the toppling of the old regime, she says at Nile TV "I was always changing things around and they got tired of arguing with me … for example, they would tell me to say 'freedom fighters' but I would call them 'suicide bombers'." "Whenever I wrote a controversial article for CNN," she adds, "I was always invited on to the presidential plane with Mubarak. I couldn't not go. So I went and covered, objectively, his activities, but I found it the most boring thing ever."However, on one occasion Amin found herself in Mubarak's suite – all the journalists had been invited, only she decided to go – and they talked, one-on-one for over an hour until Mubarak's son, Gamal, arrived and asked her to leave. She describes the former president as "modest and humble, but very out of touch. I walked out of that room feeling really sorry for someone who I thought is such an outcast and doesn't fit in."What Amin finds most upsetting is that people in Egypt know the media system is corrupt, yet many still believe what they read. For instance, the writer, feminist and activist Nawal El Saadawi is hailed by the west as a pioneer of liberal values, but because she was demonised by the former regime and state media, Egyptian people tend to continue to dismiss her views. "This drives me crazy," Amin says. "I don't even bother to read the newspapers any more."One big problem with state journalists, she points out, is that too many aren't used to going out into the field to gather news. Many of those who filled the roles of the journalists who left after the revolution "aren't half as qualified", she notes. "They aren't real journalists – they just want to get paid." She believes the west can help Egypt post-revolution by investing in proper training for young journalists.Nevertheless, Amin sees "some positive signs". Social media continue to be widely used by young activists, with some becoming Twitter celebrities attracting thousands of followers from around the world. She is also reassured that a number of independent news channels and newspapers have emerged since the revolution.However, she compares this with the growth in the number of political parties and presidential candidates. Amin believes it is encouraging that more people are being politicised and having their say, but thinks they can't have any real influence unless they unite, as their individual followings are too small."The fear barrier has now been broken so a lot of people are speaking their mind. One good thing that came out of the revolution is that everyone wants to become involved. The energy is there."But energy may not be enough for the future of Egyptian media, Amin says. "There is still such control – it looks very bleak right now."