Egypt's 84 million people, a number set to double by 2050, are crowded along the Nile and the Mediterranean coast, woefully short of land, water, electricity, housing and jobs. Water supplies in Cairo were so bad in 2011 that some described the popular uprising that brought down Hosni Mubarak as a "revolution of the thirsty". His successor, President Mohamed Morsi, also lost popularity and in the end his office in part due to power cuts and petrol shortages.The country has large natural gas reserves but has failed to develop them, and industry struggles with the resulting power shortages. The military, meanwhile, is only kept going by American money. Egypt is, in other words, a country hanging on to viability by its fingertips. What has traditionally made the difference is tourism, which is why the recent bombing of a tourist bus in North Sinai is such bad news.Even though the minister of tourism, Hisham Zaazou, recently described the country's tourist towns as "ghost cities", there were hopes that the industry would soon begin a slow recovery. There had been no terrorist attacks on tourists for three years, and the authorities were trying to revive it in areas far from protest-ridden Cairo. But the deaths of two South Koreans and their Egyptian driver will, rightly or wrongly, send the message abroad that Egypt is still unsafe.The warning by Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, the militant group that claimed responsibility for the bombing, that tourists should leave Egypt by today, is a bluff. It is almost certainly beyond their capacity to cause mayhem across the Sinai tourist zones, let alone in the rest of Egypt. But most people planning to travel do not look at the statistical possibilities of violence. They act instead on the intuitive feeling that holidays and murder do not mix.Field Marshal Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, almost certain to be the country's next president, is presumably aware that he could face a summer of discontent or worse. The question is what he plans to do about it. The overriding need in Egypt is for a settlement reconciling the military and the Muslim Brotherhood, but he is the last man who could bring that about. It is perhaps beyond anyone's capacity, so poisoned has the relationship become.Failing that, the institution of reforms that would set the economy on a better track would be wise, although politically difficult in the short term. The Egyptian record unfortunately suggests that a combination of ducking reforms, blaming imaginary foreign and domestic enemies and suppressing protest is the most likely course. That may hold things for a while, but it will not revive the economy and it will leave the jugular vein that is tourism even more open to attack.