Laura Rozen reports:The Obama administration has scheduled a rare Saturday principals committee meeting to assess the rapidly-moving situation in Egypt as anti-government protests intensify in that country......The State Department and White House have expressed concern about violence and have repeatedly urged -- to no avail -- that Egyptian authorities not block social networking sites and the Internet, and respect the universal rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression.Meantime, senior Egyptian military leaders are currently holding annual bilateral meetings with their U.S. counterparts at the Pentagon this week about U.S.-Egyptian military cooperation."If the administration truly wants that message to be received by the Mubarak government, and the Egyptian people, it needs to speak with greater clarity and back its words with actions," a bipartisan Egypt working group of foreign policy scholars and former U.S. officials said in a statement Wednesday."We urge the administration to press the Mubarak government to lift the state of emergency that restricts freedom of assembly and to end police brutality and torture," the group, co-chaired by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace's Michele Dunne and the Brookings Institution's Robert Kagan, said. "The administration should also press for constitutional and administrative changes necessary for a free and competitive presidential election open to candidates without restrictions, supervised by judges and monitored by domestic and international observers." As you can see, Dunne and Kagan are calling for fine things, but all the same things that aren't very dramatic; "press for" this and that. It underscores the fact that there's little Washington can do here, in part for the obvious reason that everyone is mindful that while Mubarak is no great friend of democracy, the likely alternative if he should go seems considerably worse. I remember that in 1979, some people were originally elated when the Shah had to take a powder.Diplomacy cannot make things sweet and light overnight. I remember well the Lebanese Cedar Revolution of 2005 and how everyone (well, everyone on the right) was saying that it was only through the great efforts of the Bush administration was this coming to pass, and see, you weak liberals, democracy promotion worked! The Bush administration does in fact deserve some credit for Syria's withdrawal. But now, as of last week, the March 14 coalition collapsed, without having accomplished much anyway because of the opposition's obstructing third and because that, uh, wily Jumblatt switched sides, and now Hezbollah is back in charge, as they fundamentally always are anyway, sad to say.Obama still has moral authority around the world that Bush did not. He should use it more than he has. At the same time, we should not expect that America really has all that much power to change things.