Before 25 January 2011, people like me were living in a bubble. Yes, some of us were more socially and politically aware than others, but we had far too much ego. Most of my generation who are more entitled than the majority looked down on everyone else. We wanted things better, but we were thinking in terms of secularism, freedom of speech and constitution. The people wanted better salaries, better bread and better medical insurance. This gap was the reason that none of our demonstrations before then had much of an effect.Social media was the answer. This tool was a way of involving others. And so on 25 January 2011, we chanted "bread, freedom, social justice". Suddenly, it wasn't 30-40,000 15 to 25-year-olds, it was a revolution! The people had managed to change the course of history. Since then I know exactly what I'm fighting for: peace, civil rights, freedom, justice, women's rights – I'm fighting for my utopia. The revolution taught me not to compromise on what's right or settle for any less.Biggest challenge: In terms of women's rights Egypt may be slightly better (with the emphasis on slightly) than the rest of the Middle East, but the way women are treated is still nothing short of disgraceful. There's an old saying that says women only have three homes: their family's, their husband's and the grave. Women are often told that sexual harassment and rape is their fault, because they're wearing revealing clothes, because they're not veiled, because they laugh loudly, or just because men are never wrong.Not too long after the revolution, when I was 15, I started working for an organisation advocating women's rights. I was assigned to tutor an all-girls' middle school in an under-privileged area. I was teaching them science, particularly physics, and it was hard to get them interested.Proudest moment: I was teaching the most exciting thing in history (physics is awesome, just saying) and no-one paid attention. As the semester progressed, some girls started responding. One girl in particular grew almost as enthusiastic about dynamics as I am. Finally, one day at the end of the semester, I asked if this class had changed the way any of them saw science, physics, Egypt and girls. One girl replied that she wanted to pursue a higher level education in aerospace engineering, another told me how surprisingly exciting she found special relativity. I felt nothing but utter happiness and pride.This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To get more articles like this direct to your inbox, sign up free to become a member of the Global Development Professionals Network