Press freedom groups have warned that an "unprecedented" number of journalists are being targeted by Egyptian forces during the violent crackdown on Muslim Brotherhood supporters.The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) said it was "deeply disturbed" after several reporters for international media groups, including the Guardian, were assaulted or briefly detained in Cairo over the weekend.A French television crew were held for about 10 hours on Saturday after they covered a siege by security forces on Fateh mosque, in Ramses Square, in the Egyptian capital. The Guardian's Egypt correspondent, Patrick Kingsley, was detained twice on Saturday while reporting from the square.The incidents followed the fatal shootings of a Sky News cameraman and a reporter for a Gulf newspaper last week as part of days of widespread bloodshed across Egypt. Sherif Mansour, the CPJ's Middle East and North Africa orogramme co-ordinator, raised the alarm about the apparent crackdown on journalists in the politically-torn country. "The unprecedented number of killings and harassment of journalists in Egypt last week are ominous signs for the Egyptian press," he said."A free press is fundamental to the restoration of democracy and to the inclusion of disparate voices in public discourse. Safeguarding press freedom, as promised by the Egyptian interim government, is a key step in that direction and direly needed right now."The weekend incidents came as Egypt's government-run State Information Service accused international media in a statement of "conveying a distorted image that is very much far from the facts." Mansour said he believed the statement appeared to be "the basis for several civilian attacks on journalists". "Recent statements by Egyptian authorities against the foreign media are deeply disturbing. Having successfully silenced many critical local news outlets, the government is now trying to harangue, harass, and intimidate international journalists into toeing the line," he added.Separately, Sky News called on Egyptian forces to undertake an urgent investigation into the circumstances of the fatal shooting last week of Mick Deane, a long-serving cameraman employed by the broadcaster. A spokeswoman for Sky News said: "Mick Deane was killed while carrying out his legitimate role filming events in Cairo. Sky News has expressed its immense concern about Mick's death to the Egyptian authorities and called for an urgent and thorough investigation."Mona Eltahawy, a freelance Egyptian-American journalist, said she does not feel as vulnerable as local journalists. Speaking from Cairo on Tuesday, she said that "even though we're still Egyptian, and we could still be treated as Egyptians under the emergency law and could still be interrogated under state security, having a foreign nationality offers some protection. I know other journalists are in worse danger." Only one of the seven journalists killed in Egypt since 1992 has held a foreign nationality. That individual was also the only journalist to have been working for a local, rather than an international, media organisation. Eltahawy also said the Egyptian regime knows the world is watching, so the pressures facing international journalists are different, and overt moves to "switch off the internet are unlikely". Although access to international news networks and social media is still available, national media has suffered according to Eltahawy. She said "the local media have keeled over – even privately owned TV channels that used to give alternative views have just given in." Two Turkish journalists – Heba Zakaria for the state-owned Anadolu news agency and Metin Turan for the public broadcaster TRT – were among those detained on Saturday, according to local reports. Zakaria was reputedly held for eight hours at a prison.Kingsley, for the Guardian, was led away from Cairo's Ramses Square in the late morning before being released with "strict instructions to return to my own country". Hours later, in a separate incident, reports on Twitter claimed that Kingsley had been detained in al Daher police station "after a citizens' arrest". Though he was taken to a police station, it later transpired that unidentified assailants had transported him there and seized his phone and laptop. Brazilian freelance journalist Hugo Bachega was held for seven hours, according to reports, when he was picked up while covering the unrest in Ramses Square. He was reportedly released following an intervention by Brazil's embassy in Cairo.Other journalists reported being attacked by protesters outside the Fateh mosque. The Wall Street Journal's Matt Bradley and the Independent's Alastair Beach were targeted – the CPJ said Beach was hit on the head with a stick and Bradley's notebook was stolen – before being pulled away by soldiers.International Federation of Journalists president Jim Boumelha said it appeared to be "open season" on journalists in Cairo. "On specific days, it is one of the most dangerous places to report from in the world," he said.