Travelling to Europe for the first time in my life in the summer of 1969 meant much more than a simple crossing of the Mediterranean. To begin with, travelling abroad was not a human right in Egypt in the 60s, especially if you happened to be on the wrong side of the gender divide.Why my father raised no objections to his two young daughters, my sister and me, travelling abroad alone is beyond explanation. It was fortunate for us that he never heard the call of evangelising Islamists threatening doom and gloom to fathers allowing their daughters to travel without a male guardian.The state also required citizens to obtain exit visas to be able to travel abroad. To qualify, you needed to prove beyond any reasonable doubt that you had a legitimate reason to travel. Stacks of papers and documents had to be produced and various types of permissions obtained. Travellers, however, were extremely fortunate in being allowed to carry a maximum of $5 with them on their trip, proudly stamped on their passports. Larger amounts of money were considered acts of hard currency smuggling and were punishable by law. So it must have been through divine intervention and the state lapsing momentarily into administrative coma that my sister and I travelled at all.To qualify for the visa, we managed to get an invitation to a youth camp in Austria. A friend of ours had gone through the same process a year earlier. And because both my sister and I were already studying German at the Goethe Institute in Alexandria, we could easily claim that our trip had the laudable educational objective of improving our German language skills.Though it's hard to believe now, Arabs in the 60s were still human, and European visas were generally obtained on the spot. There were neither security checks nor suspicious looks. There were no queues, no fingerprinting, and no eye-scanning to go through to prove you were the same person you said you were and to show beyond any shadow of doubt that you were not planning to blow up people, buildings, or yourself.Nor was it necessary to produce guarantees that you would not linger in Europe after your legitimate business was over. Al-Qaida was not even a twinkle in the world's eyes. Western nations had a well-defined enemy which they watched every step of the way. They were too busy fighting the KGB to turn their attention to us. And we hung blissfully in limbo, on the sidelines of the world's political show, never realising the good fortune we enjoyed in not being the declared enemy. You simply applied for a visa, they gave it to you, and voilà, you were already on your way.We arrived in Venice by ship and spent two days there before taking the train to Innsbruck. We stayed at the Venice youth hostel in large dorms with two-bunk beds.Waking up the following morning, and opening my eyes slowly in the bright Venice sun that poured freely into the uncurtained room, I couldn't believe what I saw. A young woman stood right in front of my eyes, as naked as the day she was born.She moved around the room with the comfort and self-assurance of a princess dressed for a ball. Walking with her head held high and her back straight, she was superbly oblivious of everything around her. Was she perhaps wearing the emperor's new clothes and was I the one child capable of seeing the truth? Or did she perhaps think nobody saw her?Of all the sights I saw and enjoyed in Venice, the image of this girl gave me a great deal to think about. Whenever I thought of her I was reminded of my father's admonitions to my sisters and me to cover our knees if they happened to peep from beneath our skirts. With the huge popularity of mini and micro skirts throughout the 60s, the knee struggle continued relentlessly.Women's knees were in fact a contested territory. To show them or not to show them was a burning question and the subject of many scholarly discussions, for they represented the demarcation line between modesty and obscenity. With the recent popularity and proliferation on our streets of the niqab, or face cover, the line has clearly shifted higher, making faces, and not knees, the focus of heated disputes.On the train to Innsbruck, we met the jolliest Italian anyone can hope for on a long journey. He insisted on pursuing a conversation with us although he spoke no English and we no Italian. We gathered that he was a university student and a communist to boot because he kept pointing to himself saying "communista, communista". When he knew we came from Alexandria, he kept saying, "Bella Alessandria ... Bella Alessandria".He also provided us with a running commentary on the locations we passed, although unfortunately we missed virtually all the explanations with the exception of names. But he laughed with gusto and we laughed equally heartily, and it seemed to us that language was an unnecessary addition.Over the years, the memory of those two encounters has remained a source of infinite amusement for me. By crossing over to the other side of the Mediterranean, I not only came into direct contact with a different culture and a different mode of self-expression, but, more importantly, I became keenly aware of the supreme human ability to cross barriers, linguistic as well as cultural.• Amira Nowaira's memoir, Growing up Feminist in a Muslim Land, is published as an ebook.