Everyone knew Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, Egypt's former army chief, would win the country's presidential election this week. The question was how many Egyptians would turn out to validate his coronation. Supporters wanted an overwhelming majority of voters to throng to polling stations, proving the strongman had universal support. Critics hoped he might win with a low turnout, suggesting that most Egyptians are at best indifferent to his leadership.Preliminary results suggest over 46% of the electorate took part, the vast majority of them voting for the former field marshal. Predictably, the ensuing debate has revolved around two questions. Is the turnout figure believable? And if it is, how much legitimacy does it grant Sisi?On the former, sceptics are struggling to believe participation is as high as 46%. Anecdotal evidence from reporters touring the polling stations suggested a lower turnout. So too did widespread panic  among Sisi's many vocal supporters in the media, and his tacit ones within the state."I'm willing to cut my veins for the country – right now! on air! – for people to go down and vote," shouted an emotional pro-Sisi talkshow host, Amr Adeeb, after Monday's turnout appeared lower than expected. Seemingly rattled, the government announced a last-minute public holiday to encourage more people to vote, extended voting to a third day, and threatened non-voters with a large fine.The final proof, for Sisi's opponents, lay in statements from the likes of interim prime minister Ibrahim Mahlab, who said late on the second day of voting that turnout had only exceeded 30%. It left many wondering how so many more voters could have made up the numbers on the third and final day.For others, the 46% figure seems plausible, given the extent to which the government and its supporters in the media pushed for a higher turnout."I think it makes sense based on our numbers," said Magued Osman, the head of one of Egypt's few homegrown pollsters, Baseera, and a statistics professor at Cairo University. Baseera's 220-strong team interviewed over 12,000 voters over the three days and estimated that turnout would be between 42% and 46%.Sisi's supporters certainly panicked – but that could be explained by their realisation that he might only have the support of a significant and vocal minority of all Egyptians, rather than an overwhelming majority. Sisi himself had initially called for a turnout of around 80%, a hope that proved wildly optimistic.Yet, if 46% did take part this week, Sisi's supporters could still argue that on paper it is a respectable result. When Mohamed Morsi, whom Sisi ousted last summer, was elected president in 2012, he received just 52% of a 51% turnout. This week, Sisi won well over 90% of a comparably-sized group of voters. Even if it dispels the Sisi campaign's myth that 40 million marched in his name last summer, it still technically gives him the largest electoral mandate of any Egyptian politician since the 2011 uprising.But for his opponents, the credibility of the result will be undermined by the oppression and corner-cutting it took to get there. The fact that it took a last-minute holiday, the threat of a fine, and an election extension to nudge turnout towards the 50% mark clearly puts the electoral process into question. In the words of one international observer, Democracy International, the latter move was "just the latest in a series of unusual steps that have seriously harmed the credibility of the process", and came amid claims by rival candidate Hamdeen Sabahi's campaign that dozens of its activists were arrested after querying voting irregularities.For others, the election was flawed even before the polling stations had opened. Even if the poll itself was fairly free, it was conducted against a backdrop of prolonged oppression. By the police's own admission, at least 16,000 political dissidents – mostly Islamists, but also many secular activists – have been locked up since Sisi ousted Morsi. A recent independent estimate suggests that figure may now have topped 41,000. Well over 1,000 protesters have been killed, journalists have been locked up, and the youth movement that helped inspire the 2011 revolution has been banned.In this climate, several could-have-been candidates boycotted the election, citing the impossibility of campaigning against a man – Sisi – who was so clearly backed by the state.In their eyes, the election is meaningless whether or not 46% of voters engaged in it.