In a ground-breaking deal, the British construction company Balfour Beatty agreed yesterday to pay £2.25m to settle bribery allegations over a £100m overseas contract. The company helped build the re-created Alexandria Library in Egypt in 2001, a prestigious Unesco project.The Serious Fraud Office, which has been investigating the firm for the past three years, has avoided the risk of losing a criminal trial but the exact allegations have been hushed up as a result. The SFO said yesterday: "By proceeding in this way, the SFO has been able to impose a significant sanction on a major UK company whilst avoiding the extensive cost to the public purse of lengthy court proceedings."Both parties refused to depart from limited statements yesterday. But a prominent Egyptian consulting engineer, Mamdouh Hamza, told the Guardian from Cairo that he had been questioned by the SFO. His firm controlled the project, under which extra payments had been authorised in 2001. He denied handling bribes and said: "No bribes whatever were paid to anyone in the project." Extra payments had been approved only for necessary additional work on the contract, he said.Hamza's involvement began in melodramatic circumstances. He was arrested in London in 2004 on his way to a Buckingham Palace garden party, after claims to British police that he was planning to have the Egyptian housing minister assassinated. While he was awaiting his Old Bailey trial, Balfour Beatty reported to the SFO "irregularities" in their Alexandria library project. Hamza was questioned by the SFO in 2005, he says. An Old Bailey jury eventually threw out the assassination-plot charge and Hamza says: "The whole file was sent to the Egyptian government in 2005. They investigated and found there was no wrongdoing."Yesterday's statement from the SFO said that Balfour Beatty was voluntarily paying the £2.25m and part of the SFO's legal costs, thanks to the agency's newly acquired asset-seizure powers under the Proceeds of Crime Act. The money was regarded as the fruit of "unlawful conduct" because the firm was implicated in false accounting over the suspect payments: "Having itself brought these matters to the attention of the SFO, Balfour Beatty plc has accepted that unlawful conduct, in the form of inaccurate accounting records arising from certain payment irregularities, occurred within a subsidiary entity ... The documentation prepared in connection with these payments did not comply with the requirements for accurate business records to be kept in accordance with ... [the] Companies Act 1985."Observers of the SFO's largely unavailing struggles for seven years to crack down on corruption were heartened by yesterday's outcome. One well-informed legal observer said: "This is a good result, particularly because it focuses on the question of false accounting by companies. It would have been difficult to prosecute in any event because the events took place before Britain's anti-overseas bribery legislation came into force in 2002."The SFO said Balfour Beatty had been let off lightly because it cooperated. Richard Alderman, the SFO's director, said: "This is a highly significant development in our efforts to reform British corporate behaviour. We now have a range of enforcement tools at our disposal."Balfour Beatty said: "There is no suggestion of any improper overall commercial advantage accruing to the company nor any financial advantage being gained by any individual employee."