The first time I went to Cairo it was, by accident, within weeks of the fall of President Mubarak of Egypt. Tahrir Square was still occupied by protesters, and the young journalists I met in the course of a visit organised by Unesco to talk about self-regulation of the press were enthusiastic participants in the revolution, risking death for a better future, part of which would be a free media.And some lost no time in pointing out an old Guardian error. On 4 February 2011 the Guardian published an article suggesting Mubarak’s personal fortune could be as much as $70bn. As that story swept through Tahrir Square, propelled by social media, it further inflamed the protesting crowds. However, the report and the reasons for publishing it were strongly challenged by those young journalists. Unsurprisingly, some of those I met felt it would be wise to start with self-regulation a little closer to – the Guardian’s – home, and so I investigated the background in an Open Door column and amended the online article as a result.On my return to Cairo 10 days ago a lot of that optimism following the fall of Mubarak had been quieted. In the intervening three and half years President Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood had been elected and ousted by the army from which the new president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, comes. During a two-day visit to meet members of the Egyptian media with a delegation from the Ethical Journalism Network there, I found a wariness about the future and a nearly uniform backing of the new government’s “war against terror”. This view manifests itself in a near absence of any kind of dispassionate reporting of the Brotherhood, which has been declared a terrorist organisation and whose leadership has been dispersed.A leading commentator told the group that the western media doesn’t understand the concerns of the common people in a society where unemployment is officially at 13% and of those around 60% are aged between 15 and 29, according to World Bank figures. “The Egyptian state is weakened, public services are weakened,” he said. “We are Muslims, but we want to have a modern life. We don’t want a religious state influenced by the ideology of IS [Islamic State]. This is a correction of the earlier revolution.”This was echoed by a young journalist on the state-run daily, Al-Ahram, who said: “What the west doesn’t want to admit is that we are in a war against terror.”Journalists told us they were reflecting the will of the people in speaking in support of the government’s “war on terror”, although that is not true of all journalists. Away from their bosses some of the younger ones express a wish for a return to the challenging journalism aimed at the government that characterised the revolution of 2011, but none felt able to say this openly. This extends to an apparent lack of concern over the detention of political opponents and the jailing of journalists.However, there were some signs of optimism. There is a newly formed Egyptian Editors’ Association committed to modernisation of the media and the development of a free and diverse press.Aidan White, the director general of the EJN, said that there were positive movements: “On the positive side, the mission found enthusiasm to expand the scope for independent journalism, particularly through local newspapers and the spread of digital platforms for the delivery of news. Two examples are the hyperlocal journalism initiatives of the Egyptian Media Development Programme, which is a Cairo city-centre free newspaper, and Welad El Balad Media Services, a string of regional online and local newspapers. These initiatives were launched by Tarek Atia and Fatemah Farag, respectively, both of them leaders of the new editors’ movement.”There is a new constitution, which would give more press freedom than Egyptians have ever enjoyed, but many fear this may be a long time coming. However, Egyptians have long memories, as I discovered when I met one young woman who has been in the forefront of the battle for a free press.She immediately remembered the Guardian story about Mubarak’s fortune and the error it contained. She said: “I also read the correction, too.”• I hope to write about the Guardian’s coverage of the Scottish referendum next week when the dust has settled, so please let me know what you think of it – email reader@theguardian.com. In addition the Guardian is running two events for readers who wish an insight into the work of the office of the readers’ editor. Details here.