Eighteen tourists, including one Briton, have been killed in a hot air balloon crash near the Egyptian city of Luxor, officials say.Two other Britons are believed to have survived after the balloon exploded on Tuesday morning and plunged into a sugar cane field west of Luxor, which is 320 miles (510km) south of the capital, Cairo.A witness described seeing people leaping out of the balloon as it was on fire. Reports quoted police as saying a British male had been killed, while the two British survivors were in a critical condition. An Egyptian security official said initial reports of 19 dead were revised to 18 amid confusion in the aftermath of the accident (video).A spokesman for the British Foreign Office said: "We are aware of reports of a balloon crash in Luxor and are making urgent inquiries."Cherry Tohamy, an Egyptian living in Kuwait who was on holiday in Luxor, told the BBC her balloon was landing when she heard an explosion and saw flames from a balloon above."Our pilot told us that the balloon had hit a high pressure electrical cable and a cylinder on board exploded," she said. "People were jumping out of the balloon from about the height of a seven-storey building."Tourism official Ahmed Aboud said the balloon was at around 300 metres (1,000 feet) above Luxor when the blast happened.The pilot survived by jumping from the basket when it was 10-15 metres from the ground, said Aboud, head of an association representing Luxor balloon operators. The pilot was being treated for burns.Mohamed Mustafa, a doctor at the hospital where the wounded were being treated, said the dead included tourists from Britain, Japan and Hong Kong. Three more were hurt, he said.In Paris, a diplomatic official said French tourists were among those involved in the accident, but would give no details on how many, or whether French citizens were among those killed.An Associated Press reporter at the crash site said he saw eight bodies being put into body bags and taken away.The American photographer Christopher Michel was in another balloon, taking aerial shots, when the crash happened. He told the BBC: "We flew over the ancient ruins. Just before landing in the cornfields, I heard an explosion and saw smoke. I think it was the balloon behind mine. I wasn't sure what had happened at first. It was only when we landed we heard the full extent of what happened."Konny Matthews, assistant manager of Luxor's Al Moudira hotel, said she heard a "huge bang" several kilometres from the hotel at around 7am (5am GMT). "Some of my employees said that their homes were shaking," she said.Luxor, which stands on the banks of the river Nile and on the site of the ancient city of Thebes, is a major destination for tourists visiting its many remains and monuments. But Egypt's tourism industry has suffered amid the political instability that has rocked the country since the beginning of the uprising that ousted Hosni Mubarak as president in 2011.Balloon trips, usually at sunrise over the Karnak and Luxor temples as well as the Valley of the Kings, are popular with visitors.In April 2009, 16 people were hurt, including two British women, when a balloon crashed during a tour of Luxor. The balloon was believed to have hit a mobile phone transmission tower near the banks of the Nile. After the crash, early morning hot air balloon flights over the Valley of the Kings were suspended for six months while safety measures were tightened up.