The revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt became the gold standard of a movement known as the Arab spring for one very good reason: they were peaceful, non-sectarian and democratic. In Egypt, the army stayed to one side. The collective heartbeat of the revolution that was Tahrir Square resisted wave after wave of attacks from plainclothes thugs sent by the dying regime but stayed its course for 18 days until the dictator was gone. The army did not fire on its own citizens. What is so disturbing about Sunday's clashes in Cairo is that the qualities that made Egypt's uprising so influential and what made it different from the armed conflicts that broke out in Libya, Yemen and Syria, no longer held true.For one brief but significant spasm, Cairo became Homs under Bashar Assad's Republican Guard or Benghazi under Muammar Gaddafi's loyalists. Protesters were fired on or crushed under the wheels of army trucks. State television fanned the flames by talking of "hidden hands" and outside interference. Announcers used sectarian language. Saying that "the (Christian) Copts had killed soldiers", they appealed at one point for Muslims to come out on to the streets and defend them. Live feeds to satellite stations were cut. What started out as peaceful protest by minority Christians over an arson attack on a church in Aswan ended up with 25 dead and more than 300 injured.Yesterday the fury was rightly directed at Egypt's Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF). This is supposed to deliver a transition from dictatorship to a democratically elected government. What it may instead be doing is taking Egypt from one form of emergency rule to another. The violent reaction to a largely, but not wholly, Christian demonstration did not come out of the blue. It followed the assault on a university strike in Alexandria, an announcement that military tribunals would be used for civilians, and an ongoing tug of war over electoral law. Parliamentary elections will be staggered over several months, but the presidential contest could be put back to 2013.The Coptic community has real grievances. It embraced the revolution while institutionalised discrimination remains in place. And it has real enemies, like the Salafists attempting to break down hospital doors to get at its injured. But the lesson of these events surely goes wider: if the generals of the SCAF are reverting to the tactics of Hosni Mubarak, they too must be brought to account for them. Elections must not be delayed. Egypt needs civilian government and the military has to go back to its barracks. Sunday should serve as a reminder of what could happen if the real work of Tahrir Square is left unfinished.