A battle royal is taking place inside Egypt. The Islamist leader, Mohamed Morsi, is finding out that it's one thing to win a presidential election, but quite another to act as president once elected. Clawing back the powers usurped by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (Scaf) in two decrees issued before and after the presidential poll is proving to be as tense an operation as the revolution 18 months ago which ousted Hosni Mubarak.Last week Dr Morsi ordered parliament to reconvene, overturning a ruling by the supreme court dissolving it. The court re-affirmed its ruling and parliament met for five minutes before adjourning, pending an appeal to a lower court. This week's drama will centre on the constituent assembly, the body that will write the next constitution. Scaf has already warned that it is poised to replace it if it "encounters an obstacle" preventing it from completing its work. That may duly arrive tomorrow, when the administrative court reviews lawsuits filed against its formation, a move that could be countered by a fresh presidential decree setting it up again.Enter Hillary Clinton. On Saturday the visiting US secretary of state declared that the US supported the "full transition to civilian rule with all that entails". She looked forward to the military's return to a purely national security role. On Sunday she told Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi the same thing in person. All of this is welcome, although America's own power to influence what the generals do is limited, despite the money they get from Congress. The second factor constraining her is the knowledge of how divided Egypt's non-military elites are about the power the president is striving to acquire for the institutions, such as parliament, which the Muslim Brotherhood dominated. Like it or not, by striking back at Scaf, the president is also targeting the judiciary, whose top judges are as divided as everyone else is about the legality of the president's decrees.In this battle, everything gets thrown up in the air: the parliament and the power to legislate; the constituent assembly and the power to write the next constitution; and the constitutional court and the priniciple of the rule of law. The more the president rules by decree – and one faction in the Brotherhood argues that he should issue a constitutional decree of his own, annulling the content of the decree Scaf issued within hours of the closing of the presidential polls – the more he risks alienating his future political partners in the broad-tent political coalition he intends to set up both under him as president, and under the prime minister he intends to nominate.He has to tread a fine line between rolling back the powers of the generals (who failed in a free democratic election to get their candidate elected, but who continue to interfere in the transition to civilian rule) and keeping his future secular and Christian partners in the government on side. Otherwise they will turn around and say that the Brotherhood is doing no more and no less than grabbing all power for itself. As the political tension rises, it gets harder for the newly elected president to argue that he is not acquiring power for its own sake but redistributing it. One way to legitimise a new constitutional transitional order, as set out in a decree, would be to put it to a referendum. This has already been tried once, in March last year, and the result was not to the liking of the generals.The revolution has to maintain its unity and the generals have also to see the writing on the wall. Rather than issuing dark statements about not allowing " a certain group" – ie, the Muslim Brotherhood – to dominate the country, as it did on Sunday, Scaf should now take a strategic decision. It has incentive enough to stage an honourable retreat and keep its reputation as national guardians intact. No one is proposing to deprive it of the defence ministry or indeed of its extensive business empire. Scaf should see this as a moment to withdraw, not to launch another campaign that it cannot, in the long run, win.