French unions were out on the streets yesterday hoping to repeat their past success in defeating plans to reduce the pension entitlement of French workers. After all, they forced a previous president, Jacques Chirac, to retreat on pensions, as well as bringing down one of his prime ministers on the issue. So this is a make-or-break moment for the unions and for Nicolas Sarkozy, who sees a pensions victory as the centrepiece of a range of reforms which will transform his faltering presidency.As the French assembly begins an extraordinary session to decide on changes to the pensions system, while the senate considers budget cuts, a new security law and a law to ban the burqa, there is a sense that France faces dangerous choices. If the reforms go through unmodified the country will have diluted welfare state achievements and cut its responsibilities to citizens, at the same time as it becomes a more hard-faced society for migrants and minorities. On the other hand, if Sarkozy's reforms are derailed, that could wreck what remains of his presidency and might even bring about the credit downgrading which all European governments fear so much.Sarkozy wants to raise the age at which workers can choose to retire by two years to 62 and the age when they get a full pension from 65 to 67. France's pension provisions are more generous than those of most of its neighbours. Trimming them a little might seem to outsiders not unreasonable, given that the pensions burden is steadily becoming less sustainable as the ratio of retirees to people in work worsens, which it is doing everywhere in Europe. But that is to ignore the French left's fear that any change would be the thin end of the wedge, as well as the French view that most work is a burden from which an early release is, or ought to be, a right. Le Monde this week reported on steel workers who speak of the hell of being at the furnace head and chemical industry employees who complain that they will have to breathe in toxic fumes for another two years. Nearly 700 amendments have been tabled in the assembly, and exemptions for workers in dangerous or dirty occupations are one of the areas where there is room for manoeuvre.But the French do not confine their notion of the hard slog to factory work. Le Monde also quotes a shop assistant who explains that by 60 you are completely ground down, and a teachers' leader who sourly offers that the teacher who retires with tears in his eyes is something found in films and not in real life. Francois Chérèque, leader of the Confédération Francaise Démocratique du Travail, has made sensible suggestions for compromise which the government should consider with care.