It's not called austerity, or even rigour. Instead, plans to raise €7.2bn on taxing the rich, be they big businesses or the richest households, all fall under the rubric of a "fair" effort, "just" budgetary discipline, "fairly redressing" the nation's finances. Give François Hollande and his prime minister, Jean-Marc Ayrault, their due. They are doing exactly what they told the French they would do, and what they are doing is proving to be popular.Measures such as a 75% tax on people who earn over €1m get approval ratings of 76% – including 49% of those who voted for the centre-right UMP. Similar high approval ratings greet the other measures he has announced, such as cutting his own salary, capping the salaries of heads of public enterprises and creating 60,000 jobs in education. Hollande's centre-left government is riding a wave of public opinion, not merely the aftermath of elections that give socialists an absolute majority.There are several reasons why Hollande must succeed. To start at home, Britain is moving in the opposite direction. When it was signalled in advance that the top tax rate would go up to 50p, bankers took their bonuses early. Now that George Osborne is taking it down to 45p from next year, the bonuses are being deferred, so that the period of time when a 50p rate has operated is kept as mercifully short as possible.Not only that. David Cameron is positioning Britain as a home for French tax exiles, for whom he wants to roll out the red carpet. When Hollande first announced the 75% tax, the financial daily Les Echos illustrated a report on whether there would be an exodus of the rich with pictures of South Kensington and a Learjet on the runway. British public opinion on this issue differs little from the French. In an era in which getting rich has little to do with wealth or job creation, the rich are seen as the ultimate self-caterers. A Hollande success would reveal the true loyalties or failings of successive British prime ministers.This week was about amending or reversing measures in a budget largely fixed by Nicolas Sarkozy. The deeper tax reforms will come next year. But so too will the hard stuff: spending cuts. Hollande has pledged both to increase the numbers of posts in education, and to freeze total public spending. With a €40bn hole to fill over the next two years, real cuts will have to come. From which ministries the government refuses to say. But this week was also about symbols. Another sign of changed times was the police raid on Sarkozy's home and offices, as part of an investigation into allegations of illegal campaign funding from France's richest woman, the L'Oréal heiress Liliane Bettencourt. The era of being intensely relaxed about the filthy rich is over – even if they pay their taxes.