France is one of those countries that we think we know. This assumption is, in part, what shields so many of her more secret places from invasion. And when I say we, I don't mean just we British. The French, too, when they plan their long and frequent holidays, tend to stick to the well-trodden axes of pleasure: the Alps for their skiing, Brittany or Normandy for their spas, Provence for their long lunches by the pool . . .These are all corners well-served by the French state's magnificent infrastructure but there are other places, most of them off the beaten tracks of the TGV and the autoroutes – and where I live in the Cévennes mountains is one of them.Part of me is still wondering why, at the age of 43, I suddenly decided to uproot from a comfortable life in central Paris and move to a part of France so wild and so remote that even my best-educated Parisian friends, who had no difficulty rattling off the obscurest capital cities, were unable to locate it on the map. They knew that the Lozère, the part of the Cévennes where I would henceforth be paying my taxes, was the most sparsely populated départment in France. And they knew that the cévenols – those taciturn, heavily defended peasants who feature in Raymond Depardon's fashionable and rather condescending documentary on rural France, La vie moderne – are mostly Protestant. For the French, a nation of lapsed Catholic pleasure-seekers, the word Protestant evokes hard work, austerity and mirthlessness. It is therefore of little surprise to me that, two years on, none of my Parisian friends has paid a visit.For Parisians, the Cévennes is still the place described by the great 19th-century French historian Jules Michelet: "The Cévennes offer rock, nothing but rock, razor-sharp shale. You feel the struggle of man, his stubborn and prodigious labour in the face of nature."And it is true that everywhere you go in the area where I live, La Vallée Française, you see evidence of this struggle. You see it written on the landscape: in the dry stone walls and the terraces carved out of the steep hillsides; in the beautiful sweet chestnut groves that still march over so many of those terraces; even in my own roof, made of shale, each lauze carefully chosen and laid like fish scales in ascending order of size, from ridge to eaves. Michelet was right: it is a place of hardship. The Protestants of the Cévennes were brutally persecuted by the French Catholic monarchy for more than 120 years.Today it is still a place of rigorous husbandry. The nearest supermarket to where I live is half an hour away on winding roads, so every one of my neighbours has a vegetable garden hewn from their hillside; many have beehives on the furthest reaches of their land. Everyone has a log pile, beautifully stacked outside their house – the measure of their industry and their readiness for whatever nature can throw at them.Because in this part of the world, nature can suddenly turn nasty. Most of the year the climate is Mediterranean, softened a little in summer by the altitude. Winters are relatively short and mild, with the occasional dusting of snow on the summits. So at first it all seems relatively gentle, particularly to a Brit used to the annual tussle with seasonally adjusted depression. Cypress and green oak thrive on the south-facing slopes, and you can find morels in April, chanterelles in June and cèpes in October. At first I could not understand either the Parisian reluctance or indeed my neighbours' dogged preparedness for the worst. But in my first autumn here, I experienced an épisode cévenol: when cold air from the Atlantic meets warm air from the Mediterranean, leading to dark cloud for days on end, apocalyptic rain, flash floods, broken bridges, dead sheep, restive children, fretful fathers and unhinged mothers. When it ended, and the sun came out, I found myself once again in the most beautiful landscape I had ever seen, one peopled with individuals who gave the impression that they felt lucky to be alive, today, and in this particular part of the world.You come to these hills – like the writer's writer, Robert Louis Stevenson, did – to think and to walk. Looking out over the Vallée Française from the breathtaking crest road that was carved through the Cevennes by Louis XIV's dragoons in their pitiless campaign against the Protestants, you will see little evidence of any change to the landscape since those times. Nothing but tiers of wooded hills fading to the distance with tiny villages huddled around their precious springs and linked by thousands of footpaths, still trodden by smallholders with their goats. This is not a place for people looking for distraction or amusement. It is, and always has been, a place of exile, a place to run away to.I once asked a neighbour of mine, who was giving me a lift to the village in his van, if he still noticed the beauty of the landscape he was brought up in. Without taking his eyes off the winding road, he smiled."Nope," he said. "I drive over the mountain at sunrise every day and I see the mist in the valley but I don't look at it any more. If I ever went away, though, that's when I'd miss it, and I wouldn't be able to be without it."People here are not smug, but they know that they have something precious and they carry that knowledge like a secret worth having.In his essay Spirit of Place, Lawrence Durrell said, "all landscapes ask the same question in the same whisper: I am watching you – are you watching yourself in me?" It was without a doubt the landscape of the Cévennes that drew me. What it was that I saw there of myself I'm not entirely sure, but my father was raised by a Scottish mother near Stirling. When we went on holiday to Provence when I was a child, he would soon become bored by the luxuriant heat that so enchanted my mother, and together we would strike for the purple hills we could see in the distance. The low-lying mountains that you see if you look west from vineyards of the Rhône are a frontier. Beyond them lies another landscape, of craggy hills, mossy woodlands, vast moors, rushing streams and stone bridges. These are close to the Scottish landscapes of my father's youth. His fantasy, you might say, and not mine and yet the Gardon river in my valley flows towards the Mediterranean, not the North Sea. Put simply, it is perhaps as close as France gets to Scotland – or as close as I can get to my roots without betraying my self.• Places to stay: The Hotel Bourgade in Saint André de Valborgne (+33 4 66 566932), has doubles from €55. In the village of Les Plantiers, Auberge du Valgrand (+33 4 66 839011) has doubles from €65. There are no hotels in the Vallée Française but Gîtes de France has a selection of self-catering cottage in the area. Search on the website for Sainte Etienne Vallée Française, Moissac Vallée Française or Sainte Croix Vallée Française. Ryanair flies to Nîmes from Liverpool and Luton and to Montpellier from Bristol and Leeds-Bradford. Easyjet flies to Montpellier from Luton and Gatwick. London to Montpellier by rail with Rail Europe (08448 484 064) starts from £104.50 return. Lucy Wadham is the author of The Secret Life of France (Faber). To order a copy for £10.99 with free UK p&p go to theguardian.com/bookshop or call 0330 333 6847