Rain fell furiously from gun-metal clouds that passed like heavenly rafts. In Montpellier's medieval quarter, water overwhelmed the drains. It hadn't stopped raining for days, rendering the streets bare on a typically bustling Saturday.The ground floor of a car park constructed in 1962 sat like a carbuncle on the pleasing architecture of the Saunerie-Saint-Denis quarter. Sodden and breathless, my husband and I gratefully entered.Enveloped by the scents, sights and sounds of the Halles Laissac market, we heard the florist greet us over her buckets of vivid blooms with, "Quelle inondation! What a flood! Four times the usual rainfall for November."Nearby, an elderly lady tapped her elegant hands on the fromagerie window. "No, no, not the Pélardon. It's too mild. Ah, there." She pointed to a charcoal-rubbed goat's cheese. "The Valençay is better, don't you think?"Carefully displayed fruits and vegetables graced Le Jardin de Laissac's stand; dried fruits and antipasto formed a mosaic at another.We seated ourselves at Chez Corinne, the central buvette, or bar-café. Its wooden bar was lined with age-worn men in heavy caps. My neighbour recommended, "The rosé, naturally." We were near Provence.The barman said: "I've seen three generations. The same customers shop each week. Local markets are lifebloods, not only for the customers but my friends here." Of the men he said, "They're here setting up the stalls at six o'clock when I arrive. They come to me for their espressos and fresh orange juice. And now, their lunch."Indeed, the men were pulling apart crusty baguettes and spreading softened Mont d'Or cheese from their spruce containers. "Why not make your lunch here too?" the barman suggested, and we did."This isn't a beautiful place, but it's a friendly one," the barman said. "It's our home. There are 24 stalls and we all know each other." We couldn't have imagined that the municipal council would decide, irrevocably, to close the market in early 2015.Rain continued to pound as the wind roared. "Have another rosé," my neighbour grinned. "We're not going anywhere for a while."Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions – they should give our readers a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com