The plateau de Millevaches is a granite upland on the western edge of the Massif Central, one hour east of Limoges. A wild, depopulated area of moors, forests, rivers and lakes, it is increasingly becoming repopulated by "green" tourists looking for destinations off the beaten track.Visitors may not encounter a thousand cows on the plateau de Millevaches – the ancient name is actually thought to mean a thousand springs, which could be why it is so green. But they might be surprised by what they do discover among these woods and hills, which is that the area has become a destination for lovers of modern art.In the middle of the plateau is the Lac de Vassivière, a 1,000-hectare lake with five beaches and three mini ports. On an island linked by a causeway to the mainland, is the Centre International d'Art et du Paysage. It's a modern complex of hi-tech exhibition spaces, a symbolic lighthouse, artists' residences and a remarkably well-stocked art bookshop.It's made even more special by the fact that the rest of the island is a renowned sculpture park, with a trademark Andy Goldsworthy stone wall unfurling out of the woods and sliding into the lake itself. There are now more than 60 individual works on the island and the centre provides a free map so that you can hunt them down.A startling recent acquisition from Russian artist Alexander Ponomarev is a decommissioned, redecorated Russian submarine anchored off the shore. Ponomarev is a former nautical engineer, and the sub in its transformed role certainly breaks the conversational ice. Combining art and utility is a new work by Paris based Korean artist Koo Jeong-A called Otro, a sunken complex of bowls, cradles and tunnels that doubles as a skate park.The centre's director, Marianne Lanavère, arrived last year bringing fresh energy and imagination to the site. Her bold programme of conferences, concerts and partnerships is attracting new visitors from all over France and beyond. It has just opened its own art lending library, or artothèque, where local residents can borrow graphic art from the collection to display in their homes.A short drive away in the ancient town of Eymoutiers is another centre of excellence. Espace Paul Rebeyrolle pays homage to an enfant du pays, who could be called the French Francis Bacon. His large-scale canvases set out dark, violent, distorted figurative narratives that explore themes of hostile nature and political oppression.In addition to the permanent collection of paintings, monumental sculptures, drawings and prints, there is a temporary exhibition every summer by a modern master. In the past these have included Miró, Chagall and Picasso.Further south, 30km away through beautiful oak and pine forests, is the pretty slate and granite town of Treignac. Here a young couple from London, Sam Basu and Liz Murray, have taken an audacious gamble. They are gradually restoring an old mill and factory complex in an idyllic setting in the centre of town by an old stone bridge.They already have a two-floor industrial exhibition space called the Treignac Project and invite over 30 international artists for residences and workshops each year. Matt Packer, curator of the Lewis Glucksman Gallery in Cork, Ireland, is now the artistic director.The Treignac Project's reputation is spreading and it has some ambitious plans. Up to now the town has been known primarily for luxury chocolatier Borzeix-Besse which has been making chocs, sweets and patisserie here for over a century. But now the town's own mini Tate Modern is attracting new visitors.The plateau ranges in altitude from 600 metres to almost 1,000. Its southerly latitude means that hot summers (often well over 30C) make the lakes heat up, offering pleasant swimming in 22C water. In the winter, temperatures drop well below zero and there is plenty of snow.The most attractive season is probably autumn, which can be warm and moist. There is a gold and yellow light show as the leaves change colour and the woods are filled with cep and chanterelle mushrooms. The plateau is also an official parc naturel régional which means extra protection for the fauna and flora and a controlled environmental strategy.The Limousin region has recognised the growing importance of a strategic focus on cultural tourism, to add to its already green credentials. These modern art destinations are just three examples from a network of 15 venues in the area.• Le Verrou (+33 5 55 69 98 04, leverrou.co.uk), in the peaceful village of Nedde, is a typical rural auberge well-placed for visiting all these centres. It has 10 bedrooms including two family suites (doubles from €75, set menu using local produce €23). In Eymoutiers, La Cave (2 boulevard Karl Marx, +33 5 55 69 45 34) is a busy restaurant with a terrace on the main square. And tucked away in a side street is a small cafe/restaurant called Cuisine et Compagnie (5 rue de la République, +33 5 55 36 29 45) which has a daily changing menu of surprising quality and innovation given the low prices. Ryanair (ryanair.com) flies to Limoges from Stansted, Bristol, East Midlands, Leeds-Bradford, and Liverpool from £28 one-way. FlyBe (flybe.com) flies from Newcastle and Southampton from £80 one-wayA newly protected area of bogland, woods and lakes, Lough Boora contains a 40-acre sculpture park whose huge works were largely inspired by the industrial legacy of the region. Exhibits include a train sculpture by Irish artist Mike Bulfin, celebrating the Bord na Mona peat-digging machines and the men who operated them, and a stone pyramid by Eileen MacDonagh. • Open all year dawn to dusk, free, loughbooraparklands.com/sculptureSculptor Gintaras Karosas established this open-air gallery in 1991 as the cold war was ending, as an expression of the brave new future. Over 100 large works by sculptors from around the world are displayed in clearings and woodland. They look particularly striking amid autumn colours.• Open all year, adults £6, children £2.60, europosparkas.ltEstablished to promote and commission the best of contemporary sculpture, the Cass Foundation presents regularly changing displays of 80 enormous works set in 26 acres of rolling countryside on the Goodwood estate. Artists involved have included Anthony Caro and Eduardo Paolozzi.• Open daily until 3 November, adults £10, five-16s £5, sculpture.org.uk This 4,000-hectare park in southern Sweden contains a dedicated area of outdoor installations conceived on site. The permanent collection of about 50 works includes sculptures by Dan Graham, Kari Caven and Per Kirkeby.• Open weekends to end-October, adult £5.80, under-18s free, wanas.seA boat balanced on top of a sharp, grassy ridge, an artificial red tree standing in a woody grove … 50 cutting-edge sculptures are spread across this seven-hectare landscaped sculpture park 7km south of Graz. It contains works by a wide variety of artists, from Austrian "visual poet" Heinz Gappmayr to Yoko Ono.• Open daily to end-October, adult €11, children over six €4, museum-joanneum.at