Today members of the French parliament will finally cast their votes on the infamous law banning the voile intégral – the burqa, sitar or khimar – that has been making the headlines for the past year. In the meantime, the anti-burqa campaign has reached Belgium, Spain and Italy, and last week British MP Phillip Hollobone also expressed support for similar measures in this country.Is all this an indication that feelings have changed across Europe, five years after 7/7? That Europeans have become more "Islamophobic"? Probably not. It's rather that things have become particularly tangled and Islam has become an easy card to play. As a recent editorial in Le Monde Diplomatique suggested, the French government is busy sorting out its finances and reforming pensions. The burqa debate is a convenient way to distract the public from unwelcome economic cuts.It is also curious to note that, whereas Belgian MPs have been unanimous in demanding that their country should also ban the voile intégral for the past four years or so, they have been unable to agree on how to form a stable government. Ironically, the anti-burqa bill was approved by the lower chamber of the Belgian parliament on the same day as the latest in a series of government crises; as a consequence the law-making process stalled, and the bill never went to the senate for discussion. Although the Belgian situation came to our attention in Britain unexpectedly, tensions about the veil and Islam have been going on for almost a decade there, especially in the Francophone part of the country, which tends to be influenced by the stricter French approach to laïcité.Although French MPs, left and right alike, have repeatedly insisted on their support for the law, the context to their decision is one of great controversy. Not only are French Muslims frustrated and furious but the Conseil d'État gave official advice, in May, not to pursue a total ban on the burqa in public spaces, and deemed it legally "unfounded". A week ago the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe also issued a unanimous resolution condemning a general law, although it stated that legal restrictions may be justified "for security purposes, or where the public or professional functions of individuals require their religious neutrality, or that their face can be seen". It also recognised that "no woman should be compelled to wear religious apparel by her community or family" and that European governments should educate Muslim women on their rights and freedoms.These mixed feelings about how to respond to the full veil are symptomatic of a not-fully-explicable uneasiness with Islam and the growing religious plurality of Europe. Behind this is probably an inability to deal with bigger issues such as the consequences of globalisation, migration, the financial crisis, and a crisis of national identities. Places in which the veil was not an issue until recently have now been drawn into the debate. With my research team I recently completed fieldwork with Muslim women in Spain and Italy. We clearly detected fear and paranoia among our respondents. Until recently, when questioned about the situation of Islam in Italy I would answer that there were many problems, primarily to do with immigration law, but that no, the veil was definitely not an issue, if anything because Italians and Spaniards were used to seeing and interacting with nuns with their veils everywhere. Unfortunately the situation has now reversed. The "non-issue" of the veil has been imported and become one that polarises people.Spanish local authorities recently put forward legislation (which has nevertheless attracted the support of national politicians including from the left) against veiling; but there had been concerns for some time. Most of our interviewees in Zaragoza mentioned cases of women forced to take off their headscarves in order to be able to accept jobs. In Turin, many well-educated and articulate Muslim women of Moroccan origin complained of how they would be treated with disrespect, as if they could not understand, read or write, when they went to public offices for paperwork pertaining citizenship or their permission to stay. And a young Italian convert told us how frustrated she felt when, the moment she started wearing the hijab, she noted that people suddenly switched to the tu ("you" singular) form in conversation with her and insisted she could not possibly be Italian, whereas before she would be treated with the more formal lei ("you" plural) form.Many Muslims have become very anxious about these developments and Middle Eastern governments and media outlets often emphasise the apparent anti-Islamic attitudes of Europe. I am not sure that the situation has deteriorated all that much, however. Muslims in Britain complain about the negative depiction of Islam in the public domain but Muslims in France wish their country was as free as the UK. Muslims in Italy are tired of being treated as alien immigrants, but at least there have been no draconian counter-terrorism measures or stop and search programmes such as those in the UK. The grass is always greener on the other side.As we know, very few Muslim women wear the burqa or the niqab; many Muslims are in fact opposed to these covering practices; and certain security issues brought up in support of the burqa ban are not totally unfounded (Yassin Omar, the 21/7 bomber allegedly fled London dressed in a burqa; several suicide bombers in Iraq – including a female Belgian convert – were covered; Italy has had a law banning covering your face since Red Brigades and the "years of lead"). The problem with the laws currently being discussed across Europe has a lot to do with the tone used and with the contradictory approach adopted in our countries in matters pertaining to freedom and diversity.Talking to Muslims in antagonistic and aggressive terms, in particular when they are citizens – as in Belgium, France or the UK – or would-be citizens – as in Spain or Italy – does not sound like an ideal way of promoting the notion of a cohesive society with shared values working for the common good. Most politicking talk in Europe revolves around integrating and educating Muslims. Maybe what we need most urgently is a bit of collective reflection on what we understand by diversity and the need to respect the individual.