Britain will fall behind eurozone laggard Italy in the global economic league table next year as a deep recession and the weakness of the pound affect the value of national output, a London-based consultancy said today.After ranking fourth behind the United States, Japan and Germany in terms of the size of the economy earlier this decade, the UK is set to end 2009 in seventh place, the Centre for Economics and Business Research said.Britain has already ceded fourth place to China and will be overtaken this year by France, the CEBR said. Next year, both Britain and Italy are expected to suffer severe recessions but Italy's gross domestic product will have a higher market value than Britain due to the weakness of the pound against the euro. The report said the UK's output at market exchange rates will edge down from $2.80 trillion (£1.9tn) in 2007 to $2.78tn this year, before falling far more sharply to $2.04tn in 2009. Italy's is expected to decline from $2.40tn to $2.17tn.Ben Read, managing economist at the CEBR, said: "The UK economy overtook both Italy and France in the 1990s. However, this position was based on an over-valued sterling and debt-fuelled growth; it is set to be reversed." If the forecasts come true, it will not be the first time Italy has overtaken Britain in the world economic rankings. In the 1980s, there were celebrations for "Il Sorpasso", the moment when Italy's GDP was judged to be bigger than the UK's.The CEBR found, however, that both countries would suffer badly from the global downturn. After uninterrupted growth lasting 16 years, the report said it would take 18 quarters for GDP in the UK to return to the peak reached earlier this year. Italy will suffer a similar period of retrenchment, but the strength of the euro will mean that the value of its output will fall far less sharply. Germany will take 14 quarters to restore GDP to its previous level and Spain 16 quarters. France is expected to be the major European country least affected by the recession, taking six quarters to return output to its previous peak. Richard Snook, one of the authors of the report, said: "The UK economy is likely to be the hardest hit by the credit crunch due to its reliance on consumer borrowing and the financial sector for growth. We see the economy taking four-and-a-half years to return to the peak in the second quarter of 2008. Only the Italian economy, which is beset by structural weaknesses, is set to do worse."