Hometown: Gothenburg, Sweden.The lineup: Joel, Henrik.The background: It's funny that there should have been a feature this morning on perfect pop because the matter has been brought to the table by today's new band. Perfect pop comes in many guises. Many hear it in the scruffy surges of the Strokes, the bubblegum punk of Buzzcocks or blitzkrieg bop of the Ramones, while others see the words "perfect" and "pop" and assume an allusion to the shiny and clean, non-abrasive and sweet, like Sugababes' ear candy or the polished R&B of Rihanna. For some, a perfect pop song must have guitars and gruff (male) voices while for others it must be delivered via keyboards and computers and the airy sigh of a creature of no fixed sex.Air France, two studio hounds plus a fluid lineup of players and singers, come from Sweden, the home of a certain type of perfect pop. Like fellow countrymen (and women) Club 8, Jens Lekman, the Tough Alliance, El Perro Del Mar and NBOTD favourites Studio, they use samples and sequenced beats to create a music that has been described as "post-rave bliss", "beach foam pop" and "Balearic disco". But with its dance pulse, deodorised female vocals, and classic mix of urgent rhythms and melancholy melodies it bears echoes of groups from all over the world, particularly Avalanches and the Go! Team, the pioneers of forlorn girl-group house-pop St Etienne, and the godfathers of pristine disco ennui New Order circa their greatest album Technique.Talking of superlatives and accolades, Air France's debut album, No Way Down, released as it was in the States last year, came in at No 14 in Pitchfork's Best Albums of 2008 list, ahead of Hot Chip, Santogold, Kanye West and Lykke Li, with the single Collapsing At Your Doorstep being voted at No 8 in their Critics' Poll and No 10 in their Readers' Poll. All well deserved: No Way Down, clocking at just 36 minutes and only a bit longer than one song by the otherwise similar-sounding Studio, features the sort of cleverly constructed (the Air France boys claim to be ex-Situationists), superbly produced music whose notional immaculacy doesn't always translate into record sales. Air France do everything right: the pulsing strings, layered synths, pounding house piano, popping basslines, chirpy horn bursts, breathy voices, sampled shouts, wildlife sounds, congas, woodwinds, harp glissandos and guitar filigrees are all exquisitely deployed and arranged. And yet, for whatever reasons, this brand of perfect pop is doomed to remain popular only in theory; an abstract concept, a wistful dream.The buzz: "Their debut album is a work of widescreen bliss, a collage of clubby basslines, kids' voices, disco strings, marimbas, and the occasional whinnying horse. But for every jubilant melody, there's a dose of melancholy."The truth: They'll make you long for the beach while they long to see their lovely music in the charts.Most likely to: Make you cry while you dance.Least likely to: Make you want to do the conga.What to buy: The album No Way Down is released by Something In Construction on 23 March.File next to: New Order, St Etienne, Avalanches, Club 8.Links: www.myspace.com/theairfranceTomorrow's new band: The Soft Pack.