France was today struggling to cope with its most violent storm for 10 years, as winds of more than 100mph swept through the country, killing at least 40 people and leaving 1m homes without power. Central and western France were worst hit with gales and torrential rain felling trees and causing flooding. At least seven people drowned in villages in the Vendée, while three elderly people and a child were found dead in Charente Maritime around La Rochelle. A man was killed by a falling tree branch in the south-western town of Luchon, where winds reached 90mph. As well as the known casualties, at least five other people were reported missing and dozens others injured. As the storm, known as Xynthia, progressed northwards through France over the weekend, five of the country's 95 departments were placed on red alert for only the second time in the emergency system's history. By this afternoon the alert had been downgraded.The Météo France weather agency predicted the worst would be over by this afternoon as the storm headed towards Denmark. Xynthia reached France yesterday after lashing parts of southern Europe with heavy winds and rain. In northern Portugal, a 10-year-old boy was killed by a falling tree branch while playing football, and authorities in Spain said two men died when their car was crushed by a falling tree. Tens of thousands of homes were left without electricity. The bad weather conditions caused transport chaos across France. Fallen trees and flooding caused roads and railway lines to be cut off, while some flights in and out of Charles de Gaulle (Roissy) airport, in northern Paris, were cancelled. Authorities at the garden of Versailles reported that 30 trees had fallen overnight. In the worst-hit areas on the western Atlantic coast, helicopters were deployed to rescue residents who had been forced to climb on to their roofs by floods. According to Météo France, Xynthia is the most violent storm France has seen since December 1999, when high winds caused widespread damage across the country.