We were up before 6am, on the road by 6.30am and threading our way through silent lanes as the sun slowly spilt into the French fields and warmed our aching legs. This was day three of a cycling trip from Caen in Normandy all the way through rural France to the Mediterranean.We averaged 50 miles a day, stopping each night at a chambre d'hote or small hotel. With us came one spare set of kit, a few clothes for the evening, wash bags and wet weather gear, all crammed into the smallest possible saddle bags, along with puncture repair kits and emergency supplies of water and chocolate. After the first couple of days, we fell into a pattern. Creep out at dawn, check the maps, pass the sleepy cattle and greet the two or three farmers we might see before 8.30am. Stop for breakfast at another inviting patisserie and savour a delicious croissant and café au lait while watching local life shuffle by. We'd get bread, cheese and fruit for lunch and cycle on for another couple of hours, hoping to find a patch of shade for our picnics. Then, back in the saddle for the final heave to our destination, where we'd pour an ice-cold beer down our throats as we planned our route for the next day. In bed by 10, with our washed cycling shorts gently drying at the window, our dreams were full of that day's vistas. Châteaux, miles of unbroken green with flashes of red poppies, medieval hill-top towns, the lemon-coloured morning sun easing the mist from the fields, some fantastic swoops down into villages, when we'd freewheel at amazing speeds, shouting into the wind. These wonderful dips were too often followed by an exhausting climb out, when five miles an hour seemed an achievement, but the cold water at the top tasted like the best champagne. Four friends took the trip - two super-fit Kiwis and two south-coast Brits. None of us was a "real" cyclist, but we each brought a unique skill to the group. Alan, the fittest, would steam ahead, and find the best possible place for our picnic lunches. Angie was the chief organiser, who liked to plan our routes and decide where we stayed. My husband was head map reader and packer of saddle bags, while my ability to speak French meant I was most useful at explaining we needed somewhere to lock up our bikes and that we'd be gone before breakfast. It was an amazingly simple holiday. We cycled from our front door to Portsmouth harbour, across to France on the overnight ferry, then pedalled for 13 days and 712 miles to reach the Med. I consumed more calories than at any other time in my life and still lost 7lbs.When we reached our destination and had to pack up our bikes to fly home, we agreed that - if not for work waiting for us - we would have cycled back again.