One of the enduring quotations in the tortuous history of relations between France and Britain is the remark attributed to Churchill during the second world war – that the cross he had to bear was the Cross of Lorraine, the symbol of Charles de Gaulle and the Free French based in London.In fact, the remark came not from the prime minister but from Sir Edward Spears, his friend and emissary to France, on whose plane De Gaulle flew to London in June 1940. Despite his recurrent rows with the general – on D Day he wanted the Frenchman flown out of the country, in chains if necessary – Churchill always harboured an admiration for the man who had said no to his country's defeat by Nazi Germany.But De Gaulle's habit of saying no to the British, too, has left a folk memory in Britain of an alliance that had caused more pain than gain. It is part of a long saga of cross-Channel tension stretching back at least to the hundred years war, which is still evident today in deeply different approaches to the European Union, or invitations by David Cameron and Boris Johnson to discontented French entrepreneurs to move to the UK. Some French would equally recall the British bombardment of their fleet in 1940, the invasion of north Africa two years later, and the US plans to treat France as an occupied nation. On the British side, there is also De Gaulle's obfuscation of the Allied role in liberating Paris in 1944, and his veto of the UK bid to join the Common Market two decades later. On the French side, there is the burning of Joan of Arc, Churchill lining up with Roosevelt against the General, Britain's preference for the open seas rather than collaboration with the European mainland, Tony Blair's backing for George W Bush in Iraq – and the way English has wormed its way into the sacrosanct language of Racine and Corneille.The squabbles are undeniable but there is also another story – one of co-operation and friendship. This was epitomised this week, as the exploit of wing commander Ken Gatward came to light after his war medals were auctioned. Gatward flew his Bristol Beaufighter in Nazi-occupied Paris, down the Champs-Elysees at 30 feet, before dropping a French tricolour flag over the Arc de Triomphe. He then went on to strafe Gestapo headquarters nearby. After the war, the RAF pilot was hailed as a hero by the French government; at a ceremony in Paris, he was presented with a honorary tricolour – and a magnum of champagne. He was also awarded the Distinguished Service Order.There were also, of course, the British agents who went into occupied France to work with the Resistance. For all their arguments, Churchill backed De Gaulle and the Free French from the start (though characteristically, the General insisted on reimbursing funds granted to his movement by the British government). Not everybody was so convinced. De Gaulle's historic BBC broadcast with his call to resistance on 18 June 1940 was initially blocked by the war cabinet, meeting under Lord Halifax, the foreign secretary who wanted to pursue talks with the Petain regime. Churchill was absent, writing a speech, but he agreed to a request by Spears to be allowed to try to get a majority of cabinet members to overturn the decision, which they did.The Free French were initially unpopular with establishment members of the French community in London, but they got a warm welcome from British people who sent gifts to their headquarters – first on the Embankment and then in a grand terrace overlooking St James's Park. The Queen Mother was a supporter. The French Club in St James's thrived as a social centre for the British as well as the French – one popular attraction was jazz violinist Stéphane Grappelli. De Gaulle often lodged at the Connaught hotel, and lunched at the RAC club in Pall Mall.In his final meeting before moving his headquarters to Algiers in 1943, De Gaulle was asked by foreign secretary Anthony Eden what he thought of the British. "Nobody's more friendly than your people", the Frenchman replied. "I do not always think the same of your policy". "Do you know that, of all the European allies, you have caused us the most difficulties?", Eden said in a bantering tone. "I don't doubt that", De Gaulle responded with a smile. "France is a great nation".That pursuit of greatness, embodied most of all by the seemingly aloof but highly human wartime leader who went on to found the Fifth Republic, has caused many upsets over the centuries. Anti-French jokes are two a penny. The image of French politicians as untrustworthy schemers persists. For their part, the French often seem indifferent to the British pursuing their own vain quest to maintain the leadership of Europe in the face of rising German political, as well as economic, authority.But the links are stronger than might appear. London is home to approximately 400,000 French people – more than all but the five biggest cities in the Hexagon (mainland France). Ryanair flights to French towns nobody across the Channel had heard of 20 years ago are full of Brits who have bought cheap country properties (though rising prices are leading some of them to cash in and move elsewhere in search of bargains). British insularity and French pride will always clash but this week, the story of Gatward's feat reminds us that national sensibilities have their limits in times of trouble.