Regions may not seem very significant in a country that has long been highly centralised, but France's regional elections yesterday will be. The ruling UMP held on to Alsace and managed to stop the haemorrhage of support started in the first round of voting a week ago, with a slightly lower abstention rate. It was not the knock-out blow that the Nouvel Observateur predicted in another pun on the president's malleable name (Has Sarko been KOed, it asked). But this was still a stunning victory for the left and reminiscent of the result in 2004. It is not just that this was the last electoral test before the presidentials in 2012. It is also the manner in which his ruling UMP party lost.This election witnessed a significant reversal of the roles played out over the past eight years. The formerly fractious Socialists – arguing over the deckchairs as the ship has been sinking beneath them – have rediscovered the art of forming alliances by reaching out in both directions, to the greens and the far left. Meanwhile, the conservative UMP seems to have run out of road, squeezed on the right by a stubbornly resurgent Front National, and in the centre by mass abstentions. The UMP always remained a coalition between centrism and Gaullism, but having consumed the centrist UDF, it has found itself with no one to turn to.None of the ballot papers had the president's name on it, but the recriminations starting today almost certainly will. The president's instinct will be to kick the cat, and dismiss his prime minister, François Fillon. Except that he is no more able to do that than Gordon Brown was to remove Alistair Darling a year ago. The amiable prime minister is more sure-footed and popular than his mercurial president. And Mr Fillon's powers as a negotiator will be needed in full if Mr Sarkozy is to modernise the pension system, the most perilous part of his reform programme. Mr Sarkozy is more likely to cast the Socialists, for example, foreign minister Bernard Kouchner, out of his government.Martine Aubry has been the Socialist heroine of this election. The daughter of Jacques Delors, she has struggled to impose her authority over a party dominated by large political egos. With one wobble (a row with the president of Languedoc-Roussillon, who made an antisemitic allusion to the former prime minister, Laurent Fabius). Ms Aubry held the show together and formed a valuable alliance with Daniel Cohn-Bendit's Europe Écologie. Having, for the moment, seen off the former Socialist presidential candidate Ségolène Royale, and faced with the possible return of Dominique Strauss-Kahn, who may find that running the IMF does not make the strongest springboard for the presidency, Ms Aubry is in a good position to press the case for her own candidacy against Mr Sarkozy in 2012.