In April, my boyfriend and I made our fourth trip of the winter back to our old haunt Morzine, staying with friends who were working in a chalet there. Hospitable and lively, Morzine is the resort of choice for many a British seasonnaire. But come the end of April, the tourists have left town, most of the chalets, apartments and hotels have closed their doors, and the majority of seasonnaires are gone, just goggle marks, a few neat tricks and a dose of the clap to their names.Peace descends. Yet the lifts are still turning and the pistes are still groomed. For those who have stuck around, there is more to be had. The last week of the season. At the very end of April this year we basked deliriously in two days of fresh powder. Our posse felt like we were the only ones on the mountain.For me, the last week of the season is the week of the season. And the party of the week of the season takes place at Chez Flo in nearby Avoriaz, when the usually civil restaurant is gripped with end-of-season madness of the very best kind. This is why we really come. We kick off at noon, faces already flushed from a morning's corduroy-riding grow ruddier with exuberant amounts of rosé. The decking is packed with tables, everyone initiated in what lies ahead. A giant paella cooks outside, yellow rice and orange prawns bright against the snow. Waiters gallop between long tables, napkins flutter in the breeze, the sun beats down on beanied-heads and welds goggles to faces; everyone gets an unavoidable red-neck tan. The band sets up on the snow. Chords strike. The sky is very, very blue. The Génépi appears, the clear spirit that maketh monsters. The music gets louder. Beer is slopping in the snowy mosh pit. Someone thinks it's a smart idea to get a final ride in, on the last lift. The place is crammed with lifties, pisteurs, red-coat instructors. We are all celebrating. The season that was. The seasons that will be. We've had our fill of snow for a little while, we've had more than most, and our faces are joyfully turned to the sun.