There is nothing uniquely African about corruption – or war, or arms trafficking, or the power of petroleum to encourage excessively selfish behaviour among men. If any good could come of Angolagate, it might be this: a lesson for the many millions of westerners who still manage to delude themselves with the idea that Africans are somehow nastier and greedier (or, in the case of mainstream media and pop-star portrayals, simpler and sweeter) than the rest of us.Among those accused in the arms-to-Angola scandal is a long list of French businessmen and senior government officials, many of whom served during the presidency (1981 to 1995) of the late François Mitterand. His own son, 61-year-old Jean-Christophe, is accused of "complicity in illegal trade and embezzlement" and of having received over $2.6 million in bribes. Yet I hear no moans and groans in Britain about the corrupt bloody French. Despite its name, Angolagate is more a reflection of French greed and French politics than Angolan corruption, even if several Angolans probably did also walk away with large wads of wonga.In 1993, just months after a first and very flawed election had collapsed the year before, the Angolan war escalated considerably. The central highland cities of Kuito and Huambo were among the worst affected, split down the middle between forces loyal to the ruling Movimento Popular da Libertação de Angola (MPLA) and the then rebel army, União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (Unita).Angolan President José Eduardo Dos Santos was desperate, and feared he would finally be defeated by his oldest and most brilliant enemy, Unita leader Jonas Malheiro Savimbi. So the story goes, he called up an old socialist comrade, Jean-Bernard Curial, who also happened to be the Africa advisor to Mitterand's Parti Socialiste (PS). The networks swung into action, and soon huge arms deals were under way involving the Angolan, Slovakian and Russian governments. All almost well and good: the only sticking point was the conservative French ministry of defence, which favoured Savimbi's rightwing Unita over the still seemingly socialist MPLA.As Global Witness's Alex Yearsley puts it:There was a double French policy concerning Angola, a hangover from the Cold War if you like. And those battles – between right and left, between who gets into the French presidency and who doesn't - have continued. This is how the Angolagate trial should be understood. The French political establishment are having their dirty laundry put on show in the death throes of a trial that was supposed to be about corruption, arms dealing and money laundering.With this in mind, it will be interesting to see how far President Nicolas Sarkozy will go to protect his new-found friendship with Dos Santos. Observers in Paris expect the French investigating judge, Philippe Courroye, to subpoena senior Angolans - including the president - who have been named in the indictment, and accused of financially benefiting from the arms deals. But Sarkozy will not want to upset the Angolan leader, who heads what is one of Africa's largest oil-producing nations pumping out close to 2 million barrels a day.The trial is expected to last five months, which would push proceedings into March next year – the same year that marks Dos Santos' 30th in power, and the same year in which he has promised to hold presidential elections (the first in 17 years). The last thing he needs is details of backhanders and arms deals splattered across the newspapers. If he is embarrassed publicly, he will ensure that French interests suffer in Angola's oil, energy and construction sectors. Which is why we should be watching Sarkozy closely.Incidentally, earlier this month, Dr Edward George, an economist at the Economist Intelligence Unit, reported that the French presidency is alleged to have intervened in another case involving another African leader, this one being Cote d'Ivoire's President Laurent Gbagbo. Gbagbo's wife, Simone Gbagbo, was linked to the 2004 disappearance of French-Canadian journalist, Guy-André Kieffer.Earlier this year, she and an Ivorian minister received a summons from a French court seeking to hear evidence from them. The court had also communicated with an anonymous witness who wanted to give evidence about Kieffer's disappearance. This all sounds like progress, except that the witness lost his nerve and refused to testify, citing pressure and intimidation from the office of the French presidency.All of this amounts to gloomy news for those Angolans who would like to see some measure of justice and equality introduced onto the Angolan political scene. They have just seen the MPLA take a landslide victory of almost 82% in legislative elections that were far from being truly free or fair. The party, as Angolan writer Sousa Jamba told me, is "above any criticism, and it will be a long time before the Angolan establishment will be ready for any scrutiny."