Readers of the Times could be forgiven for feeling a little confused after reading that "the monkeys have not merely surrendered but are prostrating themselves at the Golden Arch" of McDonald's. The monkeys? The French. The evidence of their national surrender to burgers: the latest profit figures showing that France is leading the field for McDonald's in Europe with revenues increased by 11% to €3 billion (£2.3 billion) in 2007. In October 2004, however, the Times ran a story headed: "How France keeps children out of McDonald's". Since then though, the number of French people buying McDonald's grub every day has only slightly increased to around 1.2 million. So how, in just three years, did the French go from managing to keep their children out of McDo to the country's total surrender to le Big Mac? In fact, French kids are not kept out of le McDo, and surrender never took place.However strange and counter-intuitive it may sound, McDonald's has always been successful in France, ever since it first set foot in Strasbourg in 1979 (and in Paris, five years later). It could be the great anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss in them, but a majority of French people are extremely curious about food. So when burgers entered their lives in the late 1970s, they embraced them with the passion of new converts. As much as they later adopted sushi and sashimi: Paris was 10 years ahead of London in pioneering affordable Japanese eateries to its hordes of students and adventurous gourmets in the late 1980s.French school canteens, with a menu du jour displayed every day in playgrounds, also educate young palates so that children don't become slaves to fast food in later years. Most teenagers in France go to McDonald's, but it doesn't prevent them from enjoying their grandmother's soupe de cresson their uncle's soufflé au fromage, and more importantly, they know the difference between junk food and gastronomy.Personally, if I have to eat fast, I find nothing better than a good jambon-beurre in a Parisian cafe, eaten standing up at the counter. Three euros and 10 minutes later, you still feel light. If I want to eat a burger, I wait until I can sit on worn-out red leather high stool in an old diner in the US. I could also save for a month to go to L'Atelier, the restaurant of chef Joël Robuchon who, as the International Herald Tribune recently reported, serves burgers topped with foie gras.  So who wins when American burgers find their way to the best tables of the best restaurants? Imagination wins. But of course, to explain McDonald's parfum de success you may prefer to dig into the legendary contrarian nature of French behaviour ...