As he was held in prison on Devil's Island, the only prayers that Alfred Dreyfus offered up were those to the president of the republic. Piers Paul Read points out in his new account of the most infamous miscarriage of French justice that the ideals that sustained the Jewish army officer falsely accused of espionage were those of republican France. Read quotes from one of the letters Dreyfus wrote from his Caribbean gulag to his wife Lucie: "However atrocious may have been the tortures inflicted on me … I have never forgotten that, far above men, far above their passions, far above their errors, is our country. It is she who will be my final judge."A similar sentiment is re-emerging in a France stunned by the Toulouse shootings. And it will pour out on to Paris's streets on Saturday when the French – Jews and Muslims and everyone else – will march in their thousands together. Their message stands repetition: the republic will come together in the face of such an assault on its minorities. Until the massive manhunt tracks down its quarry, it is dangerous to speculate on motives. They may have no connection with the 17th Parachute regiment of Montauban, three of whose members were filmed in 2008 making Nazi salutes.We simply do not know whether the shootings are connected to the anniversary of the end of the Algerian war, or whether France is on the brink of its own Oslo moment, when Anders Behring Breivik massacred 77 people at a Social Democrat summer camp last year.Campaigning has been suspended, but the shooting has already sent tremors through France's presidential election. The first to say what was on everyone's mind was not the Socialist challenger François Hollande but the centrist François Bayrou. He said the killings were the product of a sick society, with politicians who pointed the finger and inflamed passions. No prize for guessing whom he was talking about. Nicolas Sarkozy's lurch to the right has included such claims as there being too many immigrants in France, and that the French were secretly ingesting halal meat. Alain Juppé, the foreign minister, fought back by declaring that Bayrou's statement was ignoble. But it is must already be clear this part of the incumbent's re-election campaign is dead. Currying votes from the extreme right is a two-edged sword, and Sarkozy could be about to feel its blade. The minister who has been most shamelessly xenophobic, Claude Guéant, is now the man in charge of of the manhunt.This was not the election campaign – personalised, divisive, vituperative – that France wanted or needed. France's main concern, like Britain's, is jobs. Its problem, like ours, is curbing the super-rich not immigrants. Mr Sarkozy may now try to move to the centre ground. But let us hope he does not fool too many voters.