It's been so long... The last one should have been the two weeks in Sri Lanka over Christmas and New Year 2004/5, but it was hard to kick back and really chill in a country that had been devastated by a natural disaster on the very day we had arrived. And yes - that comment is knowingly narcissistic: if there have been two weeks in my life other than those 14 post-tsunami days when I have thought less about myself and more about the bigger picture then I can't recall them. So, aside from a few snatched days here and there, in Wales and Suffolk and Spain, and that final pre-birth blow-out in a Four Seasons in Bali when I was five months pregnant with my firstborn, all of which involved note-taking for professional purposes - though admittedly this was no great hardship - the last time I'd been on a proper no-strings, you-pays-yer-money sort of holiday was in Kerala at the tail-end of 2001, when I was a mere 12 weeks pregnant. My eldest turned six last Monday, so it's fair to say I've probably needed one for a while.For ages I couldn't really work out how I was going to have any sort of holiday with my offspring that may conceivably involve relaxation. Hurling a credit card at the problem by booking an all-inclusive with hot-and-cold running kids' clubs and en-suite baby nannies to keep the small people entertained while I sat on a sun-lounger hiding behind Christopher Ciccone's stitch-up of his big sister (riveting, but very wrong) didn't really appeal. Meanwhile, the prospect of CenterParcs - perhaps the most smugly preening nuclear family-orientated holiday experience ever - was terrifying. I envisaged myself dining alone with small children in mid-sugar rush while parents covered the eyes of their 2.4s, whispering.Don't let anybody attempt to persuade you there is no stigma attached to single-parenthood any more, much less among the middle classes. Couples with kids don't really want you near them in case it's a form of measles, while singles and the child-free observe you with bemused detachment and think 'What fresh hell...?'Nonetheless, given that there are so many of us I'm amazed how limited the holiday options are for single parents. I'd be far too embarrassed ever to ask my coupled-up friends with kids if I could make a gooseberry fool of myself, so what - aside from a rented cottage in Cornwall with nights spent weeping into the gin - is the alternative? Well, a couple of weeks ago circumstances happily conspired to let me find out, without resorting to Mother's Ruin. A few months ago I had a call from Shirley, who, in the absence of my own (alive, but a long way away), has been a surrogate mother to me since 1980, when I met her daughter, Claudia, on our first day at sixth-form college. Claudia and I became besties and I adopted her family, who, compared with my own, seemed to me to be the very model of warmth, kindness, generosity and functionality. After the intensity of our teenage years, Claudia and I have lived very different lives but retain a sibling fondness. She now lives in Australia and has two children, almost exactly the same ages as mine.'Claudia's coming this summer and bringing the children,' said Shirley, from her home in south-west France. 'You must come. And of course Mark [Claudia's brother] and Gail are here with Oscar, so there would be three boys all the same age, and then the little ones...'. I didn't need any more of the soft-sell.'Do you know anywhere I could stay?''Oh, you must stay at Alex's house...'.Blessed indeed is the exceptionally tired single mother-of-two with old friends who own holiday homes in attractive bits of France. Weeks later, sitting on my lovely borrowed hill overlooking the valleys where the rivers Lot and Garonne converge, nursing a glass of rosé while watching a posse of newly bonded small children colliding on the trampoline, I thought, 'You lucky cow.' It took another 10 days to begin to relax, of course (I blame the trampoline), but then I'm out of practice. 'You will come back, won't you?' said Shirley, but I think she knew the answer. The children would never forgive me if we didn't.kathryn.flett@observer.co.uk