Blame it on the Bastille. Though the storming of the Paris prison on July 14, 1789 was really quite a minor affair, with just seven prisoners inside to be freed, it not only gave the French a national holiday but also set a pattern of street protests that wends its way through history to today's "Black Thursday". Initial reports suggest that the effects of the latest protest against the Sarkozy administration have been somewhat less than the forecast of national paralysis had indicated. No matter, the French have taken to the streets again to exercise their time-honoured right of seeking to stop an elected government putting into practice policies which were approved by a majority of voters. Taking to the streets and going on strike is much more fulfilling than waiting for the next round of elections or forming a coherent opposition.French friends have told me over the years that we British lack the proper enthusiasm needed to take matters into our own hands to show what we think of those we chose to rule us. As Agnes Poirier wrote on Cif of early strikes against the Sarkozy administration at the end of 2007: "After all, we like demonstrating. For us, it's like a jog in the park: refreshing and energising." The fact that the finance minister reckoned that particular strike was costing the country €300m a day at a time when economic clouds were already gathering was of little import. When I quibbled about the merits of a strike and demonstrations to preserve the right of booking clerks on the railway system to retire early, a French relative lectured me about the importance of the Republican tradition stretching back to 1789.I know, from past experience, that if I appear at all critical of the way things are done in France, I am likely to receive a stream of postings pointing out how much better French health service/schools/trains work than those in Britain, and, after yesterday's IMF report, drawing attention to the fact that the UK is forecast to do even worse than France economically this year. So may I get in a pre-emotive plea that, in musing on France, I am in no way defending the leader who said he had saved the world (or at least the banks) just before we went through another avalanche of bad news?My problem with the French way of strikes and street protests is that they reflect a democratic deficit which has run through the country's history since 1789. The revolution took the nation through the terror to the first modern military dictatorship under Napoleon. Then there was the restoration, and a relatively liberal burst under Louis Philippe which was carefully controlled as the years went by and favoured the bourgeois establishment. The revolution of 1848 led to Napoleon III, a man with some good ideas who ran an increasingly oligopolistic regime. When he fell in 1870, the Third Republic was proclaimed as the bearer of modernity to the French people, but it evolved into a system controlled by an elite whose members swopped jobs in a series of revolving-door governments, and who mouthed a progressive rhetoric but presided over an unequal society. The popular front of 1936 was soon brought down by economics. The regime's collapse amid the debacle of 1940 was not only the result of military incompetence but also stemmed from the fact that most of the population could see no reason to preserve it. It had withheld votes from women for fear that they would back reactionary religious parties and ended by voting power to an 84-year-old old soldier with a limited attention span and a dedication to old values.After the liberation of 1944, the politicians got rid of Charles de Gaulle and went back to the small circle government of the past, in which the same class remained in power despite the disasters in Indochina and Algeria. De Gaulle's assumption of power in 1958 was a coup in everything but name. He had been in favour of a strong, even authoritarian, central executive and contemptuous of parliamentary politicians ever since his jottings as a German prisoner in the first world war, but he managed to combine this with a respect for democracy that saw him stepping down when he lost a referendum in 1969. As for the riots and strikes of 1968, one might note that, despite their social and cultural impact, the first had little positive political resonance – the ensuing elections returned a big conservative majority – while the work stoppages were carefully controlled by the Communist party and called off when the government came up with the cash. Since then, France has been looking for somebody who can make the Fifth Republic work as well as its founder did in its first nine or ten years. For all his vim and vigour, Sarkozy does not fit the presidential robes designed by De Gaulle. In part, this is a function of changing times. But it is also a matter of political psychology. Though he could be as partisan as anybody, De Gaulle proclaimed a myth of national unity behind him. He liked to tower above the fray. Sarkozy is down there brawling with his opponents; that is how he got to the top, after all.This, naturally, draws a populist reaction such as we see with today's strikes and marches. The rejectionist front reinforces itself as it stretches from intellectuals to the hallowed ranks of the train drivers. Parliament is seen as irrelevant. The failure of the left at the last presidential elections has been compounded by the subsequent comic opera jousting for the leadership of the Socialist party. The result is a continuing disdain for the legislature and for the electoral process.In the past, some governments have retreated in the face of protests, mainly from the left but also, as in the defence of Catholic schools in the 1980s, from other parts of the political spectrum. Sarkozy says, of course, that he will not change course. His smoother prime minister, François Fillon, delivered a convincing argument on television the other night explaining the effects of economic downturn on the country. But both men have shown considerable skill at trimming their sails in negotiations with unions and professional bodies. They may hope that the mobilisation will be relatively low and that French people are growing more placid and less intent on getting immediate results without waiting out the long period between elections. However, they are confronting not only today's protests but also tradition stretching back for more than two centuries. Is France really ready to become more British?