On 12 December 2012, after 10 months' restoration work and silence, the great organ of Notre Dame de Paris – the largest in France, with five keyboards, 109 stops and nearly 8,000 pipes – opened the festivities for the cathedral's 850th anniversary. But this fine tree, which is public property, hides a forest of 234 other organs in the capital, many in poor repair. Of these, 126 (including 32 historical monuments) are the responsibility of the city council under the law of 1905 separating church and state."Paris has the privilege of being the public authority which owns the most organs in the world," says Catherine Hubault, head of the council's heritage and history department. "Our annual budget of €250,000 ($320,000) is just enough to do limited upkeep on about 15 instruments. But we have to plan restoration jobs which may cost, depending on the instrument, between €500,000 and €1.5m, as was the case for the organs at Saint Louis en l'île, which were restored in 2004. Since then we have spent about €3.5m."The budget is totally inadequate, according to Eric Brottier, organ expert to the city council. He carried out a full inventory when he started work in 2005. "The situation is alarming," he says. "Two-thirds of the organs need major repairs, whereas all we can do is patch up those in most urgent need of attention."The outlook is gloomy. The funds allocated to the city's religious heritage have plummeted in the past 15 years. "Between 2000 and 2013, the amount fell from €120m to €60m, whereas the overall budget rose from €3bn to €8bn," says Maxime Cumunel, head of the Observatory of Religious Heritage (OPR).Apart from normal wear and tear the dust and pollution in cities are key factors in the deterioration of organs. Nor does dry air from heating systems help.Brottier complains that organs are generally poorly maintained by individual parishes. Furthermore, "repair work on the rest of the building often harms inadequately protected instruments", he adds. "At Saint-Pierre de Montrouge, we found lots of sand and stones inside the organ after work on the bell tower." Setting aside financial worries, the image of organs has lost its sparkle. "Organists do their best to change mindsets, but most people associate them with religious services. Added to which they're mysterious, complicated instruments often seen as boring," says Benjamin Alard, the organist at the church of Saint Louis en l'île, which boasts a superb specimen built by Bernard Aubertin.Falling between two stools – part artistic, part religious – organs are increasingly sidelined as church attendance dwindles in France. "Faced with the choice between public welfare and organ repairs, local councils always favour welfare," says Cumunel. "For organs to justify subsidies they must serve a social purpose, in other words be used for concerts and teaching."But they remain an essential part of local identity, with all the emotional weight that carries. "We weren't able to save Saint Jacques church at Abbeville in the Somme [in northern France]," says Roland Galtier, an organ technician employed by the Monuments Historiques organisation. "But the organ, a 1906 Mutin/Cavaillé-Coll, was rescued."The prospects for the next 20 years look bleak. But organs have plenty going for them. France has one of the most highly rated schools for organists, even if the high-profile stars of the past – such as Marcel Dupré, Pierre Cochereau and Marie-Claire Alain – have been followed by equally talented but less well-known virtuosos. It also boasts some excellent organ builders, whose skills have won recognition in many places, particularly the US, Japan and more recently Russia. "We are nevertheless worried about the future," says Yves Fossaert, an organ-builder based in Seine et Marne, east of Paris, who has just restored a 19th-century symphonic organ, built by Aristide Cavaillé-Coll, in the Pentemont Protestant church in Paris. "Many projects are being postponed, which makes it difficult for young people entering the trade."To reverse this trend, advocates highlight the need for the instruments once more to play a central role in concert halls. In France only the Auditorium Maurice Ravel, in Lyon, still has an organ, an old Cavaillé-Coll (82 stops, 6,500 pipes) purchased from the Palais de Trocadéro in Paris in 1977. The Palais Garnier lost its organ when Rolf Liebermann was at the helm of the opera house. But Radio France is building a new auditorium and, after selling its Danion-Gonzalez to Lille cathedral for next to nothing, it has suddenly changed its mind and commissioned an 86-stop Grenzing instrument. The new Paris Philharmonic Hall plans to have an organ too.Another solution may be to take advantage of the current fashion for playing live music in cinemas during the projection of a film. An organ is currently being built for a cinema in La Ciotat, near Marseille, according to Philippe Lefebvre, one of the organists at Notre Dame. He wonders whether this idea might not catch on with old movie houses in the capital, if only to show that "organs are more than just machines for pumping out hymns".This article appeared in Guardian Weekly, which incorporated material from Le Monde