Elections in the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia always carry special political resonance for Germany as a whole – and even for Europe. That's partly because NRW is the most populated of Germany's federal Länder, and partly because of the state's economic clout. The area was the home of the German industrial revolution of the 19th century and became the crucible of the postwar German industrial miracle. Even today, it is responsible for a quarter of Germany's GDP.But NRW also resonates because it has sometimes been a political bellwether. Though always more naturally social democratic than many other Länder, North-Rhine Westphalia has often signalled the emergence of governing alliances, whose participants have then consolidated their grip in subsequent national elections. This happened with the SDP-Green coalition in the state in 1995, and with the Christian Democrat-FDP coalition that ousted it there in 2005. So it is naturally tempting to see the weekend re-election of North-Rhine Westphalia's current SDP-Green coalition and the eclipse of the CDU, Angela Merkel's party, as a harbinger for next year's federal elections too. Perhaps not even Mrs Merkel is safe from the anti-incumbent, anti-austerity electoral mood across Europe right now.That may be simplistic thinking. The CDU certainly did very badly on Sunday, with its share of the vote slumping eight points to an all-time record low of 26%. The SDP did well, boosting its share by five points to 39%, though that is still a poor result by the historical standards of the party in this state. But local campaign factors were crucial in both cases, and Mrs Merkel remains more popular than other party leaders on the national stage. Other parties of the left, meanwhile, did badly, with the Greens slipping back a little and the Left party falling out of the NRW Landtag altogether. The gainers on Sunday were the free-market FDP, Mrs Merkel's federal coalition partner, which had done abysmally in many recent state elections, and the hard-to-classify Pirate party, which may be on course to break into the Bundestag next year too.Sunday's NRW election is a reminder of a larger fact. Germany now has six main political parties vying for votes, not three as in the 1970s. Single-party victories at state or federal level are now very much the exception. All German elections are about choosing coalitions. Mrs Merkel can take comfort from the rise of the Pirates, which may make leftwing coalition majorities more difficult. But Sunday's good performance in North-Rhine Westphalia by both the SDP and the FDP will revive talk of a possible traffic-light alliance between them and the Greens if Mrs Merkel is judged to have lost her grip on the eurozone crisis in the months ahead.