The uncomfortable truth about Germany's Muslim minority is that for years both ethnic Germans and the Turkish and Kurdish migrant community have preferred to live more or less separately. Germans have not been very welcoming, while Turks and Kurds have not been very interested in integration. This is, or was, hardly surprising. When people of quite different cultures are forced together by circumstance, rather than design, they are likely to rub along with one another in a very limited way, at least at the beginning.What is understandable in the short term, however, is likely to be unwise in the long run, so it is not entirely a bad thing that Thilo Sarrazin has pushed the issue to the top of the popular agenda with his controversial book. This descendant of Huguenot refugees, who also boasts two grandparents of non-German background, is not happy with today's migrants – who are, he says, welfare dependent, responsible for too much crime, unwilling to learn or speak German, and unwilling to marry Germans. They marry other Turks or Arabs instead and go on to have too many children. He does not wish to see, he adds, a Muslim-dominated Germany. He claims these arguments are supported by official statistics, and this is not entirely untrue. The trouble with his book, apart from its half-baked views on genetics and civilisational characteristics, is that it leaves out the historical context, deals with social problems as if they were deliberate and perverse choices by those of Muslim background, and blames immigrants for situations for which both sides share the blame.It has, nevertheless, gone right to the top of the bestseller list. A considerable number of Germans seem to feel that Mr Sarrazin has given voice to their own views. His sudden prominence is likely to be sustained rather than diminished by the fact that he is in the process of being ejected from his position as a member of the board of the Bundesbank. The German elite's rush to dissociate itself from him is understandable but has had unfortunate consequences. Bundesbank independence, even though it is meant to be fiscal rather than personal, looks somewhat compromised and Mr Sarrazin may achieve a sort of martyr status.The larger problem is that in Germany as elsewhere, mainstream politicians both play to anti-immigrant feeling and deplore it. Even while they subtly exploit the majority's fears, in the name of diversity they tread far too carefully in their dealings with minorities. This is a bad combination at a time when economic pressures are widening and a new selfishness and readiness to blame others is on the rise across Europe.