The Taiwanese technology company HTC faces the bleak prospect of seeing sales of all its smartphones blocked from sale in Germany during the crucial Christmas period, after it withdrew its objections to a patent claim won by the German firm IPCom in February 2009 in a Mannheim court.HTC's appeal against the 2009 decision was due to be decided on this week. Its withdrawal means that the fourth-largest smartphone maker in the world could see its sales halted in the country. IPCom said in a statement that it "now intends to execute this injunction in the shortest possible time" and that: "We will use the right awarded by the courts, likely resulting in HTC devices disappearing from shops during the crucial Christmas season."The announcement comes just weeks after HTC warned that its revenues could fall by much more the 8% in this quarter compared to the third quarter due to intensifying competition in the smartphone market from Samsung and Apple at the high end, and Chinese mainland companies at the low end.To some, it indicates that the company faces a serious challenge to its future growth. HTC claimed that its appeal would have been redundant, as a German patent court has questioned the validity of the patent in the 2009 decision.IPCom acquired Bosch's mobile telephony patent portfolio, created between the mid-1980s and 2000, which includes about 160 patent families worldwide, including some of the key patents in the wireless industry – such as "patent 100", which standardises a mobile phone's first connection to a network. IPCom has battled for years against HTC and the giant Finnish mobile company Nokia in European courts.Analysts and lawyers said HTC's withdrawal gives it time to battle against two other patents which could have been decided upon next week, while it can still try to delay the original injunction. However, the German patent expert and blogger Florian Müller said that "while HTC can try to oppose the enforcement of the injunction, my research shows that the odds are very long against HTC on this one". The sales disruption in Germany, one of Europe's largest smartphone markets – but where penetration is still only around 30%, indicating huge potential for growth – comes at a time when HTC is struggling to hold on to its position on the smartphone market."This represents an unwelcome distraction during an already difficult quarter for HTC," said CCS Insight analyst Geoff Blaber.Late last month, HTC warned that revenue would fall by up to 8% in October-December from the third quarter, and this week it flagged a much bigger drop, citing tougher competition and the global downturn. HTC's stock has fallen 30% in eight straight trading days.With Nokia's fall from market dominance still fresh in the memory, and BlackBerry maker Research in Motion losing ground, HTC needs to recapture its innovative drive to make sure it maintains its position, say analysts."It won't be easy for HTC to get out of the mess it's in right now," said Simon Liu, deputy investment officer at Polaris Group's fund unit. "Still, it's not the end of HTC. It's certainly not another Nokia. Nokia missed out on the smartphone market from the very beginning, and didn't develop applications as well as Apple."For a decade, Taiwan's HTC quietly made phones for others to sell, but then decided to push its own brand in late 2006. In the year to April, its shares more than tripled after its innovative designs played well with shoppers.Sales of phone models including Desire, Sensation, Wildfire, Rhyme and ChaCha grew fourfold in just 18 months, and in the third quarter of this year it sold more smartphones in the US than any of its rivals.But its cracking performance is sputtering as it fails to bring out new products to rival the iPhone and Samsung's Galaxy in the high-end smartphone market.Closer to home, China's ZTE and Huawei Technologies Co are turning out smartphones that sell for as little as $100 (£65) to target the low end of the business, a fast-growth market that HTC so far has largely avoided."It lacks a star smartphone," said CK Lu, an analyst with research firm Gartner in Taipei. "If you put HTC phones all in a line, you won't be able to differentiate the products too clearly, unlike Samsung's Galaxy 2 or the iPhone. In China, for example, consumers won't be able to differentiate HTC phones from a slew of others, such as the China-made ones, and that's where HTC is facing some problems."HTC, valued at around $14bn, saw a bigger buildup of unsold inventory than rivals in the third quarter, a portent of weak sales in the crucial year-end holiday season."Aside from rising competition from Apple and Samsung in the high-end market, aggressive price competition from Huawei and ZTE at the lower-end could put further pressure on HTC's margin," said Laura Chen, analyst at BNP Paribas. "We believe HTC is reviewing its product roadmap to regain market share in 2012. However, most of its new products are to be launched only late in the first quarter."HTC is also re-evaluating its $300m acquisition of S3 Graphics after the graphics technology firm lost a legal battle in the US against Apple, which raises the spectre that HTC products could be banned from the US – where it earns half its revenue. HTC had planned to buy S3 to beef up its defences in its own separate lawsuit battle with Apple."Winning the lawsuit has made it possible for Apple to squeeze HTC by the neck in future," said Liu at Polaris.HTC was the company that infuriated Steve Jobs, Apple's late co-founder and chief executive, when in January 2010 it introduced an Android phone that he alleged assimilated a number of iPhone features. On seeing it he told Eric Schmidt, then chief executive of Google, that he would try to wipe out Android. However the iPCom lawsuit has been running since long before that, and there is no indication that Apple was involved in its inception.HTC's shares are down more than 60% in six months, making it the worst performer among major handset firms, along with RIM. Shares in LG Electronics are down 36% and Nokia 29%. Samsung and Apple both rose around 9% in that period.Five analysts now have "sell" ratings on HTC, up from two just a month ago. The number of "buy" recommendations has dropped to nine from 13, Thomson Reuters StarMine data showed. HTC shares fell by the most allowed in one day last Friday, dropping nearly 7% for a second consecutive session.The company, which had 10.8% global market share in the third quarter, sold only 1m more phones than RIM, and its market share gap with bigger rivals is expected to widen as Nokia fights back with its first Windows Phone-based models."HTC hasn't offered enough new models, and hasn't been aggressive in its pricing strategy," Barclays analyst Dale Gai wrote in a client note. "We believe Samsung leads HTC in most high-end models, including LTE phones, where HTC has failed to compete on form factor."Gartner's Lu, however, sees little risk of HTC going the way of Nokia."Basically, HTC is on the right track, but it will take time for its brand- and retail-building. It's in way better shape than LG, RIM and Motorola. But it's true it's not as competitive as Apple or Samsung."Annie Lu, a spokeswoman for HTC, said the company remained confident about driving new technologies. "HTC has a strong and complete portfolio in both high-end/premium and mass market high quality products," she told Reuters."With our US operator partners, we have launched premium products such as HTC Rezound (with Verizon Wireless) and HTC Vivid (with AT&T), with high customer satisfaction ratings. In the mass market sector, HTC Wildfire has been a big hit this year, and we expect strong sales with the HTC Explorer launch."