 9.02am GMT Small but important update. I’ve amended the penultimate post from Thursday to give the Economist’s executive editor his correct name - Daniel Franklin (not David). Apologies. 4.05pm GMT It’s not really a subject which deserves a crude verdict: the idea was never to suggest we were foes, more to explore the often overlooked ties that bind and see how strong they really are.There is no doubt that German and British people who go abroad and meet each other find much in common - as they inevitably would, and hopefully would with many other nationalities. That there is surprise so often expressed at how much they have in common betrays the underlying issue, I’d suggest.Today though there seems to be more reason than ever to explore much strong relationships between the two countries. I hesitate to say a special relationship because there is something exclusive and bullying about the term.Thanks so much for some great comments. Reality Check wont always lend itself to personal anecdotes, but I’ve really enjoyed them and this time they were relevant!  4.01pm GMT There have been suggestions that the question about the UK and Germany being friends or foes is redundant or even insulting - some politely, by inference, others more - ahem - directly.There are too many good personal anecdotes and gentle chastisements about people getting on with people and nation states being an artificial construct to credit them all, but this was one of my favourites. It also happily deals with the issue of humour which I inexplicably forgot to mention, possibly because I laugh a lot with my friends from Germany.I remember reading somewhere that a traveller heard more laughter within two hours of arriving in Berlin than he/she had heard the previous two weeks in Paris. The truth is that the Germans are - to generalise wildly - a great bunch. They manage to run an efficient, de-centralised economy with workers' representatives often on corporate boards. Without much fuss, they integrated the lame duck former GDR and made a success of that. They make great beer and know how to enjoy themselves. Yes, they're patriotic but this doesn't spill into the demeaning jingoism stoked by the tabloids over here. They've also faced up to their responsibilities over WWII and, it could be argued, have actually gone too far. The poignant holocaust memorial in Berlin (next to the Brandenberg Gate) is a stunning acknowledgement of guilt planted right in the city centre. And, strange as it may seem, they actually like us...although are a little baffled by our obsession with WWII. I'd be proud to say 'Ich bin ein Berliner'. Tchuss.However I also spoke to Peter Littger, chairman of the King Edward VII British-German Foundation, a small charity dedicated to promoting better relations between the two different countries. He has just helped edit a book of essays on the subject, published by Granta in the UK, under the title ‘Common Destiny vs. Marriage of Convenience - What do Britons and Germans want from Europe?’The title borrows in part from an essay by the Economist’s executive editor Daniel Franklin, ‘Scenes from the British-German Marriage (marriage of not that much convenience)’. Franklin gives a fly on the wall account of a summit of senior figures from both countries including business leaders and former diplomats, one which appears to have gone so badly that one member of the UK delegation is reported as saying “we’re not moving apart, we’re marching apart”.Somehow, amongst the people that were once the “glue” between these two countries, something is going wrong, says Littger.﻿The national character: there are differences that perhaps are part of the reason it’s so difficult... There’s this kinship and common history, and dynastic relationship, but [on] economic and social concepts we tend to think we know best and Brits tend to think they know it best﻿.Littger, too, however believes that Germany and the UK have many common interests - citing an unexpected but growing euro-scepticism in Germany, albeit within a strong commitment to staying in the EU.We need to keep open communication channels because everything can only get worse if we move apart.Updated at 9.01am GMT 2.42pm GMT I’m still looking for a historian who can talk me through Anglo-Prussian relations before the world wars, which I think were very different. Meantime, I’ve talked on the phone to Simon Green, professor of politics and co-director of the Aston Centre for Europe at Aston University in Birmingham, who has a particular interest in Anglo-German relations.The suggestion of a rivalry between the two countries is noticeably declining as the generations who lived through the two world wars give way to younger people for whom that has less cultural resonance, suggests Green. Now, the more important question is “how much of a friend is Germany” to the UK, says Green:Germany is absolutely critical, a key partner in the EU. From our perspective as a country look around you in Europe: who is going to be the country which is closest to Britain in our trading interests, in our interests in free markets? It’s going to be Germany. It’s not going to be France, Italy or Spain... All those countries have got different traditions in terms of how the state operates, particularly France. The German way of ordo-liberalism - that the state sets the rules of the game but doesn’t interfere in markets beyond that﻿ - that’s something that resonates well in the UK.We might prefer to go on holiday to France, Spain or Italy - as the Germans do too - but in other EU matters the UK and Germany have similar approaches to important issues such as migration, foreign policy and security, suggests Green. Labour market policy is perhaps a notable exception. Interestingly, in the UK we are marking the 100th anniversary of the start of World War I, and the 75th anniversary of World War II, while in Germany there is discussion of the 300th anniversary of the King of Hannover becoming King George I. 12.50pm GMT Two reasons we should keep being friendly with Germany: they are the world’s second biggest buyer of UK exports (though experts might be able to tell me if this is skewed by goods passing in and quickly out of their ports) and the biggest source of UK imports.These charts are from HM Revenue and Customs figures for trade in the year to December 2013. The full report is here. 12.17pm GMT An interesting debate below the line about whether the question itself is childish and out of date, or still valid:Are we still rolling out this sort of juvenile type of polling? Can we really be friends??!! Can we remember the War/penalty shootouts and still get on yes - its possible really!! We have had a good relationship with Germany for over a generation so lets move on from this stereotypical backward approach and understand that many people are now so well travelled in Europe and have multi-international ties with many people in many countries. Guardian you can do better than this!!In reply, britwatch recounts a disquieting experience of brining a group of German school children to the UK:Your stereotypically trite response shows that like so many you are in denial regarding the complexities of this issue.Educationalists and historians in the UK have nurtured a clear black-and-white narrative on the world wars: the British were the heroes and the Germans were inhuman incarnations of unimaginable evil. That' s easy to teach and is generally satisfying to hear. War is on the obligatory syllabus of schoolchildren as young as ?seven or eight (correct me on age.) Nothing that has happened in Germany in the last seventy years makes for such a good story.Going round the Imperial War Museum of the North one morning with a group of 15-16 year-old German girls, we encountered three British primary school groups doing project work on 'War'. Two kids from one of the groups asked some of my pupils what language they were speaking. When they heard they were Germans, they ran away shrieking in genuine terror. Although I had tried to prepare my pupils for this sort of encounter, which has become increasingly common in the last ten to fifteen years, the girls were left in tears, deeply shocked that children so young were being brainwashed into being afraid of them. I could continue and list all the similar unpleasant und uncomfortable encounters over the years. It is a problem I have discussed on more than one occasion with head teachers in the UK but most react like jiveboy and pretend it is all a figment of the imagination.Germans eventually get used to it. I personally think it is nevertheless extremely dangerous to teach young children this kind of racism. It could be something the UK lives to regret. 12.06pm GMT Our Berlin correspondent Philip Oltermann has sent me some interesting, nuanced thoughts on the subject by email.He wrote a piece for the Guardian this year comparing the Anglo-German relationship with the recently reinvigorated Franco-German ties. There are so many institutional projects that France and Germany work on together, like the joint TV channel Arte, the Franco-German University, and the annual joint cabinet session last month. Talking to government people about the Merkel visit, they all say that in particular Merkel’s people have a lot more in common with Britain than France, but they get the chance to talk to the French more often, and more informally, whereas conversation with Britain is always done via loudspeaker, through the press.On a more informal note, Oltermann adds:While relations between Merkel and Cameron appear by all accounts to be in pretty good shape and they are said to like each other, Anglo-German relations at the other end have been neglected for years. I did this about the decline of twin towns and school exchanges recently, which made for quite depressing research.At the sports and culture end, I think it’s fair to say there has been a bit of a shift. Germany has always been Anglophile, relatively speaking, and especially so in the 90s and noughties, when Schroeder tried to copy Blair and Cool Britannia was in vogue. Now the Germans have cooled on British culture a bit, whereas German art (see exhbition at the National, Saatchi, etc), German music (Kraftwerk selling out Turbine Hall), and German footballers (I bet there are more German players in the Premier League now than ever before) are all the rage. 11.39am GMT We might as well get this over and done with early in the day. Our national football rivalry kicked off in 1930 with a draw: since then the Germans are ahead in the stats, but only by a nose. George Arnett on our data team has done battle with the FIFA website and totted up the results in international tournaments, qualifiers and friendlies since then. And the results are:Two of those Germany wins were on penalties. So yes, if penalty shoot-outs were scratched from the rule book, we’d be evens.  11.12am GMT It’s nice to start on a positive note. This from the Germany Embassy yesterday: Ahead of tomorrow's visit by Chllr #Merkel, @yougov finds British public opinion on Germany "strongly positive" - http://t.co/v5CuTILCMTThe research by polling company YouGov is titled “Hurrah For Ze Germans!” and reports: Fully 59% of British people have a positive opinion of Germany, including the majority of supporters from all three main parties, and even 50% of those supporting UKIP, a Eurosceptic party. Only 9% of people have negative views of Germany.﻿ 11.03am GMT Angela Merkel, the German chancelllor, flies into the UK today for a high profile visit, including tea with he Queen and an address to both Houses of Parliament. This treatment is usually reserved for visiting heads of state, as previewed in today’s Guardian by my colleagues Nicholas Watt and Philip Oltermann.The visit itself, including any briefings from official meetings and a press conference with Merkel and David Cameron, are being followed by the incomparable Andrew Sparrow on his Politics Live blog.Today’s visit contrasts strongly with the pub lunch offered to the French president Francois Hollande in January.Is Cameron’s government desperate to make a powerful friend in the EU? Or is it a reminder that despite two big wars and too many football penalties, the two countries have a lot in common?Help us to round up those football scores, flick back through the history books, test those political and economic ties, or simply share your experiences. Get in touch on Twitter @JulietteJowit, by email to juliette.jowit@theguardian.com and, of course, below the line. I remembered to turn on the comments today....