Germans like to complain that this is the most boring election they've ever held. Perhaps they are still dazzled by the American election last year; perhaps they expect similar fireworks in the weeks before the Big Day.Maybe they forget that they live under a multiparty parliamentary system, where the excitement only begins when the polls close. Put that way, this election could end up a turning point – especially for German-American relations.Here's the good news: if, as expected, the election renews the coalition's mandate, Germany won't be pulling out of Afghanistan any time soon. Nor will the chancellor, Angela Merkel, or vice chancellor, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, immediately take a more confrontational approach on issues like climate change. But neither party prefers the existing arrangement, and most observers expect them to immediately begin positioning themselves for the next elections, which could come well before the mandated 2013 poll.Over time, that dynamic will push parts of the government toward a more critical stance vis-a-vis the US. As soon as the coalition is set, the SPD (Social Democratic party) will almost certainly try to win back voters on the left. The party has suffered from the rise of the Left party, a synthesis of disaffected western German SPD members and eastern German ex-communists.Consistently polling at about 10% (compared with the SPD at about 23%) and led by former SPD bigwig Oskar Lafontaine, on foreign policy the Left calls for a withdrawal from Nato, a curtailing of certain EU commitments and a reduction in military spending, among other goals.Steinmeier has ruled out a coalition with the Left on the national level, but there are many within the SPD who feel the only way back to fighting weight is to either win back the Left's voters or merge the two parties.Since the latter is unlikely with the SPD in a coalition government, there's a good possibility that the Social Democrats will start tacking left, particularly on issues like Afghanistan and climate change, where there exists the potential for significant disagreement between the Christian Democrats (CDU) and the SPD.In the short term, such positioning will remain just talk – though Steinmeier is and would remain foreign minister, Merkel and the chancellery are the real seat of foreign policymaking. But with the German public increasingly vocal in its opposition to the country's Afghanistan presence, there is little chance that the coalition would permit a new deployment of troops, as President Obama has consistently demanded, and a good chance that Steinmeier could push Merkel into setting an explicit timetable for withdrawal. Either option would be a substantial blow to America's AfPak mission.Climate policy is another place where Obama can expect turbulence, no matter what the outcome on Sunday. European officials at both the national and EU level have been increasingly critical of US inaction on climate change and its apparent lack of resolve in the run-up to December's Copenhagen summit, but Germany has been noticeably mum. That will likely change after the election, particularly as Steinmeier looks to steal support from the Left and the Greens.What if the coalition doesn't continue? The second most likely outcome, at least according to conventional wisdom, is a coalition between the CDU and the free-market Free Democrats (FDP). Both are strong supporters of the Afghanistan deployment and relatively lukewarm on climate policy, making this the best outcome for the US.But two other possible outcomes – three-way coalitions among the CDU, FDP, and Greens or the SPD, Left, and Greens – portend significant foreign policy changes. The Greens, who will likely get a vote total in the mid-teens, could easily become the kingmaker in a scenario in which the two other parties can't make a majority on their own. Either would likely mean a speedier Afghanistan withdrawal, or at least pressure on Obama to lessen Germany's military obligation. And it would definitely mean more vocal criticism on climate policy, at a time when the US needs Germany to be at least a quiet part of the opposition, if not an ally.German-American relations have improved dramatically since the 2002 election, when Gerhard Schröder used Bush-bashing as a campaign tactic. And despite steady opposition to the US on security and climate policy, Obama remains a personally popular figure among the German public.But for that very reason, the post-election environment in Germany is one ripe for the politician savvy enough to take on American foreign policy without pushing too hard against Obama himself – indeed, his charisma may be the only reason it hasn't happened yet. Nevertheless, Obama probably wasn't speaking off the cuff when, earlier this summer, he told a press conference that he'd like to see Merkel continue as Germany's chancellor.He knows he needs the status quo in German foreign policy to give him international breathing room. The only problem is, come 28 September, even the status quo means change.