9.24am: Guten Morgen! As part of the Guardian's month-long Europe season, I'm live blogging today from the Hamburg offices of Der Spiegel, Germany's most celebrated news magazine. Der Spiegel has long been a German institution and is essential reading for anyone who wants to understand Germany or German politics, so it should be a good base.The Guardian's editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger sets out the purpose of our Europe series here. "Too often Europe is discussed and reported through its common institutions or purely in terms of its relations with Britain," he writes.Here are a few highlights of our coverage today: We've got the results of a Europe-wide ICM poll that shows trust in politicians at rock bottom around Europe – and the lack of trust is greatest in Poland and France.Today's focus is on Germany and we have a provocative comment piece  from Hans-Olaf Henkel, a former president of the Federation of German Industries, who argues that the euro should be split in two – a northern zone with a strong adherence to "monetary and budgetary stability, and a southern zone that would reflect a "free-spending mentality and talent for monetary improvisation". And the headline of the day award goes to this piece about German theatre by Guardian critic Michael Billington, "Don't mention the phwoar".You can read the rest of the Guardian's coverage here. Later today, I'm interviewing Der Spiegel's editor-in-chief, Georg Mascolo.I want to ask him about Angela Merkel, WikiLeaks' revelations, and Der Spiegel's relationship with Julian Assange. (Unlike the Guardian and New York Times, Der Spiegel is still on friendly terms with the WikiLeaks founder.) You can find the Guardian's coverage from Germany today here. Spiegel Online is currently leading with the latest explosion at the Japanese nuclear reactor in Fukushima.9.30am: Morning conference in the offices of Spiegel Online has just got under way. The main theme of discussion is Japan and the rapidly worsening situation at the Fukushima reactor. There's a view among Spiegel journalists that the Japanese government is deliberately underplaying the scale of the crisis in order to prevent panic breaking out among Japan's population. Mathias Müller von Blumencron, Spiegel's chief editor, puts it like this: "These are historic days. The news we've had in the last few minutes suggests that the nuclear reactor's core could be heading for a meltdown."9.54am: There's a knock on the door. Urgent news from Berlin: the German government has decided to review the decision to prolong the country's nuclear reactor programme. The catastrophe in Japan has provoked a massive debate about what to do with Germany's own ageing nuclear power stations. The Greens and Social Democrats want the stations to be phased out immediately (remember Atomkraft? Nein Danke!). But Angela Merkel's coalition government recently decided to keep them in service. The government now seems to be having a major wobble.More discussion in the Spiegel conference about how to cover the events in Japan. There's much praise for Spiegel's hastily employed Japanese translator. And apparently an amateur scientist in Tokyo is running round posting live radiation levels on Facebook.10.26am: Conference is over and I'm now installed on the sixth floor of Spiegel Online's offices in Hamburg. Just across the road is the historic building where the main Spiegel magazine is based. The 11-storey block was built in the 1960s and is justifiably famous: its canteen is decorated in lurid oranges and reds. It looks like something out of the film Barbarella. Jule Lutteroth, Spiegel Online's deputy editor-in-chief, tells me there used to be an equally funky swimming pool in the basement. Now, boringly, it houses Spiegel's archives. (Each floor was decorated with its own colour scheme: journalists working on foreign news sat in rooms painted in a hideous dark blue. They eventually demanded a new colour scheme.) Der Spiegel, Spiegel Online and Spiegel TV are moving in August to a new building just down the road. This may be progress, but this modern penthouse is duller than Spiegel's old home.11.20am: I've just had a fascinating chat with Olaf Kanter, Spiegel Online's managing editor. Unlike in Britain, where the newspaper industry seems to be in its death throes, Der Spiegel is making a healthy profit, he tells me. Germany's advertising industry recovered strongly in the second half of last year, he says, and the magazine is selling about 1m copies every week. And it's not only German newspapers doing well: the car-makers BMW, Mercedes, and VW are all posting record profits. "We haven't suffered like England. You have a much bigger financial services industry. We build more things. Our exports have rescued us," Kanter says. Generally, Germans seems much more optimistic than Brits. One of my old friends in Hamburg, Stefan Schaefer, works for the travel agency Travel Overland. We had dinner last night in one of Hamburg's cheap and cheerful Turkish restaurants; he's busier than ever, he says.12.03pm: Another dramatic development: Der Spiegel has decided to pull its reporter out of Tokyo because of the risk a Chernobyl-style radiation cloud could reach the Japanese capital. Thilo Thielke, Spiegel's veteran war correspondent, is leaving Japan today. Spiegel is now covering the story from Bangkok and the south of Japan. Mathias Müller von Blumencron says the latest information is ominous: the wind is blowing from the north – in the direction of Tokyo. "Perhaps this is a piece of German angst. But no country is more against nuclear power than Germany," he says. He adds: "The wind is shifting from the north and could blow a cloud south directly to Tokyo. This is really horrible. I think this is a big, big crisis and a wake-up call for nuclear energy." The German embassy is also making preparations to evacuate some staff, apparently.12.06pm: There is good coverage of Japan in Spiegel Online International, Spiegel's English language window. In an opinion piece Rolland Nelles, a one-time fan of nuclear energy, says in the wake of Fukushima German chancellor Angela Merkel (pictured) will be forced to modify her pro-nuclear stance. He writes:Even the last remaining advocates of the technology must realise that we can't go on like this. It is over. Done. Finished. Nuclear energy cannot be controlled by humans, no matter how good the arguments might be in its favour. The danger of disaster is real, and it can happen at any time – even in a super hi-tech country like Japan. And it could also happen here in Germany. A sense of security when it comes to atomic reactors is no longer possible. Not anywhere.12.19pm: A few non-Japan stories caught my eye this morning. The German tabloids all report on a driver high on drugs who ploughed into a group of pedestrians in Hamburg yesterday afternoon, killing four of them. One of the victims was Dietmar Mues, an actor in the popular and long-running German police series Tatort (Crime Scene). His wife Sibylle also died. The accident took place in Eppendorf, an affluent part of Hamburg. (I know the area well: my best friend in Hamburg, Michael Fleischer, had an aunt who lived nearby.) Bild Zeitung calls it a "horror-accident" (German only).Oh, and a gang of punks are apparently stealing Hamburg's dogs. They have so far made off with a three-month-old bulldog, Joker, as well as a labrador, Buddy, and a sheepdog-mongrel Milo, Bild says.12.58pm: I'm about to try out Spiegel's legendary canteen over the road. But before I go off and grab a Brötchen I ask Mathias Müller von Blumencron about relations between Germany and England. (In 2006 I wrote an essay arguing the World Cup had transformed Germany's image in the eyes of the British media, and ordinary Brits. The Nazi cliches were over, more or less, I suggested.) Mathias tells me that the Germans don't feel schadenfreude at Britain's current economic woes. He says: "You have a tricky and difficult situation. David Cameron has to see through a public sector cuts programme of unheard of proportions. I'm surprised there isn't a revolution in Britain going on. We don't like to see other European countries suffer, especially not Britain. I love London. I'm often in Britain. What would Europe do without British newspapers like the Economist, Guardian and FT?"Der Spiegel hasn't nailed down its plans yet, but is almost certainly going to cover next month's royal wedding. It may even do a live-ticker! Could Der Spiegel be more interested in the royal wedding than the republican Guardian?2.28pm: The Spiegel canteen lived up to its billing! The decor with its space-age ceiling lamps and funky wall balls is a breathtaking piece of 60s modernist kitsch. The chips aren't bad either. Verner Panton is the man who designed it. You can see more examples of his work here on Flickr .The canteen is due to close, alas, in five months' time when Spiegel moves house.I'm off to see Georg Mascolo, Spiegel's editor-in-chief. I'll report back shortly.3.13pm: I talked to Georg Mascolo for 20 minutes – not bad, given the huge running story in Japan. I asked Mascolo about Julian Assange (pictured) and WikiLeaks. (Assange collaborated with the Guardian, New York Times and Der Spiegel in the release of secret US state department cables last year, as well as war logs from Iraq and Afghanistan. He is no longer on speaking terms with the Guardian and New York Times teams.Mascolo says of Assange: "He's a very interesting guy. I always thought he might end up running Facebook or Google rather than WikiLeaks. I think we can admire the achievements. We all see his very difficult personality." The Spiegel editor-in-chief recalls a tense meeting last November when Assange threatened to boot the Guardian and New York Times out of the newspaper consortium publishing the secret US government communiques. "There was a moment when he decided only Spiegel would go ahead with printing the cables. I refused and said I was very happy with the relationship with the New York Times and Guardian. We would not accept any split with our group."Two Spiegel journalists, Marcel Rosenbach and Holger Stark, have written a German-language book about WikiLeaks, currently on Germany's non-fiction bestseller list.3.28pm: Mascolo also had some interesting things to say about the media industry. He doesn't believe that newspapers should give away their content. Much of Spiegel's success – it posted huge profits last year – is due to the fact that Spiegel Online and the Spiegel magazine have almost entirely different editorial content, he says. (Spiegel Online posts only four or five articles from the weekly print edition. Its editorial operation is separate.) Mascolo politely criticises the Guardian's online model, where you can read all the paper's content for free. He says: "We decided years ago to raise the price for the magazine. It's already €4 (£3). You might say this is a lot of money but it isn't much more than a cafe latte in Starbucks. I don't believe in journalism for free. I believe if you want to have good quality you have to pay for it."3.38pm: Thanks for all your comments about my "liquid lunch"! I can assure you I haven't drunk anything stronger than tea since arriving in Hamburg on Sunday.Breaking news: Angela Merkel has just announced a three-month "delay" on the German government's decision to extend the lifespan of Germany's ageing nuclear power plants. Her move is clearly in response to events in Japan. But it also appears to be linked to regional elections later this month in Baden-Württemberg (and two other federal states) where Merkel's Christian Democrats (CDU) are running neck and neck with the centre-left Social Democrats. The CDU has controlled Baden-Württemberg for almost 60 years; losing it would be an enormous blow to Merkel's coalition. The nuclear power station debate has dominated the election campaign (German only).4.19pm: My colleague Juan Gomez from El Pais has taken this photo of Mascolo's office on the 11th-floor of Spiegel Towers. There is an amazing panoramic view of the city. On Mascolo's wall is a sign saying: "Keep calm and carry on." He also has a cushion in the colours of the German flag with the words: "Geld allein macht nicht glücklich!" (Money alone doesn't make you happy!) on a black leather sofa.According to Mascolo, Merkel has every chance of winning Germany's next general election in 2013, despite today's embarrassing U-turn over nuclear energy. "I don't think she's going anywhere anytime soon,' he says. Merkel's biggest failing, he suggests, is that after seven years as chancellor she has still not properly explained her vision for Germany. Mascolo also says Guido Westerwelle, Germany's foreign minister, is doing better after a disappointing first two years in the job. Unlike British foreign secretary William Hague, Westerwelle – the leader of Germany's pro-business FDP party – has had a "good" Arab revolution. He has spoken passionately in favour of democracy in the Arab world, though Germany as a whole is opposed to any kind of military intervention in Libya or elsewhere. I'm interviewing Westerwelle on Thursday and will form my own view then.4.55pm: It's been a good day to be live blogging in Germany: after decades of debate the Germans really do appear (unlike the French) to be calling time on their nuclear energy industry. The subject is the top of the political agenda here and today's events in Japan will ensure that it stays there. I spent four years in Germany as the Guardian's correspondent in Berlin (2003-2006) before moving to Russia, from where I was recently, and unhappily, expelled. I've always been struck by how the Germans manage to do things more successfully than the Brits. Today's visit to Der Spiegel has merely confirmed this view. German newspapers are still hugely profitable, (ours are virtually bankrupt) and there seems to be a view here that both journalists and journalism has a future. The German economy has already recovered, while ours is mired in gloom.The Guardian will be covering Germany for the rest of this week as part our month-long Europe season. After that it's on to France, from where Alexandra Topping will be live blogging from Monday. Thanks for all your comments and Tschüss! 