Germany had been taking a noticeably tougher line with Iran lately. In past years Berlin has been the most ambivalent about sanctions and has a high volume of trade with the Islamic Republic. But at the moment Angela Merkel is talking up the need for more sanctions if there is no movement from Iran on uranium enrichment. London and Berlin are coordinating ahead of the UN general assembly this week so that they will both deliver the same stern message.There may well be a connection between this stiffening of Berlin's line and a strange case playing out in the German courts. The defendant is a German-Iranian trader called Mohsen Vanaki who was charged in 2007 with brokering the export of dual-use equipment with nuclear weapons applications to Iran through front companies in the Gulf.The exports included high speed cameras, which according to the Washington-based Institute for Science and International Security (there is a concise account and analysis of the Vanaki case on its website) have several conventional military uses as well as a role in developing nuclear warheads. They can help analyse the hemispheric array of explosives in an implosion device, of the sort IAEA inspectors say the Iranians have "probably tested" according to the "secret annexe" to the agency's Iran report leaked last week. Vanaki was also charged with exporting radiation detectors built to withstand harsh conditions. The extraordinary element in his trial was the use by Vanaki's lawyers of the US National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) on Iran, which had been just published at the time of the trial, and which judged "with high confidence" that weaponisation stopped in 2003 for "at least several years". If there was no weapons programme, the lawyers argued in the Frankfurt am Main court, Vanaki could not be a proliferator. The judges agreed and dismissed the charges.However, the prosecutors appealed against the verdict and in March this year, the appeal was upheld by a federal court, on the basis of evidence presented by German intelligence, the BND, that there was an Iranian weapons programme underway at the time of Vanaki's exports. The retrial began earlier this month.Vanaki insists he is innocent, but whatever the outcome of the trial, the striking thing about it is the BND has publicly revealed it believes Iran is continuing work on weaponisation. I checked with the Germans and they agreed with that interpretation.The British have always been sceptical about the NIE suggestion that weaponisation stopped in 2003, and briefed against the US estimate. One official I talked to recently said: "We think something stopped in 2003-2004, but it is another leap to say everything stopped back then." It is worth remembering that the NIE only assessed "with moderate confidence" that work on weapons had not restarted as of mid-2007. There is not necessarily a contradiction here. It will be interesting to see whether the NIE is overridden in the coming months if the impasse over Iranian enrichment continues. On the one hand, there will be a desire to turn up the pressure on Iran, but on the other hand, western governments will be reluctant to give what Israel might interpret as a green light for military action. In any case, any briefings on intelligence clearly intended to align with western policy of the day will be treated with a fair degree of scepticism after Iraq. Russia and China will make up their own minds.