"Thousands of Americans in Paris during the Nazi era? Can that be true?" wondered William Boyd in the Sunday Times, reviewing Americans in Paris: Life and Death Under Nazi Occupation 1940-44. "It is the freshness and unfamiliarity of these narratives that make this book so intriguing ... Among the small lexicon of technical phrases that a screenwriter requires, one of the most useful is 'another angle'. This is used when you want a scene to be reshot, obliquely, from a second point of view. Charles Glass provides 'another angle' on the familiar and often-told story of Paris under the Nazi occupation that makes it new again." "If Germany had conquered this country in 1940, what - as an adult at the time - would you have done?" asked Noel Malcolm in the Sunday Telegraph. "I expect everyone has fantasised, one way or another, about this. And I also expect that, in our fantasies, we are all rather heroic ... Most of us, I think, will close this book knowing that we would have fallen far below our own ideals. Charles Glass describes the various realities with just the right combination of objectivity and compassion; this is a moving and deeply thought-provoking book.""Smart, provocative, often very funny, but ultimately deeply sobering, Jeff in Venice, Death in Varanasi is an early contender for the most original, and the cleverest, novel of the year," declared Mick Brown in the Daily Telegraph. "What Geoff Dyer puts his protagonist through, first in Venice, and then in Varanasi, is the test all of his alter egos invariably face: how to achieve, as he defines it, 'existential contentment,'" wrote Matt Thorne in the Sunday Telegraph. "This is Dyer's great theme, and this novel his finest exploration of it: a career-best performance from one of England's greatest (if most reluctant) novelists." "All the way through there is a sense of being kept at arm's length, not quite being let in on the deeper meaning or the cosmic joke (if there is one)," said Tim Teeman in the Times. "But Dyer's eccentric charm and barbed perceptiveness will hook you to the end.""The material Claire Harman has deftly put together makes two things strikingly apparent: no reading of Jane, however seemingly wayward, is a misreading; and Austen's major effect is to inspire good writing," wrote Frances Wilson in the Daily Telegraph, reviewing Jane's Fame: How Jane Austen Conquered the World. "Harman presents a writer who was deadly serious about her work, her reputation and her independence, who took control of her own career and negotiated hard with her publishers," said Paula Byrne in the Sunday Telegraph. "Is there anything new here? Well, not really ... but no matter - it's the quality of the insights and the interpretations that make this book such a good read." "Harman locates two moments when Austen's reputation took off," observed John Sutherland in the Times. "The first was in the 1890s, when, among many other cults and secret societies, 'Austenolatry' became fashionable among the cognoscenti. These cultists lit the 'Janeite' fuse. The second is the chick-lit boom of the 1990s. Austen was Mills & Boon repackaged for the new, savvy, female youth market who, unlike their predecessors, had higher education. Jane went nova alongside Sex and the City, the movie Clueless and Bridget Jones's Diary. The chicks did it."