Germany's finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble has re-affirmed his belief that Spain is on the right track. He says the only way to achieve economic growth is to continue with spending cuts that will quickly bring down its budget deficit. He praised a tough new budget that contains €27bn (£22.1bn) in new taxes and spending cuts as an example of the big bazooka Mariano Rajoy's administration must use to blast away a growing debt mountain.Why is the man who effectively pulls the EU's purse strings wedded to extreme austerity? Does he not care about Spain's 50%-plus youth unemployment, the misery brought by dramatic rises in health charges and the poverty triggered by overnight benefit cuts? And where does growth come from when the consumer is crippled by higher taxes, education charges and cuts in welfare benefits.For one thing, Schäuble represents the fears of Germans who worry that inflation is the travelling companion of extra borrowing. Spain must generate its own "real" money while it recovers. If it borrows, it cannot be from the private markets. It must come from the European Central Bank or a pool of funds created by Brussels. That means printing more money. The euro will be devalued and hyper-inflation will result."The first precondition in order to have sustainable growth everywhere in Europe is fiscal consolidation," Schäuble said at a press conference with his Spanish counterpart, Luis de Guindos, on Monday. "If now we talk about growth, it shouldn't be understood as a change of direction. That would be a mistake."Schäuble has another reason for turning the screw on Madrid and it dates back to the key role he claims for himself in German reunification. Trained as a lawyer, he spent several years before the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 negotiating with the communist leadership in East Germany and Mikhail Gorbachov's administration in Moscow. As interior minister in Helmut Kohl's centre-right government, Schäuble agreed on a draft unification treaty with his opposite number in the GDR in the months after the wall came down.As he explains it, he embarked on a campaign of tough love. This was enshrined in the one-for-one exchange rate with the east.Few East German businesses could compete with their better equipped rivals in the west after an appreciation of their currency of something like three times.Despite fund transfers that amount to €1.3tn over 20 years that have upgraded the infrastructure in Saxony and western Pomerania, the currency debacle left the local economy in a sorry state.Per capita economic output in the east is only 71% of the western level, with much of that attributable to the public sector. The east has slower growth, a population that is declining at a faster rate and more people on welfare.According to Der Spiegel, of Germany's 100 largest industrial companies and 100 largest service providers, not one has its headquarters in eastern Germany.The lesson you would expect Schäuble to draw from this would be that Spain cannot cope with tough love, except as a welfare dependent slave of Berlin, unable to devalue or leave the single currency.East Germany has its bright spots, but without huge contributions from the Berlin exchequer it would be in a parlous state and even then the outcome is not great. Locals go along with it because in the end they are German.Replicating the same policy for Spain and the rest of Club Med is not going to last. While the Spanish may be European, they are certainly not German.