The Speaker rose in a crowded House of Commons today. "National Registration Emergency Bill," he recited, and the Chief Whip said according to the ritual. "To-morrow," which is the Parliamentary device for passing over a measure that it is not desired should be immediately discussed. There was a roll-call of half a dozen such bills, and then the Speaker almost casually called, "The Prime Minister!" Just so have sessions of Parliament opened decade after decade, and some have left no imprint at all behind them on their national history; to-day's session belongs to the very few high peaks of our national destiny - the day we went to war to destroy Hitlerism."The Prime Minister." He had been loudly cheered when he came into the Chamber. He began almost in a whisper. He referred at once to the doubts about the Government's firmness that struck the whole House nearly dumb after his statement last night. There is no need now to go over the anguish that searched every soul in the House last night at the delayed ultimatum.He then told of the ultimatum. There had been no reply from Berlin. "Consequently," he went on in subdued tones, "this country is now at war with Germany." Even Mr Chamberlain's thin voice could not rob those words of the ring of fate.France had also sent an ultimatum with a time-limit. Here was relief, the destruction of the last plaguing doubt. There was a loud burst of cheering.Emotion nearly mastered Mr Chamberlain now. He spoke of this sad day that had brought to ruin "everything I have worked for and hoped for during my public life." There was a murmur of sympathy from the packed benches. He ended with the hope that "I may live to see the day when Hitlerism has been destroyed," to which there was the instant response of a sustained cheer. Mr Greenwood, who so magnificently spoke in those torturing moments last night, spoke even better today. Nothing could have been more admirable than his contrast of last night's "anger and apprehension" with "the relief, composure and resolution" of today. "The intolerable agony of suspense is over," and a relieved House cheered its agreement with the Deputy Labour Leader.Then Mr Lloyd George rose and the House, remembering only the great leader of the nation in the last war, welcomed him with rounds of cheers. "I have been through this before," he said, shaking his white hair. Suddenly raising his head he told the House in accents that still hold their spell that he himself had always found the country greatest in moments of disaster.