"On this day 90 years ago, on 6 December 1921, the treaty was signed. The treaty restored Ireland's sovereignty [and] the British conceded fiscal autonomy to Ireland." These were the opening words by Ireland's minister of finance, Michael Noonan, in his first budget speech since the Fine Gael/Labour coalition came to power last February. Negotiated in 10 Downing Street and signed by David Lloyd George, Winston Churchill and Austen Chamberlain, the Anglo-Irish treaty created the Irish Free State. Michael Collins, a personal hero of both Noonan and the taoiseach, Enda Kenny, was one of the chief Irish signatories.Sovereignty has emotional resonance in Ireland. The consequence of the loss of financial independence is a fourth austerity budget. Since the economic crisis began in 2008, some €25bn, almost 15% of current gross domestic product, has been wiped out of the Irish economy. But this marks only the halfway point under the IMF-ECB-EU programme. Noonan and the Labour party minister for expenditure, Brendan Howlin, announced a €3.8bn adjustment this week, as required by troika agreement. This time around, the targets included the most marginalised and vulnerable in Irish society. In a scatter-gun approach, €2bn in stinging spending cuts were declared. This ranged from cuts to fuel benefit for poor families, widows' pensions, one-parent payments and child benefit.The coalition's commitment not to raise income tax was honoured and €1.6bn in extra revenue was instead raised through consumption and capital taxes which inevitably hit the lowest-income groups, according to the opposition parties.The government blames these choices on the fiscal straitjacket imposed by the troika. The failings of the previous Fianna Fail/Green coalition have served as a useful narrative by the current government to act as if in opposition."This is the budget of a puppet government, which is doing what it has been told to do by the IMF, the EU commission and the European Central Bank" proclaimed Noonan to his predecessor, the late Brian Lenihan, at last year's budget speech. Nonetheless, Fine Gael and Labour have been in power for nine months and now the public feels they have to take ownership of the painful decisions that have been made.One of those is the 2010 Croke Park agreement between the public sector unions and the last government. The current coalition chose to leave public sector wages and pensions untouched. While benefits to the silent minority of the disabled, the poor and infirm were slashed, public sector workers will receive €300m in pay increases. So there have been no large-scale protests like those in Athens, but the honeymoon is certainly over.Although it has the largest majority in the history of the state, the stability of the coalition is being tested. A commitment to re-examine cuts to disability allowances were announced the day after they were made. Three Labour MPs, including a minister of state, have lost the whip following their opposition in recent months to swingeing cuts in public spending.The coalition's biggest test, however, is yet to come.Kenny has publicly opposed suggestions by the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, in advance of the crisis European summit on Friday, that treaty changes are necessary to deal with eurozone governance. The Irish constitution requires that European treaty change must be passed by referendum – a near-impossible feat given the tide of growing Euroscepticism in Ireland.In the first televised address by a prime minister for 25 years, Kenny told a record Irish audience on Sunday, "I want to be the taoiseach who retrieves Ireland's economic sovereignty." Irish acquiescence to treaty change in return for a European gesture of Irish debt forgiveness may go some way towards righting the balance. There are certainly parallels with 90 years ago – but whether the results for Ireland will be as happy remain to be seen.