Is Germany, Europe's biggest economy, a corporate swamp? As the tax evasion scandal triggered by Deutsche Post chief executive Klaus Zumwinkel grew this week, judges at a court in Braunschweig (Brunswick) prepared to pass more sentences in the long-running Volkswagen sex and bribery affair that has already claimed the scalp of the architect of the country's labour reforms.The tax scandal itself testifies to a stinking rottenness in many boardrooms where executives have pocketed huge salary increases and stock options while plotting with their tax advisers to squirrel their wealth over the border, first to Luxembourg and now, it transpires, to neighbouring Liechtenstein. All the while as they slash their workforces and impose effective wage-cuts.The German tax officers' union estimates that as much as €30bn (£22.65bn) a year may be withheld from the exchequer. Media reports, based on leaks from the prosecutors and police involved in nationwide raids on offices and homes, point to sums of up to €4bn. Anything between 700 and 1,000 executives, some of them prominent, risk investigation while scores of them are hastily consulting their advisers and paying off their tax bills rapidly to escape fines or even imprisonment - or singing like canaries to the authorities.It's reported that when executives meet over cocktails it's not their latest round of golf or business coup they discuss but their tax bills and how to cut them. Anybody who declares his or her full income is widely viewed as a fool - unfit to run a business and maximise shareholder returns....As Josef Ackermann, the well-heeled (€15m a year at least) chief executive of Deutsche Bank, said this week, it would be wrong to visit the malfaisance of some on business as a whole. Or is it? When I discussed the issue with Peter von Blomberg, vice chairman of the German chapter of Transparency International, in mid-2005 when the VW scandal erupted, he told me this was "just the tip of the iceberg". Since then even more of the iceberg has emerged.Siemens, the country's biggest group by market cap, is spending millions of euros a week on investigating and clearing up a bribery scandal dating back years that has already cost the heads of several leading executives, including the former chairman and chief executives (though both deny personal involvement). It has cost the engineering group more than €1.6bn so far, including fines, but the final bill will almost certainly be a large multiple of that. And it has brought in an outsider as CEO, Peter Loescher, an Austrian not tainted by German corporate culture, to clean out the Augean stables - with the aid of an American chief compliance officer, Peter Solmssen.Rate expectationsSo what is to be done to clean up Germany as a whole? In the Süddeutsche Zeitung, Peter Bofinger, one of Angela Merkel's "five wise men" or official economic advisers, calls for a new relationship between society and state instead of the current disturbed one. He argues that the state is widely presented and perceived as alien and spendthrift, throwing taxpayers' money away without any noticeable benefit for the citizens.Bofinger, a controversial outsider himself, insists that the tax take in Germany, where the top rate is 45%, is not too high and in fact is well below the EU average. He is a fierce opponent of tax cuts - as promulgated by Merkel's original choice as finance minister, Paul Kirchhof, who has consistently proposed a uniform 25% rate.In the same paper Kirchhof argues in an interview that the problem is the complexity of the tax rules which make them misunderstood and strengthen the feeling that the "other" is getting away with paying less. If everyone paid the same rate - and certainly not the 80% demanded by some union leaders - the outcome would be greater clarity and certainty. It's an intriguing argument but one dismissed by government and opposition so far. Their kneejerk reaction so far is simply to think of increasing the penalties for tax evasion. And new EU measures to stamp on European tax havens. Hardly enough to root out criminal self-enrichment on this scale. Pay showdownZumwinkel, named manager of the year in 2006 and a close Merkel adviser until his disgrace, is now out in the cold - even after reportedly paying €4m in underpaid tax over to the authorities. (Apparently, he declared so little interest on his savings he escaped any tax at all in at least one year). And, now that he's resigned, the Post has stopped paying him at all - and scrapped any golden goodbye.The revelations of his bottomless greed and that of other executives - 17.5% average pay rises in the past year - is grist to the mill of German unions limbering up for a showdown over pay this year after several years of restraint.This week saw more than 50,000 public sector workers down tools in pursuit of an 8% claim lodged by their union, Verdi, and others in response to a government offer of 5% staged over two years. They closed down swimming pools, theatres and kindergartens in a foretaste of what could become a "hot spring" - and autumn when engineering union IG Metall formally submits its own 8% claim.This puts the government on the horns of a dilemma as ministers from both sides of the grand coalition have argued that employees deserve to see their purchasing power increase as the economy continues to grow despite the credit crunch. It might boost consumer spending, finally, as investment- and export-led growth slackens.Cue Jean-Claude Trichet, European Central Bank president and scourge of "excessive" wage claims (those "second-round effects" of rising inflation he warns against). Merkel's government is the fiercest defender of the ECB's independence in the eurozone. But, if Trichet and his governing council colleagues, surprised us all by raising interest rates, would it still be the bank's cheerleader?