Keep tight hold of "Mutti". That was the message from German voters on Sunday as Angela Merkel – the nation's "Mummy" to her image makers – secured a stunning personal triumph at the polls that consolidates her unchallenged claim to be the dominant political leader in modern economic-crisis-riven Europe. Since the financial crisis struck the global economy in 2008, European voters have thrown out incumbent government after incumbent government, whether of the left, the centre or the right. But Mrs Merkel and her CDU/CSU centre-right party have bucked the anti-incumbency trend not once but twice. Mrs Merkel was first elected in 2005, forming a coalition with the ousted centre-left SPD. In 2009, she hung on to power even though the CDU/CSU vote had dipped, forming a coalition with the resurgent liberal FDP. Now, four years later, she has not so much hung on to power, as she did in 2009, as hugely increased her grip on it.Whatever the final share of the vote and seats, this election has been a massive endorsement for Mrs Merkel. The exit polls will doubtless move around a little before the final tallies of vote share and Bundestag seats are settled, and coalition options, if any, can be definitively considered. But with that important proviso, this is about as dominant a result as Mrs Merkel could have dreamed of, far better than the opinion polls were suggesting even at the end of last week. Her party seems likely to end up with 42%-43%, an increase of 10 points on four years ago, and the centre-right's best result since Helmut Kohl triumphed in the first post-reunification election in 1990.If, as seemed possible on Sunday night, only four parties win representation in the new Bundestag by topping the 5% threshold, Mrs Merkel may even have secured an overall majority, enabling the CDU/CSU to govern alone, not in coalition, for the first time since Konrad Adenauer in 1957. Bear in mind, at the same time, that Mrs Merkel's personal popularity runs far ahead of that of her party, and it becomes clear that we are witnessing a rare moment of indubitable political ascendancy in a continent where weak governments are the norm, not least in Britain.The centre-left Social Democrats may come out of this election as a junior coalition partner in a left-right "grand coalition" with Mrs Merkel. That would be a welcome move. They also slightly raised their share of the vote from the lamentable 23% of 2009 to 25%-26% this time. In every other respect, however, the SPD has little to celebrate. It is clear that the party's problems go deeper than just the gaffe-prone chancellor candidacy of Peer Steinbrück. The SPD's programme of increased taxes on the wealthy and the middle classes failed to capture the mood of modern Germany. There will, and should, undoubtedly be a profound period of reflection on the German centre-left about the party's failure to win much more than a quarter of the electorate. The resilience of the Green vote and that of the Left party, though both lost support while the SPD gained a little, will surely lead to speculation about realignment. All this should be watched very attentively by centre-left politicians in this country, who face many of the same problems.The big loser in 2013 is the liberal FDP, which was on course on Sunday night to fail to cross the 5% threshold for the first time in 60 years, after winning nearly 15% four years ago. That failure is surely a verdict on the FDP's free-market programme, something that Mrs Merkel has scrupulously resisted in her own, nominally more rightwing party. It also seems clear that the growing fragmentation of party loyalties in German politics – in which the anti-eurozone-bailout AfD (Alternative für Deutschland) looked like falling just short of the threshold too – has damaged the FDP as well.The net result, though, is unmistakable. Germans have given Mrs Merkel a strong mandate to govern Germany. But the way she uses her new power will affect not just Germany, important though that is, but the whole of Europe – and that includes us here in Britain. This is the Age of Merkel.