The Berliner Brücke, which spans the river Ruhr and the Rhein-Herne canal on the autobahn 59, offers a good view of the city. Here you can appreciate the extent of industrial activity still taking place in Duisburg. Looking west towards the Rhine you can see the harbour with a forest of swivelling cranes. North towards Hamborn there are a frightening number of stacks and cooling towers, most of them still active. And just to the right of these is the dome of the new mosque, the biggest in Germany.All the big names in steel are still here: Krupp, Mannesmann, Thyssen and Haniel. More steel is produced here than in almost any other city in the world. This has earned Duisburg its sobriquet The City of a Thousand Fires. Off the motorway, the city is a conglomeration of mainly dormitory suburbs consisting of rather dull streets.And yet living in Duisburg has some moments of serendipity and idiosyncrasy. The main part of the city is a narrow strip, about 4km in width stretching about 3km along the right bank of the Rhine. Bordering on the city and infiltrating it in places is the Duisburger Forest. It is nearly as long as the city itself.About a year after I arrived here, I learned that there was a holy well somewhere in the forest. One day I set out to find it. I walked for several hours through this magnificent wood consisting mainly of mature oak and beech. It had an almost Brothers Grimm quality. I had almost given up hope of finding the well when I met a woodcutter – she was snipping some twigs to decorate her apartment.Following her directions I soon found a marker pointing towards the well. I was parched with thirst and looked forward to a deep draught of pure limpid water. When I arrived I was confronted with two signs: One said Heiliger Brunnen (holy well), the other said Kein Trinkwasser (not potable). I decided to put my faith in the first one.Not far from the holy well is Der Ort für Waldgottesdienst, or the Place of Forest Worship. There was no building in sight. It is a simple clearing surrounded by 200-year-old trees, where in the summer religious services are held on the first Sunday of the month. This is where pagans get their money's worth as surprisingly, perhaps, there is a collection during the services.