German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble has described as “nonsense” accusations that he insulted his Greek counterpart Yanis Varoufakis with comments that he was “foolishly naive”.Responding after Athens sent its ambassador to demand an apology from Berlin, Schäuble told Reuters: “No I haven’t insulted my Greek counterpart, that is nonsense.”Greece had lodged its complaint with the German foreign office on Tuesday night, following Schäuble’s comments after a meeting of eurozone finance ministers on Monday. The conservative German minister had been referring to Varoufakis’s dealings with the media. Constantinos Koutras, a Greek foreign ministry spokesman, said: “There was an official complaint from our ambassador in Berlin to the German Foreign Ministry on Tuesday night. It was a complaint after what he [Schäuble] said about Mr Varoufakis. As a minister of a country that is our friend and our ally, he cannot personally insult a colleague,” he said.Relations between Germany and Greece have deteriorated since the radical left Syriza-led government in Athens, which was elected in January, used terms such as waterboarding to describe the austerity policies demanded by Brussels. Syriza has also attacked oversight of the Greek government by a troika of officials from the International Monetary Fund, the European Commission and the European Central Bank (ECB).Germany’s central bank chief, Jens Weidmann, also a policymaker at the ECB, heightened tensions with a speech in Frankfurt that emphasised the loss of trust between between Greece and eurozone governments, which are being asked to extend the terms of Greek loans and ease austerity.Weidmann said the eurozone’s central banks should ensure Greece’s banks do not worsen their liquidity position by buying up Greek government debt for which there is still no market.In an interview with Greece’s Mega TV, Varoufakis attacked the ECB’s refusal to give Athens any leeway to issue short-term debt to meet its funding needs.He said: “The ECB in my opinion is pursuing a policy that can be considered asphyxiating toward our government.”He suggested the ECB was hoping to force the hand of Greece and its creditors by increasing the urgency of getting an agreement on reforms.Varoufakis also returned fire on Schäuble, saying: [He] has told me I have lost the trust of the German government, I have told him that I never had it. I have the trust of the Greek people.”Jens Bastien, an Athens-based economics analyst and former member of the European commission’s task force on Greece, said the country was being pushed increasingly into a corner. In five years of attempting to avert bankruptcy, public finances had rarely been under such strain. “The combination of a growing funding gap with increased repayment obligations constitutes a tightrope walk for the government in March and an even bigger challenge come July and August,” he said.As Greece scrambles for the funds to repay creditors and avoid default, the European Central Bank has given it limited breathing space by raising the threshold on its emergency liquidity assistance to the country’s banks. Confirming the ECB’s move, one Athens banker said: “It will give us breathing space and removes part of the immediate and strong pressure but not for long.” He added that the country’s financial community was expecting the ECB to keep up a policy of disbursing “small injections of cash” until the summer when Greece has to meet debt repayment of approximately €7.2bn.“We’re worried, very worried. This kind of support does not in any way provide a cushion or comfort,” the banker said. “Theoretically, by the summer we will have reached agreement on a new bailout [deal] with our creditors but my concern is how the government and [prime minister Alexis] Tsipras is going to handle the mounting dissent within his own party over conditions attached to such aid.” The debt stricken country is resorting to increasingly desperate measures to ward off potential default. In the space of the past week it has raised six-month Treasury bills, tapped into the bank deposits of pensions and public sector salaries, delayed payments to government suppliers and approached the Greek subsidiaries of multinational companies for short-term loans. Athens has to repay about €270m to the International Monetary Fund on Friday, a further €450m to the Washington-based body on Monday and €270m on 20 March. It also has to roll over around €3.2bn of treasury bills on Friday and 20 March, according to figures released by Goldman Sachs.The broader struggle of eurozone policymakers to spur growth inside the currency bloc was illustrated by industrial production figures that showed a fall of 0.1% in the eurozone in January, dashing the hopes of economists that had expected a small rise of 0.2%.The fall was mainly due to a 2.2% slump in the production of consumer goods, according to the EU’s statistics agency, Eurostat.The largest drops in production were in Latvia (-3.1%), and Finland (-2.5%) while the biggest increase was in Malta (+6.1%).Jessica Hinds, European economist at Capital Economics, said the figures suggested eurozone growth in the first quarter would be weak.“The broader survey evidence such as the manufacturing output PMI suggest that industrial production growth is likely to remain very weak in the coming months. Accordingly, we see little chance of an imminent pick-up in the industrial sector that would drive a strong recovery in the wider economy,” she said.