A memorial service has been held in Germany for the 21 people crushed to death at the Love Parade techno music festival last weekend.Hundreds of mourners, including the chancellor, Angela Merkel, attended a service of commemoration at Salvator church. Thousands more watched live coverage of the service on screens at a football stadium and a dozen other churches in the western city of Duisburg. Several TV stations also covered the service, and flags across the country flew at half mast.The ceremony was led by Roman Catholic and Lutheran Protestant clerics representing Germany's two main denominations."The Love Parade was danced to death," Nikolaus Schneider, the head of the Rhineland Lutheran church assembly, said in his sermon. "In the middle of a celebration of lust for life, death showed its ugly face to all of us."Franz-Josef Overbeck, the Catholic bishop of the neighbouring city of Essen, said: "Life can be so oppositional: one moment there is a party, the next moment we are lying helplessly on the ground."We want to stir up our life in secure ways, but don't have it under control."After the sermons, a group of rescue workers who helped save people crushed in the crowded tunnel that was the sole entrance to the festival grounds in the city, lit 21 candles for the victims.Anger about the incident, in which 500 people were injured, has been building in Duisburg in recent days with more than 250 people demanding the resignation of the city's mayor, Adolf Sauerland, at a protest on Thursday.Many blame Sauerland and the city's authorities for failing to plan adequately for the event, whose turnout was initially estimated at 1.4 million people. Safety experts say the event was held on too small a site and criticised the organisers for providing only one entrance. The experts had warned that the 230,000 square metres of party grounds, on the site of a disused railway depot on the outskirts of the Ruhr valley city, were large enough to hold only up to 500,000 revellers.Since the event, however, estimates of how many people attended have been reduced. Spiegel, for instance, reported on 27 July: "Police now believe around 400,000 people were present as opposed to the 1.4m figure originally provided." Revellers at the festival packed into a tunnel that was 100 metres long and 16 metres wide after police closed the grounds owing to overcrowding.It quickly became hot and airless, and scores of people inside collapsed. Others fell an estimated nine metres from a ladder as they were trying to find another route out of the grounds. At least 10 people had to be resuscitated. Medical staff on the scene said many people had died from asphyxiation and back injuries.The 21 people who died were aged 18 to 38, and included revellers from Spain, Australia, Italy, Bosnia, China and Holland as well as Germans.A preliminary report by police investigators, published on Wednesday, accused the festival's organisers of major security breaches that may have led to the crush. But the report was criticised for failing to establish the responsibility of the city's authorities.The Love Parade, first held in Berlin in 1989, has attained a cult status around the world and spawned scores of copycat events from Leeds to Rio de Janeiro. But the head organiser, Rainer Schaller, has announced the discontinuation of the event after the tragic incident.• This article was amended on 2 August 2010, to make clear that the original Duisberg crowd estimate of 1.4m was subsequently reduced.