Talleyrand once said that the problem with Russia is that it is always both too weak and too strong at the same time. After the upheavals in the eurozone over the Greek bailout and now the resignation of the country's president over military policy, is the same now true of Germany?Germany's position as primus inter pares in both the eurozone and the European Union always underscores her economic and political strength. The bailout for the Greeks boiled down to whether the Germans, inevitably, were prepared to take on the lion's share of the loans. In the end, in last month's fractious Bundestag vote, they did so. But German taxpayers, who (the British often forget) have spent most of the last 20 years bearing the cost of the economic rescue of East Germany, are fed up of spending so much of their money on bailouts for others.Last month's Land election in North Rhine-Westphalia proved there is no political reward to be harvested from good deeds for others. The crisis has left Angela Merkel weakened and with few good options. As a result Germany has one large party, the CDU, which vacillates about doing the right thing and is punished, and another, more diminished party, the SPD, which would once have been ready to do the right thing but is now more interested in profiting from voter anger – as its ringing abstention in the Bundestag over Greece proved.A similar uncertainty runs through the saga of President Horst Köhler's resignation this week. All Köhler actually said in his controversial radio interview was that a large economic power like Germany, with its major export interests (Germany has been the world's biggest exporter, though its position is now threatened by China), must be willing to deploy its military abroad too. This is hardly a shocking thing to say, given that Germany is both a large economic power and that it does deploy its military abroad, in Afghanistan, albeit hesitantly and with misgivings.Equally innocuous was Köhler's remark that German public opinion is coming to terms with this change – once anathema in postwar Germany and still tightly constrained by the constitution. But the comments were lethally destabilising and damaging to Germany and Europe. If Europe is to play a role in the world, part of that role has to be military. But it can only play the military part of that role if rich and powerful Germany is a committed partner. France and Britain can't do all the work – and can't afford to do it nowadays anyway. Once again, Germany's weakness and strength set a confused agenda.It is important to understand Germany's dilemmas, which are real, principled and rooted in the country's uniquely destructive history. But the reality is that these are not dilemmas that will easily be resolved. German taxpayers have given billions of Deutschmarks and euros to other Europeans over the last half-century, mainly while their economy was growing and prosperous.Now that times have become much more difficult, and the eurozone's future is so uncertain, it is almost inevitable that Germany is caught between wanting to strengthen fiscal disciplines across the EU and wanting to leave the poorer nations to their own devices. Each is a destructive option. As Talleyrand's remark about Russia implies, a nation that is simultaneously too weak and strong is not just a problem for itself, but a problem for others too.