Germany, it seems, is damned if it does, and damned if it doesn't.Fearing that the hard-fought solidity of the euro single currency could dissolve because of the markets punting and pushing a spendthrift Greek government to the brink of financial insolvency, Chancellor Angela Merkel has to swallow the bitter pill of "moral hazard" and ride to the rescue or insist on austerity in Athens on a scale that could bring down the government.For now, she has opted for the ­latter. But the clash of cultures on view at today's EU summit in Brussels over how to master the threat to the euro exposed an old faultline, as old as the single currency itself.When the currency was going through its birth pangs in the 1990s, the Germans insisted its Frankfurt-based guardian, the European Central Bank, be modelled on Germany's Bundesbank, with the paramount tasks being monetary policy, low inflation, and currency stability overseen by an utterly independent authority.France waged a war of attrition aimed at diluting the ECB's independence, arguing for greater emphasis on economic and fiscal policy-making powers in the eurozone. In short, the euro should be a political instrument geared to the "economic governance" of Europe. The result was the euro's rule book, the stability and growth pact which dictates budget deficit and national debt ceilings. The "stability" was for Germany, the "growth" for France, meaning economic policy-making in the euro area. This war is still being fought.In the Greek emergency, the French sense a chance to advance their agenda, supported by Spain in the EU's rotating six-month presidency and also encouraged by early speeches from the new European council president, ­Herman Van Rompuy.The French – whose budget deficit is more than double Germany's – the Spanish and others would be happy to spend their way out of the current crisis, through loans or loan guarantees to Greece or the issue of common Eurobonds. But ­Germany, the EU's traditional paymaster, is having none of it, sticking to the letter of the Maastricht treaty which established the single currency and proscribes bailouts of other eurozone countries.When the 16 eurozone finance ministers discussed the crisis by video ­conference on Wednesday, they could not settle on a common position, not least because of this fundamental difference in outlook.If Greece is serious about quelling excitement on the financial markets, runs the German argument, it can emulate Ireland, also on the brink of financial collapse last year and now engaged in the most draconian spending cuts without a bailout. Besides, the Greeks lied their way into the eurozone in 2001 through fiddling the figures, enjoyed the rising living standards for years, and cannot now expect the Germans and others to pick up the bill.The conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, a supporter of the Merkel centre-right coalition, put it like this on its frontpage: "The Greeks are taking to the streets to protest against raising the retirement age from 61 to 63. Are the Germans now supposed to work until 69 and not 67 so the Greeks can enjoy early retirement?"Such is German opposition to bailing out Greece, that Merkel, according to senior European diplomats, went into the summit highly ambivalent about even having the Greek emergency on the agenda.There were two crucial meetings before the summit began – a breakfast with the Spanish and Luxembourg prime ministers, current EU and eurozone presidents, and the heads of the European commission, European Central Bank, and the man now in charge of EU summits, Van Rompuy. Merkel, Sarkozy, Van Rompuy, and José Manuel Barroso, commission chief, then met George Papandreou, the Greek prime minister. Diplomatic sources said Merkel was pressed to agree a bailout. She resisted.But she bowed to the consensus, albeit reluctantly, that the nuisances on the financial markets had to be appeased and sent a signal. So the 27 government ­leaders pledged to ensure the euro's stability "if needed", but stressed that Athens had not proffered a begging bowl.Had they been asked (referendums are banned in Germany because of nasty experiences with them under the Nazis), Germans would never have sacrificed their cherished D-mark for the euro 11 years ago. At the time, single currency opponents ran scare campaigns warning about the dangers posed by linking up with the "spaghetti money" of southern Europe. Now they see their currency jeopardised by southern European profligacy.If push comes to shove and Greece edges towards default, Merkel may need to change her tune. As Europe's biggest economy Germany also benefits enormously from the eurozone and the captive market for its goods. The Berlin strategy is to buy time, hope speculation against the euro will abate, that Athens will do a Dublin. It is not only the markets that are gambling.