"Nobody wants to set up barriers for investors. Anybody doing this would be crazy," Peer Steinbruck, the German finance minister, said last month in Kuwait City during a tour of the Gulf. Yet this is exactly what his government is planning.This week saw a preliminary agreement in Berlin on a draft law to hand ministers the right to veto any foreign - non-EU - investment of more than 25% in "key" German firms. The piece of legislation, amending the "external economy law" or Aussenwirtschaftsgesetz, could be presented to parliament before the summer break.In its draft form, the law foresees the entire cabinet examining about 10 such investments a year if ministers think they threaten national security or public order. It resembles the 33-year-old Committee on Foreign Investment in the US (Cfius), headed by the treasury secretary, Hank Paulson, which has,  inter alia, examined Chinese firm Lenovo's takeover of IBM's PC/laptop business.The legislation is squarely aimed at state-owned sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) which control an estimated $3trillion (£1.5trillion) - a drop in the ocean compared with the funds of institutional investors but swollen now by soaring commodity prices and trade surpluses. For many Germans, they are the new "locusts" - and twice as large as the reviled hedge funds they are replacing in popular demonology.Of course, Steinbruck and his colleagues are desperate to provide reassurance to SWFs such as the venerable Kuwait Investment Authority, a long-standing investor in Daimler, owner of Mercedes cars. They will be told they have nothing to fear. The world's biggest exporter remains open for business. And the funds have proven their worth by rescuing big banks such as UBS during the credit crunch.But ministers and leading bundestag deputies have raised the spectre of funds investing for nefarious political purposes, to filch technology, seize control of sensitive networks or even control media channels. So far, there's zero evidence of this, although similar concerns have been cited by the IMF and OECD as they seek to draw up an agreed voluntary code of conduct for the SWFs.Michael Meister, a leading member of the centre-right CDU/CSU parliamentary group, said this week the prime aim of the draft law was to control investments in infrastructure - airports, rail tracks, gas and electricity grids and telecoms. Behind it, clearly, lies a fear that, for example, the state-owned Russian railways could buy into Deutsche Bahn when 24.9% of its services and logistics business is floated. Or Gazprom could buy parts of E.On's power or RWE's gas grids. Or the Chinese could snap up Frankfurt arport!But none of this is set out clearly in the draft law which sees the economics ministry proposing which investments should be examined and recommending a course of action to the entire cabinet.It will also consult the main business and sectoral industry lobbies, handing them an extraordinary say, while some ministers could simply object because of the alleged impact on jobs. And who will define "national security" - that notorious refuge for protectionist instincts?What's more, it is far from clear that only SWFs are affected. German media reports suggest the law, as drafted, does not name individual investor groups so our old "locust" friends, the hedge funds and private equity firms, could be caught in the net. Unsurprisingly, some politicians hope the proposed law will never be enacted - and international agreement on a code of conduct take pride of place instead.While all "green" eyes have been on Rome this week with the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) conference on world food and the dispute over the role of biofuels in raising prices, the EU has been quietly rowing back further from its target of making biofuels account for 10% of all transport fuels by 2020.First, Claude Turmes, a Luxembourg Green MEP and energy expert, called for the target to be scrapped in a report last month. Then Anders Wijkman, a centre-right Swedish MEP and rapporteur for the parliament's environment committee, said it should be reduced to, say, 8%. Ahead of the FAO, 31 development and environment non-governmental organisations called for the target to be scrapped.Stavros Dimas, the EU environment commissioner, is listening. "I know there are voices in parliament calling for reducing the target," he told me this week - the clearest signal that the commission is ready to think again in the face of increasingly hostile opinion.The final decision, he smiled, depends on co-decision - the EU's highly complex procedure for working out compromises on contentious legislation between parliament and the council of ministers with input from the commission. And Dimas knows the 27 national governments are deeply divided on the issue, unable to agree after more than two months of high-level talks on the required "sustainability criteria" for producing biofuels.Wijkman wants these to include a requirement that biofuels save at least 50% of greenhouse gases compared with conventional fuels while EU environment ministers discussed an initial 35% saving this week. That happens to be the level reached by rapeseed oil, produced in countries such as France, which is resisting proposals to set the bar higher at 50 or 60%.When the EU heads of government meet for their summit later this month, they will be reminded they insisted that second-generation output must also be commercially available when they endorsed the 10% biofuels target in March last year. This means fuel produced from biomass and other non-crop materials which have no impact on food prices. Dimas, torn this way and that by the conflicting opinions, said: "We have to look very carefully at the social and environmental impacts that can be caused by the use of food crops but I hope we can get the right balance of answers and strict criteria while meeting the target." Not least, he desperately wants to retain the EU's leadership role in fighting climate change.But there's the rub. It is not only farmers and producers who are clinging on to the 10% target, saying it is essential for investment decisions. Oliver Schafer, the policy director of the European Renewable Energy Council, says scrapping the target would mean Europe losing its ability to influence the world's production of sustainable biofuels - and "give up a crucial alternative to our oil dependency and its ever-increasing prices".