Greek prime minister George Papandreou is to hold crunch talks with German chancellor Angela Merkel next Friday.He will visit Berlin at the invitation of chancellor Angela Merkel, his office said. A spokeswoman for the German government said topics for discussion during the inaugural visit would include "bilateral issues, European Union policy and international topics".The trip comes after Athens raised tensions between the two nations – at loggerheads over how to deal with Greece's soaring budget deficit – by raising the issue of the second world war."The issue of German second world war reparations has not been finally settled. We have never given up on our claims. The issue exists in the framework of our bilateral relations with Germany," the Greek prime minister told parliament today after a visit by EU inspectors. "But this is not an issue that we will use for our convenience now, when we are in a weak position and we are called to put our house in order."The spat between the two countries escalated today as Greek consumer group Inka called for a boycott of German products and stores. The protest comes after the German magazine Focus published on its cover the Venus de Milo statue giving the finger to the Greeks whom it called "the cheats in the euro family". The German ambassador, summoned to see the Speaker of the Greek parliament, deplored the Focus cover.Many Greeks are angry that Germany remains reluctant to bail out Athens, even though its financial crisis continues to worsen. Its public deficit has hit 12.7%, four times the European Union limit. Thousands of Greeks took to the streets again this week to protest against the government's austerity measures.Big German banks surveyed by FT Deutschland are not willing to invest in Greek government bonds. Eurohypo and Hypo Real Estate said yesterday that they will not participate in the upcoming Greek bond issue. However, there are suggestions that German state banks could help out.Deutsche Bank's chief executive Josef Ackermann met Papandreou and finance minister George Papaconstantinou today. Germany's flagship lender helped manage the Greek government's latest bond issue.The EU has piled pressure on Greece to adopt radical measures and bring its spiralling debts under control to prevent further damage to the euro. Its bonds could be headed for junk status after the ratings agency Moody's warned it could downgrade Greece's credit rating if it failed to meet its budget promises.Papandreou said today that the worst fears about the Greek economy had come true, but insisted Greece would not seek a bailout from abroad. He said: "There is only one dilemma: Will we let the country go bankrupt or will we react? Will we let the speculators strangle us, or will we take our fate in our own hands? We must do whatever we can now to address the immediate dangers today. Tomorrow it will be too late, and the consequences will be much more dire."His comments on war reparations came only days after Greece's deputy prime minister, Theodoros Pangalos, suggested that Germany had an obligation to bail out Greece because of its occupation of the country during the second world war."They took away the Greek gold that was at the Bank of Greece, they took away the Greek money and they never gave it back. This is an issue that has to be faced sometime in the future," he said.