 Doctors have warned that a mass hunger strike of illegal migrants could end in tragedy after dozens of protesters attempting to win legal status in Greece were taken to hospital after five weeks without food.Three hundred mostly north African migrant workers have refused to eat until the Greek government issues them with residency permits. The stand-off has put the socialist administration of George Papandreou increasingly on the defensive as the hunger strikers vowed to continue their protest into a sixth week."For 41 days I have gone without food and since Wednesday noon I have refused water," said Morrocan Elktif Belaid, who walked through the Sahara before hiking and hustling his way into Greece."But what to do? Greece has treated us very badly. All we want is what we deserve, official documents and a bit of respect. To be an immigrant is not a crime. It is not forbidden. We will continue our strike until we are vindicated, or die."Holed up in a mansion on a busy Athens boulevard, Belaid is part of an unfolding drama that has not only gripped Greece but unnerved Europe as it braces for yet another wave of refugees fleeing the turmoil of north Africa and the Middle East.As Athens beefed up its sea and border patrols amid the impending chaos – highlighted by the drowning of three Bangladeshis who are thought to have jumped from ships evacuating undocumented migrant workers from Libya – the plight of the hunger strikers has come to embody the fears of governments across Europe.Nearly a third of the hunger strikers have now been admitted to hospital. With street protests from leftists and human rights groups also on the rise, pressure is mounting on the government to bow to their demand for "full legalisation".On Sunday the government offered the migrants a compromise solution of a year's residency if they stopped the strike. "We are of course very concerned about their health," said Haris Kastinides, the justice minister. "We don't want a single one to die, but at the same time this is blackmail. If we give in today, we may have 150,000 others making the same request tomorrow."In his cotton headdress and chequered slippers, Belaid is, at 45, older than most of his comrades in hunger, and more eloquent. But in attitude and resolve he is no different. "Europeans hate immigrants even though we helped build their economies," said the bearded father of three. "But Europe has to help because Europe in the past was the colonial power, it supported those dictators. Today it is reaping what it sowed."The emigres arrived in Athens from Crete. At first, with the help of local sympathisers, they occupied the law school at Athens University before being removed by riot police. A private citizen offered to house them in the mansion when they had nowhere else to go.Like Belaid, many had made long treks to Greece, sneaking into the country from Turkey before finding jobs on Crete in construction or on farms."I arrived here in 2003," said Abdullahtif Chadid, another Moroccan, his face cupped in his hands. "I am 31, but in all that time I have never returned to my homeland. I want very much to see my mother and father and I have paid my dues, insurance, stamp duties and lawyer's fees. Yet the authorities have refused us permits."Without proper papers I know I'll never be able to enter Greece legally again." "My bones ache. My feet hurt. I can't sleep because I am so hungry and I'm so tired I can hardly walk, but I will continue because there is nothing else I can do."Noreidine Tahma said: "All of us have handed over a lot of money, around ¤2,500, to get these documents. I feel very ill, very dizzy. I've had nothing but sugar and salt and water for the past 41 days but I won't give up. Why should we be forced to be illegal?"Greek physicians have been astonished by the strikers' endurance. "Perhaps it's because they are young, but I've been surprised by their stamina," said Dr Thanassis Karambelis, examining the men in makeshift tents in the mansion's garden."Most are suffering from exhaustion, hypertension, and more and more are refusing to take water. Forty days is a very long time to go on hunger strike and this is the most dangerous phase.""Take note," said Belaid. "We are desperate people and we won't give in. Migrants have rights, too, and we will fight for them."Greece has become the main route for migrants trying to reach the EU, with some 128,000 people entering the country illegally last year – about 90% of the EU total.The Greek government has sharply stepped up patrols along the country's 9,300-mile coastline amid concerns that unrest in north Africa could cause a fresh influx. Last week the EU border control agency, Frontex, announced it will extend its six-month operation guarding Greece's porous land border with Turkey.Record numbers of immigrants from Asia, Africa, Iraq and Afghanistan have entered Greece illegally over the past year.Officials say concerns of a renewed wave will expedite the debt-stricken country's determination to build a wall across the border with Turkey. Athens has also aired the idea of creating floating detention centres.At an emergency meeting of EU interior ministers in Rome last week it appealed for funds and equipment to deal with the potential crisis."Greece is in the midst of economic and social crisis and cannot accept any more migrants," said the citizen protection minister, Christos Papoutsis, who has ruled out giving legal status to the hunger strikers.