It was never really in doubt that Greece would get the money it would need to stay afloat for a few more weeks. The attempt by the IMF to dictate the terms of the rescue to the eurozone, by threatening to withhold the next €12bn tranche of the bailout package agreed last year, was never going to work. Nor can there now be much doubt that a second EU support programme will be agreed this Sunday. Each move, however, will simply postpone judgment day.Greece cannot dig its way out of the mountain of debt it has now been placed under, and that reality was clear months ago. Since then, a political reality has been born. Even if he manages to stitch together a cabinet and win a vote of confidence from his party, Pasok, to force through a second austerity package to avoid default, prime minister George Papandreou has run out of road. So there is neither a workable plan nor, crucially, a political consensus in Athens to enforce one, let alone one including mass privatisation. Even if Greeks could be coerced into accepting more pay cuts and state sell-offs, most are convinced, probably rightly, that more austerity will just damage the economy further. Remember, they have already been taking the medicine for the past year, since public workers took a 20% pay cut. It has not worked. Greece has missed the targets set in the current bailout due to a deep recession and the chronic revenue shortfall, and debt is still projected to hit 160% of GDP. Now they are being asked to take another dose, this time in the form of tax rises.That this meltdown should happen under the leadership of a decent man, a Swedish-style social democrat all too alive to the dangers of division and conflict, is perhaps the saddest accident of history. Mr Papandreou is no neoliberal. He does not light candles each night at the altar of the free market. He set out as a reformer of the very ills that contributed to this crisis, like the problems with tax collection and political patronage which successive governments failed to deal with. But things have now gone far beyond that. With unemployment at 16% and seven out of 10 pensioners living on €700 a month, any social pact is now in shreds. And Mr Papandreou is marooned on an island amid a shipwreck.His is no longer the hand that can reach out to the "outraged" of Syntagma Square. If there was a peaceful insurrection in the central square of Athens, a few hundred yards away from the ancient agora where democracy was born, he would now be one of its targets. The man who tried to warn Greece about the dangers of corrupt political elites has become, in the eyes of his colleagues, a man of flip-flops, and in the eyes of the people he once felt comfortable among, one of the symbols of the elite. If the proper democratic process were to assert itself, it would be active against the very austerity package he is trying to push through.Politicians of all colours are right to be scared. And not just because violence can break out. Although petrol bombs flew last night outside the finance ministry, the protest has been largely peaceful, and ordered. No, the fear is that mass popular protest makes the whole political class, and the patronage from which they draw their authority, irrelevant. A mass demonstration outside a government building is one thing. But tens of thousands of citizens outside parliament itself sends a message of a different order. The string of parliamentary resignations yesterday, which could make it difficult for Mr Papandreou to form a team capable of doing the things Greece is promising the EU and IMF, is a response to that warning. For a party with Pasok's history to be outside the mass demonstration staring in is a bad place to be.However it is termed, default is looming one way or another and the French, German and Greek banks, who are also at the centre of this crisis, could still face their Lehman moment.