Greece will attempt today to claw back some of its lost credibility with the EU and other international financial institutions by outlining drastic cost-cutting measures to reduce its runaway deficit.In a no-holds-barred interview, the finance minister, Giorgos Papaconstantinou, has pledged to resuscitate the economy – even if he believes its creditworthiness has been "unjustly" questioned."We are bringing forward some of the measures and specific initiatives … as we see the need to send even stronger signals than we have been sending [to calm international markets]," the London-trained economist told the Guardian.Greece is embroiled in the most serious fiscal emergency to hit the eurozone since the single currency was launched 10 years ago. Fitch's decision last week to downgrade the country's debt to triple B+ sparked a stock market sell-off, the interest rate on its debt soared and its survival in the eurozone was called into question.But Greece's centre-left Pasok government is determined to prove its critics wrong. The prime minister, George Papandreou, spent two days convincing EU leaders in Brussels last week of the seriousness of his economic reform programme."It is clear what needs to be done. The political will needs to be there and it is now," said Papaconstantinou, who this week visits Paris, Berlin and London to "reassure" colleagues, including Alistair Darling, that Athens means business. "Actual actions have to follow," he added, ruling out any suggestion that, as the EU's weakest economy, Greece was contemplating leaving the eurozone.The socialists have announced that they will reduce the deficit from 12.7% of GDP to 9.1% next year by cutting expenditure, increasing revenues and cracking down on widespread tax evasion, a correction, says Papaconstantinou, of "roughly €8bn [£7.2bn]". The bloated public sector, which employs about 700,000, will be dramatically scaled back."If you look at the numbers for 2009, they are frightening in terms of the expenditure overruns," he admits. "Last year I was really surprised when I discovered that while around 15,000 public servants had retired, another 29,000 were rehired. We will put a freeze on hiring in 2010." The minister has himself taken a wage cut and has given up a Mercedes for a Skoda. "It will be the most difficult budget in terms of targets since [the restoration of democracy in] 1974."Papaconstantinou is already braced for the loud street protests that are bound to follow. Powerful trade unions backed by the communist opposition are girding for battle with many prepared for a winter of protests. More encouraging, he says, are the signs that Greeks want to address a corrupt system that has long run on political patronage and clearly no longer works. An opinion poll found yesterday that one in two were ready to make "sacrifices"."We should not underestimate the frustration that Greeks feel for things as they are. I am not saying that we will not have groups who will disagree violently with some of the things we want to do. But there is a general sense that things can no longer continue as they are."Deep-seated structural problems in our society have come to the surface," he added, referring indirectly to the unrest that has gripped Greece. "That is why we have put so much emphasis on the process of social dialogue and building consensus."Since assuming office two months ago, the socialists had been "truly shocked" at the scale of the economic mismanagement. Under the centre-right New Democracy party, government waste had skyrocketed, with out-of-control recruiting policies, a proliferation of public-sector committees and overpaid heads of state utilities. Ministries approved obscenely high phone and newspaper bills, while senior civil servants had spent lavishly on unnecessary foreign trips, he said."It was as if they regarded the national treasury as the spoils of war and raided it. And there was no single payment authority so the finance minister had no idea who or what was being paid."Athens had been "comforted by coherent messages of support" from its fellow EU members and the European Central Bank, which had all excluded the prospect of Greece going bankrupt.Conceding it was a "very serious situation", Papaconstantinou rejected outright the notion that Greece could default on its debt. "We are not even close to that."More than anything, he said, Greece needed to restore its credibility deficit. "Perhaps the most important task at the moment is to regain confidence. We didn't, for example, think the downgrading was justified because it had been preceded by good news. I can tell you that it is not the easiest task for a Greek finance minister to have to defend the integrity of the country's data."The profligacy of the Greek state seems to know no bounds. Since taking power in October, the centre-left Pasok government has shone an unforgiving light on government excesses and discovered secret payrolls, ministries claiming monthly newspaper bills of €35,000 (£32,000), mobile phone bills of €100,000 a year and fictitious state committees. Party political appointees heading state utilities, known as "the golden boys", were paid €500,000 and more. The government plans to save €600m next year by targeting military spending and tax evasion. Despite the plutocracy, fewer than 15,000 Greeks claim to earn more than €100,000 a year.