I first met Giorgos Papandreou, Greece's newly elected prime minister, when I was eight years old. I distinctly recall thinking that he was one of the most likable adults I had thus far encountered.I was at high school when he was foreign minister and co-architect (along with his late Turkish counterpart Ismael Çem) of the Greco-Turkish rapprochement. With what rudimentary political acumen I possessed at the time, it seemed like the right thing to do.The next time I saw him, in 2005, I was trying the deep and murky waters of Greek journalism, and he was drowning in the swamp of the internal power struggle of his party – or should I say, his father's party. He seemed out of touch with Greek reality, too civilised for the greasy pole and the notoriously corrupt Greek political scene. Nothing like the late Andreas Papandreou, as anyone in Greece would tell you.Between then and now, I have watched him make mistakes, disappoint Pasok's grassroots, lose electoral battles, be questioned, mocked for his lacklustre oratorical style, and be called "Giorgakis" (the diminutive of his first name) with more than a touch of sarcasm.But he has been doggedly persistent and displayed remarkable perseverance while treading the thorny, steep road that has led him to the premiership with a sweeping 44% of the popular vote and the all-important ability to form a strong and stable majority government.And what is more, he has undoubtedly matured and worked hard. Papandreou has handpicked a team of close associates who only remotely resemble the old Greek political class – though some bear familiar names. He has renewed his party's human capital and established himself as its leader. He has improved his rhetoric and endeavoured to minimise his charisma deficit. He has travelled far and wide, shaken hands in Greek neighbourhoods and UN general assemblies.He has capitalised on his international upbringing and education to become chairman of Socialist International and build bonds with such global bigwigs as economics Nobel prizewinner Joseph Stiglitz and former US president Bill Clinton. And now he has delivered a rare and resounding victory for the European social democratic movement in a time of centre-right governments.Nonetheless, I doubt the extent to which his electoral triumph can be attributed to the above. It was the spectacular collapse of his opponent that catapulted Pasok to a victory of these dimensions.The Greeks were severely disillusioned by Karamanlis's government and at the same time frustrated by Papandreou's failure to decisively step up as opposition leader. They are undoubtedly politically jaded; the words "nothing will ever change here" are heard too often by young and old alike.They have, however, given Papandreou the opportunity to lead. And, almost surprisingly, last night they took to the streets of Athens and other big cities to usher in their new prime minister. A friend asked me to "write nice things about him", because what he experienced following the celebrations "brought tears to [his] eyes". Most papers today report that the country is reliving the days of Andreas Papandreou's 1981 victory, when emotions ran high and hopes for a new, better Greece, ran higher.Papandreou's promise to the Greek people is that he will unite them and care for them all, without discrimination. He promises to revive the ailing economy with a €3bn stimulus; to keep pay and pensions rising alongside with inflation; to raise education expenditure to 5% of the GDP; to restructure the failing public healthcare and pension systems; to uproot corruption and favouritism from the heart of the state. Perhaps most crucially he vows to rein in a deficit now feared to be an enormous 9% of the GDP. He intends to fund all this by hunting down tax evaders, who cost the economy an estimated €20bn.He promises nothing short of a miracle.Almost two decades after my first encounter with Giorgos Papandreou, my original impression holds. I still think he is one of the most likable adults I have met. But although his likability, proven persistence and enforced gravitas will hold him in good stead as he embarks upon a road much harder than the one he's already travelled, he has a lot more to prove.He has inherited a broken economy and, sadly, a broken society. It remains to be seen if he will be the man to mend Greece.