

4.50pm GMT
16:50

Just one more thing...The Guardian’s Philip Oltermann brings us this update on the Wolfgang Schäuble/Yanis Varoufakis insult-gate.Wolfgang Schäuble speaks with a strong Swabian dialect and does seem to enjoy veering off script at press briefings. Only last May, the German finance minister caused some raised eyebrows at a speech in Berlin, when he called France’s Front National a “fascist and extremist party”. But the latest diplomatic row between Germany and Greece seems to stem from a mistranslation. Here is what Schäuble says in the clip, in which he describes a meeting with his Greek counterpart Varoufakis:“Afterwards we had a long, intense bilateral exchange, and I said to him: ‘I wouldn’t want to swap jobs with you’. My job isn’t always fun either, but compared to his … à la bonne heure! And he does have a different way of communicating … Normally one shouldn’t give details from internal chats, but in this case I think I can report an anecdote – so he said to me that everything was always misunderstood, the media were terrible. And then I said: “Well, to us you first came across as someone who made a stronger impression in terms of communication than in terms of substance. But that may have been a false impression’. [To audience] Stop the silly giggling! But that he is suddenly naïve when it comes to communication, that would come as news to me. But you never stop learning.” Have a good evening. AMUpdated
at 4.51pm GMT


4.42pm GMT
16:42

Before closing up for the day, here is a summary of the main events. Thank you for reading the blog today, and for commenting. Please join us again tomorrow. AM

4.42pm GMT
16:42

There is confusion over exactly what Wolfgang Schäuble said about Yanis Varoufakis at a press conference following Monday’s eurogroup meeting. Here is Reuters’ take on the matter:Athens has accused German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble of insulting his Greek counterpart, further eroding a diplomatic relationship already badly strained by Berlin’s tough stance on Greece’s debt woes.Schaeuble, who has become a lightning rod for Greek frustrations about Germany, dismissed the complaint as “nonsense”.Greece said it was angered by Schaeuble’s tone at a news conference earlier this week after an EU meeting in Brussels where Greek Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis had pushed efforts to renegotiate his country’s huge bailout programme.“It was not about a particular quote from Schaeuble, but his condescending, pejorative manner in general,” a Greek diplomat in Berlin told Reuters, declining to be named.Speaking in Athens, Greek Foreign Ministry spokesman Constantinos Koutras said an official complaint was made on Tuesday. “As a minister of a country that is our friend and our ally, he (Schaeuble) cannot personally insult a colleague,” he said.Greek media had quoted Schaeuble as calling Varoufakis “foolishly naive” in his communications. Foreign media did not report the same quote, and Koutras agreed that the minister had been mistranslated, but said his general tone was offensive.Schaeuble dismissed the notion. “No, I haven’t insulted my Greek counterpart, that is nonsense,” he told Reuters in Berlin.The latest spat follows days of tensions between the two countries, with Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras reviving the barbed issue of World War Two reparations and his defence minister threatening to let illegal immigrants head to Germany.

3.18pm GMT
15:18

Tsipras says he is optimistic about Greece’s future.I don’t feel as if I have a noose around my neck. I feel Greece has the will to move forward. Out partners need to understand they need to help and assist us, and leave the past as a bad memory.  Tsipras acknowledges that there is “mutual suspicion” between Greece and its eurozone partners, some of whom do not believe Greece is serious about wanting to reform.We need to construc t trust and confidence bridges. He added he was hoping the agreement with the OECD struck today would give its partners more confidence in Greece. [I am hoping] that signature will be a passport to more confidence. I am optimistic.The OECD’s Gurria says it is up to Greece to decide its own way forward.Everybody has a role to play but at the same time everybody has constraints and limitations. What we are trying to achieve today is to prepare for a very broad portfolio of reforms based on what the Greeks have signalled to the international community that they have as priority. Press conference is over.Today, w/support of @OECD we begin a new chapter on reforms that will increase social justice #Greece #ChangeEurope pic.twitter.com/QoVPRS34AwUpdated
at 3.44pm GMT


3.06pm GMT
15:06

The Greek Prime Minister says the reforms he has been discussing with the OECD today are those Greece would like to introduce - not those dictated by anyone else.The re forms we are discussing with the OECD are not reforms that have been imposed upon us. No. They are reforms we would like to introduce.This is not the right time to criticise the failed programme has followed over the past four years. But on the side of the troika, what we saw was something like blackmail. “If you don’t cut pensions, if you don’t fire people, we will not give you this bit of funding.”Tsipras says the troika never made demands based on constructive, structural reforms.So the main difference between the previous pro gramme based on the internal devaluation is that our reforms are focused on social justice.We’ve had enough of austerity. Enough. We need to bring back social justice and growth. 

2.48pm GMT
14:48

#Greece PM #Tsipras: #OECD will help Greece move ahead w/ reforms that will not lead to dismantling of society#OECD has signed agreement with #Greece for reform measures, says #Gurria

2.45pm GMT
14:45

The OECD press conference has kicked off.OECD secretary-general Angel Gurria says they have been working hard on an agreement, and worked through lunch.Greek PM Alexis Tsipras said the agreement marked “a new era” in the relationship between Greece and the OECD, which would make reform in Greece socially effective as well as financially.We won’t allow Greece to become something that it is not. At the moment Greece is at the bottom of the pile of social indicators in the EU.We are now making a break with the chronic weakness of Greece.Updated
at 2.45pm GMT


2.28pm GMT
14:28

More now on the news that the ECB has raised the threshold on emergency liquidity to Greek banks, which has been confirmed by Guardian reporter Helena Smith.Helena brings this report:“I can confirm that it has happened,” one banker in Athens said. “It will give us breathing space and removes part of the immediate and strong pressure but not for long.”He added that the country’s financial community was expecting the ECB to keep up its policy of disbursing “small injections of cash” until the summer when Greece has to meet debt repayment of approximately €7.2bn.“We’re worried, very worried. This kind of support does not in any way provide a cushion or comfort,” he said. “Theoretically, by the summer we will have reached agreement on a new bailout [deal] with our creditors but my concern is how the government and [PM] Tsipras is going to handle the mounting dissent within his own [radical left] party over conditions attached to such aid.” The debt stricken country is resorting to increasingly desperate measures to ward off potential default. In the space of the past week it has raised six-month T-bills, tapped into the bank deposits of pensions and public sector salaries, postponed government payments for supplies to the public and private sector and approached the Greek subsidiaries of multi-national companies for short-term loans.  Speaking to the Guardian this morning, Jens Bastien, an Athens-based analyst and former member of the European commission’s task force on Greece, said the country was being pushed increasingly into a corner. In five years of attempting to avert bankruptcy, public finances had rarely been under such strain. “The combination of a growing funding gap with increased repayment obligations constitutes a tightrope walk for the government in March and an even bigger challenge come July and August,” he said. 

2.21pm GMT
14:21

Greece has signed a co-operation deal with the OECD, aimed at helping the country implement reforms.The Greek PM Alexis Tsipras - along with his finance minister Yanis Varoufakis - travelled to Paris today to meet the head of the OECD, Angel Gurría, and other OECD officials. There will be a press conference at 15.30 Paris time (14.30 UK time), which will be streamed live here. In the meantime, a Greek official gave this update:The OECD will provide Greece with the know-how regarding the design and the implementation of reforms which are the priorities of the Greek government.In the long term, [the OECD] will help the Greek side implement and evaluate not only the progress of the reforms but also their effectiveness.

1.49pm GMT
13:49

German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble has dismissed the accusation that he insulted his Greek counterpart Yanis Varoufakis as “nonsense”.As we reported earlier, it follows an official complaint lodged by Athens with the German foreign ministry.Speaking after the eurogroup meeting of finance ministers on Monday, Schäuble described Varoufakis as “foolishly naive” in his dealings with the media.Schäuble told Reuters on Thursday:No, I haven’t insulted my Greek counterpart, that is nonsense.Updated
at 2.39pm GMT
