This week marks six months since the tragic wildfires in Greece that killed 68 civilians, damaged 4,000 homes, and charred approximately 178,000 hectares. With more than 35 countries and countless thousands of private citizens worldwide coming to its aid, it is highly probable that you or someone you know donated money to help with reconstruction and healing. Has there been any progress?A week after New Democracy was re-elected, George Souflias, the environment, physical planning and public works minister, set the tone by opting out of pre-campaign talk to set up a separate environment ministry, stating that he saw no need and no conflict in his position in which "sustainability and development must coexist." He vowed to stop the development of fire-ravaged beachfront property in Zacharo, though the mayor and officials later signed off with no opposition. Experienced fire chiefs were replaced with amateurs, and a law to destroy new structures on illegally seized land was tabled, but did not include provisions to deal with established homes.A few homes have been demolished, but many projects are going forward without the compulsory presidential decree on land use. This includes a government-approved soccer stadium in Elaionas that will strain natural resources, and a two-storey shopping mall with four-storey car park in the largest remaining green area of Zografou in Athens, which will put the municipality in serious debt and create pollution.Mayors have also gone to court seeking the right for residents to build on Mount Parnitha, one of the last remaining forests providing oxygen in a capital famous for its pollution. The only protests have come from local residents and environmental activists who can do little to stop the rich and powerful, as a forest official found out in 2004 when he was fired after attempting to stop land grabbing in Corinth.Lawless land grabbing started when the dictatorship ended in the 1970s, and article 24 was written into the constitution to stop it. It bans any alteration to forested areas apart from reasons of national interest, and automatically schedules burnt or cleared areas for reforestation. Any construction on forested areas is therefore illegal. Later in 1983, however, the 1337/83 Tritsis law granted protection to anyone willing to declare their home illegal, and those who did not still believe that paying fines legalises their property. Many Greeks feel article 24 encroaches on their freedom and escape punishment for building on razed land by quoting a 2003 law, which states that a home cannot legally be established as being in a forest if there is no forest registry. And of course, Greece is one of the few countries in the world without a forest registry.There is no real priority on creating a forest registry, as it would unsettle those who have grown rich from illegal property. One beneficiary is the Church of Greece, which has inherited property from faithful parishioners over decades and seized expanses of land vacated by Ottoman nobles after the war of independence in which priests were rulers of many villages and the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate had control of schools and courts. As recently as January, monks at Mount Athos were accused of staking illegal claims to land in a Halkidiki resort area. The Greek Orthodox Church is the second largest landowner in both Greece and Israel.And what about the people? Private donations poured in to help them but the only money spent as of January 2008 was 2.7 million euros on anti-flood works built by unsupervised, untrained military troops without equipment, and emergency support for farmers. Most victims remain homeless and live in prefabricated houses because of applications mired in bureaucracy. In addition, volunteers on the ground report that aid is not getting to those who need it most, with supplies being taken by non-victims.