Greece has jumped the final hurdle in its marathon effort to prevent an immediate and chaotic debt default after it won sufficient support from its private-sector creditors to clinch a new bailout package.After months of wrangling, Athens said it could meet a deadline to roll over €14bn (£11.7bn) of private sector loans due to be refinanced next week.A visibly relieved finance minister, Evangelos Venizelos, said 85.8% of bondholders had agreed to take heavy losses on their investments and a further 10% would have to comply once special clauses were triggered to enforce the agreement.Market traders hope the bond swap deal will at least briefly quell fears that the Greek crisis will send more shockwaves across Europe and beyond and further harm the global economy. French president Nicolas Sarkozy declared the Greek problem was settled and a "page in the financial crisis is turning".However, there were plenty of sceptics, including German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble, who said that Greece had a history of missing growth and austerity targets. Bond markets marked down the value of the new 30-year bonds issued as part of the deal.Schäuble said: "Greece has got a clear opportunity to recover. But the precondition is that Greece uses this opportunity. It would be a big mistake to give the impression that the crisis has been resolved. "For bondholders, the deal means taking losses of up to 74% on their holdings, but European policymakers have insisted it is a relatively small price to pay for containing the eurozone sovereign debt crisis. Greece is now expected to enforce "collective action clauses" on any holders who have not accepted the deal.The deal will mean Greece slashes its debt burden and qualifies for fresh bailout money as part of the €130bn package from the IMF, European Union and European Central Bank. Venizelos thanked creditors for helping to return "Greece to a path of sustainable growth".Charles Dallara, managing director of the Institute of International Finance, which negotiated on behalf of banks and investors holding Greek government bonds worth €206bn, said: "The debt exchange represents the largest ever sovereign debt restructuring."Analysts gave the deal a cautious welcome but said deep problems remained. "This is far from the end of the euro debt crisis," said Michala Marcussen, global head of economics at Société Générale. She said further challenges included decisions over the firepower of Europe's bailout funds – the European financial stability facility and the future European stability mechanism.Michael Hewson, senior analyst at CMC Markets, noted that a small part of the bonds in question, governed by foreign law, not Greek rules, still had to be dealt with. "Questions still remain about the status of some foreign-law bonds, the deadline for which has been extended to 23 March, but it would appear that Greece is less broke than it was a few days ago."Under the deal, private creditors swap old Greek bonds for new ones with a much lower face value, lower interest rates and longer maturities, slicing €100bn off the Greek national debt.In 10 years, Greece's debt-to-GDP level is scheduled to match that of Portugal, but interest rates on the "grey market" have already reached 15-21%, far above Portuguese levels of 11-14%.Bond traders also moved against Portugal and Spain following concerns they will breach deficit targets for 2012.Spain's prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, has signalled his willingness to battle with Brussels over fines on Madrid for missing the targets. Rajoy, who has attempted to tackle runaway spending by regional governments, said Spain's deficit would be 5.8% of total economic output in 2012, higher than its agreed target of 4.4%.Portugal is on schedule to meet deficit targets set by Brussels, but at the cost of a deeper recession, analysts said. Its economy shrank 2.8% in the last quarter of 2011 on an annualised basis as austerity measures adopted in return for a €78bn EU bailout took their toll. The economy is expected to contract by 3.3% this year.Last May, Portugal became the third country in the 17-country eurozone, after Greece and Ireland, to need a financial rescue. Despite the recession, which has pushed unemployment up to 14.8%, and numerous strikes and protests, the right wing administration of prime minister Pedro Passos Coelho says it will stick with the austerity programme.