A teenage boy is shot dead by police in Exarchia, a district of central Athens long associated with lawlessness and drug abuse. Two police officers have been charged - one with murder and the other as an accomplice. A police statement later said one officer fired three shots after their car was attacked by 30 youths. A police official said the officer described firing warning shots, but witnesses told TV he aimed at the boy, identified as Alexandros Andreas Grigoropoulos, the son of a bank manager and a student at a school in Athens.The interior minister, Prokopis Pavlopoulos, tenders his resignation, promising that "exemplary punishment" will be taken against the police officers involved.The shooting taps into widespread anger at the Conservative government's economic policies and a widening gap between rich and poor. Protests erupt and quickly spread to Greece's northern capital, Thessaloniki, the western port city of Patras, and Chania on Crete.Rioters destroy scores of businesses, injuring dozens and putting further pressure on the government.Protesters chanting "cops, pigs, murderers" hurl petrol bombs at Athens riot police. Helicopters hover over the demonstrators and clouds of teargas erupt in the streets. Rioters seek sanctuary in the grounds of the Polytechnic and Athens universities, which traditionally have been off-limits to security forces since the collapse of military rule in 1974.Scores of shops and more than a dozen banks are torched in the capital's busiest commercial districts ahead of Christmas The mayor of Athens postpones the launch of holiday festivities.In Thessaloniki, more than 1,000 protesters clash with police, set fire to a bank and smash stores. Rioters clash with police in the western city of Patras. About 200 protesters riot outside police headquarters in Chania. On Corfu, protesters attack four cars and two shops, and an 18-year-old woman is injured.Officials report 30 people injured, including police, firefighters and bystanders. Looting is rife.The Greek Communist party announces a mass rally in central Athens for tonight and the socialist Pasok opposition calls for peaceful mass demonstrations. University professors start a three-day walkout and many school students stay away from class in protest.Cars and pedestrians return to the streets of Athens as Greeks go back to work, but with a 24-hour general strike scheduled for Wednesday against pension reforms and the government's economic policies, many Greeks fear the demonstrations could last for days.