Nouriel Roubini, the world-renowned economics professor known as Dr Doom, was in Athens last week with a message: the worst of the global financial crisis might be over but for Greece recovery could only occur with an "orderly restructuring" of its huge public debt.Although he is dismissed by some as a permanent pessimist, his prediction of a Greek default is gaining traction in the EU's most indebted nation. Ahead of today's EU summit, a growing number of Greek financial experts have voiced fears about the sustainability of a debt projected to reach 160% of GDP when the country's €110bn EU and IMF-sponsored rescue package expires in 2013."Whatever Greece does won't be enough," says Theodore Pelagidis, who teaches economic analysis at Piraeus University. "Over the course of the next decade it will be forced to repay about €70bn on average in maturing debt every year. Whatever corrective structural measures it takes [to boost competitiveness] the demands of such colossal repayments will be impossible to meet without sharing at least part of the debt burden with its creditors."In public, senior officials deny that the country at the centre of Europe's worst crisis since the creation of the common currency is heading for a sovereign default, unable to refinance its €330bn debt. Seven months after it averted bankruptcy with the biggest bailout in western history, the visiting EU commissioner for economic and monetary affairs, Olli Rehn, said last week that Athens would see a return to growth "by the end of 2011".Restructuring, he said, could be avoided if George Papandreou's socialist government pushed ahead with "substantial" structural reforms and stuck to fiscal targets. To ease the debt burden, the EU has promised to examine a rescheduling of repayments beyond 2015 because an extension "would be required".But while Rehn, a no-nonsense Finn, also praised the government's "impressive" performance in cutting Greece's budget deficit by six percentage points of GDP this year, local bankers, business executives and financial advisers increasingly beg to differ. "For the next two years the economy is set to contract and when growth returns it will be anaemic," said one well-placed company director who preferred not to be named. "You don't have to be an Einstein to see that the figures just don't add up. How are we going to pay our debt when it hits 160% of GDP in an economy that is both shrinking and doesn't produce anything?"Competitiveness, say economists, is the key to Greece rebounding. Unlike other deficit countries with heavy debt loads, its economy is stifled by deep-rooted corruption, red tape, rampant tax evasion and an all-pervasive state. For ease of doing business, Greece is ranked by the World Bank at 109th out of 183 nations, below Egypt, Zambia and Uganda."Outside the borders of this country Greeks do well, but inside the system stops them," said the company director. "Here entrepreneurs are viewed as criminals, which is why we have an economy that, bar tourism and shipping, doesn't produce anything."Progress in reducing the budget deficit – at 15.4% the highest in Europe – has rested on the €30bn package of austerity measures agreed by Papandreou in return for the emergency aid. The policies, including spending cuts across the public sector, tax increases and painful wage and pension reductions, have spawned violent street demonstrations. Yesterday, as unions staged a seventh general strike in protest at the overhauling of labour laws, rescinding of collective wage agreements and axing of debt at state-run enterprises – reforms the government has rushed through parliament under pressure from the EU and IMF – the unrest showed no sign of abating.Greece's international creditors say the country is at a crossroads: either it enforces fundamental structural changes or risks endangering its entire fiscal consolidation programme. But with tensions clearly on the rise, speculation is also mounting that a pre-emptive restructuring might be preferable to yet more austerity. Indicative of the mood, Greek banks are recapitalising in an attempt to strengthen balance sheets. "Many people see the option of restructuring as an easy way out," said Stefanos Manos, a national economy minister under a former conservative government. "There's a degree of wishful thinking to it," he told the Guardian.Across Europe, officials are acutely aware that any such move would have potentially catastrophic consequences for French, German and British banks. As the main holders of Greek debt, according to the BIS (Bank for International Settlements), lenders in all three states would see huge amounts of capital wiped out overnight if Athens were to announce a debt restructuring. Governments already battling economic recession would be forced to step in with further bailouts, a scenario they are keen to avoid in the current economic climate."The idea of restructuring now or in the foreseeable future – as a means of alleviating social tensions – could have dire implications," said Costas Karagiannis, a leading independent financial adviser. "It would only be manageable should containment provisions be in place, for example within the European Stability Mechanism that is currently being contemplated. As things are turning out, restructuring may not be case-specific to Greece and might eventually have to be reckoned with as a group-therapy measure involving the periphery of Europe."