 Related: Greece's best beach cafes and tavernas: readers' travel tips Reached along a 3.5km coastal dirt track carved out of the cliff, Kohili taverna – with a sign that declares itself “at the end of the world” – is perched above a small pebble beach on the south-west tip of Samos, surrounded by lemon and olive terraces, and with nothing to see but scrub and sea. We arrived late in the day on bikes and the owner kindly agreed to us pitching our tent on the beach after a hearty meal.Jon FletcherExplore the hilly interior and deserted west coast of the island by Jeep with Bumpy Rhodes Safaris, who will take you on an off-beat and off-road trip around the island in one of their rugged vehicles (from €40). You are picked up at various spots on the coast (including most hotels in the north and east of the island) and will head inland for an olive-pickers’ lunch at a mountain cabin.SalerioWhen visiting this cosmopolitan town with its marble streets and mix of modern and traditional restaurants, don’t miss the medieval Catholic settlement, Ano Syros, on a hill overlooking the city centre. Along Ano Syros’s whitewashed cobbled streets are some of the island’s best tavernas and handmade-souvenir shops. Go to the northern part of the island – by boat from Kini village – for stunning beaches and exceptional food; head to San Michalis village with the locals to enjoy sunset at taverna Plakostroto.Georgia Manousou Nymphaio is a beautifully preserved mountain village. It has fresh cool air and no crowds, even in high season. Stay at Argyro guesthouse and enjoy stunning views, lavish breakfasts (homemade loukoumades and rosewater rice pudding set you up for a long day’s hiking). There is also a bear sanctuary at Arcturos environmental centre that cares for animals rescued from circuses and zoos in the region. Rescue centre €6 for adults, €4 for children, arcturos.gr gaufreliegois Cooking holidays in Crete are a great way to experience the island. Personable enthusiasts we met at an olive farm – where you can also pick other vegetables from the garden – communicated their passion for food, wine and local life. The accommodation was lovely. Eight-day olive harvest tour from £1,447pp, handpickedgreece.com HilaryRPhillips  Start your 10km walk at the very pretty orthodox cathedral in Fira and head off along the cliffs towards Oia. The crowds thin after a while, leaving only you and serious walkers to be rewarded with stunning views from the caldera. In the mountains you’ll pass a small, isolated church in the Cycladean style and then head down into Oia – much photographed with its blue-roofed, round-domed churches – for a well-deserved beer. keddieb Related: Return to the Peloponnese: my Greek odyssey Stoupa is the perfect base to explore the peninsula – it’s a holiday resort but also a proper working village with lovely beaches and gorgeous cooling waters running down from the mountains. Kalogria beach has gentle shallow waters perfect for children and a great vibe from the chilled-out backpackers.Veronica MurphyOn the stunning south-west tip of the peninsula, this town has a wonderful main square, shaded by plane trees – excellent for coffee and people watching. The port area looks out to historic Navarino Bay. Add interesting independent shops, cheap restaurants and proximity to the Gialova Lagoon, the fort at Methoni and seaside resort of Finikounda, and you have all the ingredients for a true Greek holiday.steveb1878 Hire a private motor boat for the day from Alykanas beach. You’ll have enough petrol to get to the stunning Blue Caves and then to Navagio beach to see (and clamber over) the shipwreck. Take a picnic with you and enjoy it while you float around. valaiswatersports.gr LorrieShardayVisit the Mastichochoria, which are to the south of the island. For centuries, these little villages have lived on mastiha, a resin from the Pistacia lentiscus tree with a distinct aroma used to flavour sweets, cakes and liqueurs. Visit Pyrgi for its houses, covered in a unique kind of sgraffito, and Mesta for its stone houses, archways and perfectly preserved reminders of when it was fortified to resist pirate attacks.Alexander Breton Less touristy and quieter than neighbouring Santorini (and only an hour away by fast ferry), this tiny rugged island feels like stepping back in time. Stay in car-free Chora – a town with picture-perfect squares and charming tavernas, all serving affordable and delicious local food. See an unforgettable sunset from the cliff-top Hotel Castro, then treat yourself to matsata, a local pasta speciality. Phoenix Kushner Hire a moped and take the stunning ride up through the hills to Homer’s tomb. The roads are quiet and have fabulous views – look out for deserted coves where you can take a refreshing dip on the way back.ID2543200 Visit in the quieter months of September and October, when the nightlife winds down, and you’ll find a secluded paradise. Stay at luxurious yet reasonably priced Petros Place Hotel. At dusk, pick your route through the winding streets up to the highest point, where you will find magnificent sunset views over Ios town. For the freshest seafood on the island, the Octopus Tree taverna on the harbour side offers a laid-back atmosphere and simple, local dishes. Tally102  This tiny island is one of the first you’ll see as you sail out of Athens. It’s a peaceful place that large cruise ships and mass tourism seem to bypass, and you’ll find crystal waters, clouds of butterflies and quiet beaches. Explore around the perfect little blue-domed church surrounded by the incredible aroma of Mediterranean pines that once provided the resin for local retsina wine. Peregrin Hodgkinson