A general strike brought Greece to a halt today as more than 10,000 people march on parliament as protests continue over the fatal police shooting of a schoolboy.The demonstration in Athens was part of a previously scheduled nationwide strike but has developed into a protest against the government's handling of the crisis that has seen four days of rioting.Flights were grounded, banks and schools closed and hospital services restricted. "Participation in the strike is total. The country has come to a standstill," said Stathis Anestis, spokesman for the GSEE private sector union federation, one of two union groups that have organised today's rally.Running battles between Greek police and thousands of protesters angry at the shooting of the 15-year-old student intensified yesterday as antagonism boiled over outside the cemetery where the boy was being buried.Security forces fought pitched battles with stone-throwing youths outside Athens's parliament and in Salonika, the northern capital.As thousands descended on the coastal suburb of Faliro for the funeral of Alexandros Grigoropoulos, killed by a bullet to the chest on Saturday, hooded youths chanting "pigs, murderers" began baiting police. Before the funeral had ended they hurled stones, iron bars and marble slabs at officers, while residents ran for cover. As the boy's flower-covered casket was lowered into the ground the air was thick with acrid smoke from successive rounds of teargas fired by the police.Amnesty International has called for the Greek authorities to end the "unlawful and disproportionate use of force by police"."Images in the international media and eyewitness statements to Amnesty International present mounting evidence of police beating and ill-treating peaceful demonstrators," said Nicola Duckworth, the group's Europe and Central Asia programme director.The worst civil disturbances to hit Greece in decades, the riots have not only dealt another blow to the already badly dented popularity of the ruling conservatives but also left a trail of devastation.In Athens alone, officials estimate that more than 200 stores, 50 banks and countless cars have been damaged. Shops are shut and streets devoid of shoppers. Hospitals have also reported an increase in the number of wounded, believed to have exceeded 70.With the prime minister, Costas Karamanlis, facing growing criticism for his handling of the crisis - and his single-seat majority in the 300-member parliament looking increasingly vulnerable - the opposition leader, George Papandreou, stepped up calls for early elections. Coming out of emergency talks - requested by Karamanlis in an attempt to contain the crisis - Papandreou said it had become clear the government was incapable of defending the public from rioters."It cannot handle this crisis and has lost the trust of the Greek people," said the leader, whose socialist Pasok party has surged in the polls in recent months. "The best thing it can do is resign and let the people find a solution."That was a view widely shared by many of the leftist and self-styled anarchists fuelling the riots. At the Athens Polytechnic, now the centre of the groups' operations, young men and women broke up marble slabs and stocked up on firebombs. Standing behind makeshift barriers of burning rubbish bins, they promised to turn the unrest into "an uprising the likes of which Greece has never seen".As the site of the revolt against the colonels' regime in 1974, the polytechnic's colonnaded buildings are off-limits to security forces under a constitutional clause that gives students asylum on its grounds."This is not just about the kid. It's about our dreadful education and economic situation. That's what pushed us on to the streets," insisted one youth who called himself Andreas. "It's our belief and hope that this is the beginning of a rebellion against the system."The chaos, he said, had exposed the deep-seated anger of Greeks who after the introduction of the euro have not only struggled to make ends meet but have increasingly felt deceived by a system that thrives on corruption, party political affiliations and patronage."All of us have poor parents who are struggling," he said.For young Greeks like Andreas, a lost generation without work or hope, their rage is fuelled by allegations of corruption and the seemingly relentless scandals involving sex, money and the church that have swirled around the conservatives - and for which, despite public outrage, no one has been punished."We all thought it would take one incident for things to go up, and with the police killing of the teenage boy that is exactly what happened," said a veteran political analyst, Konstantinos Angelopoulos.Yesterday, the rioting spread to Crete and Corfu, where hundreds took to the streets, and intensified in at least a dozen cities across the country. Greek demonstrators occupied the country's consulate in Paris, following protests in London, Berlin and Nicosia on Monday.The market-oriented government faces growing anger over its tough fiscal policies from workers demanding more state social spending as well as salary and pension increases. Unions called on workers to participate in the walk-out "and demonstrate our opposition to state repression and the consequences of the [economic] crisis".Andreas, 19, student protester "The police are pigs and they deserve what they get. They don't have the balls to go after the anarchists. Instead they pick on us kids, stop us in the streets all the time. It's wrong to smash up shops, but I see it as a symbolic act to throw stones and rocks at the police because they're bastards."Nikos, 36, fireman "Am I surprised? Of course. Everything has happened so quickly. It's not just that the riots spread so fast, it's their intensity. In Athens we've had 200 cars and 40 buildings go up in flames, most of them in one night. We're all sick with worry."Sophia, 44, shopkeeper "Twenty years of work down the drain. I turned up at my shop today and they had taken everything, even the lining in the drawers. They managed to get past the steel blinds. Why have they targeted the little man? We're not to blame for the death of a child. Who is going to pay?"Nikos Yiannos, 18, student "I agree with the protests against the police because, after all, they killed the kid, but I don't agree with the destruction. Our police aren't like police elsewhere in Europe. They aren't educated and it's because they're not properly trained that things have got so out of control."Zoe Papanidou, 19, student "There were many reasons why these riots happened. The situation was explosive, socially and economically. The state undermines people. You feel it is violating your rights. At some point the lid was going to burst."