A rare bronze statue of the Greek god Apollo was discovered this week in the Gaza strip after being lost for centuries.A local Palestinian fisherman, Joudat Ghrab, says he discovered the bronze statue on the seabed last year but was unaware of its significance. It took him and his family four hours to drag the statue ashore.The statue briefly appeared on ebay with price tag of $500,000 (£300,000) before being seized by the police.Apollo is currently being held by the Gaza tourism ministry and will not be shown to the public until a criminal investigation into who tried to sell it is completed.If you want to bring this tale of hidden treasure and lost civilisations to your classroom, here's our selection of resources for use in history, art, philosophy and beyond.Zeus's affairs – datablogA fascinating graphic representation of the genealogy of the Greek god Zeus chronicled over the centuries by different writers. You can click a name for more details, or an author to view where the affairs are mentioned.DNA explodes Greek myth about womenA few years ago researchers exploring the founders of Mycenae, Europe's first great city-state and capital of King Agamemnon's domains, found that women in Ancient Greece were major power brokers in their own right. Until then, it had been thought that women were treated little better than servants, but they actually played key roles in running affairs of state. This would be a great starting point for a discussion about gender in ancient and modern societies.Parthenon marblesA new film, The Monuments Men, has stirred up old controversy about whether or not the Parthenon marbles should be returned to Athens from Britain after being removed 200 years ago. This piece includes opinions from actors from the new film, which could be useful as discussion starters, and a useful potted history of how the marbles found their way here.Teaching philosophy to children? It's a great ideaPhilosopher Michelle Sowey explains why it's important for young people to be taught philosophy. She says: "an early introduction to philosophical dialogue would foster a greater respect for diversity and a deeper empathy for the experiences of others."How to use the enduring power of Greek myths in your classroomTeacher Peter Worley still finds The Odyssey relevant to teaching philosophy – even if it is 3,000 years old.How to teach ... ancient GreeceTaken from the hugely popular How to teach ... series, this article is an introduction to ancient Greece – just in time for September 2014 when it is embedded into the curriculum.Greek wordsHere's a selection of useful words and phrases in modern Greek. They're suitable for all ages and could help students with Greek heritage feel right at home.Ancient EgyptA lovely introduction to the Egyptians – great for use on a whiteboard. Includes information on daily life, culture and religion – with lovely (noisy) sound effects too.Design a sarcophagusIf the above piques the interest of your students then you could also try this fun activity for younger pupils too.Family tree of the Greek godsWhat do you mean you don't know your Aphrodite from your Hermes? Here's a handy family tree to help make the connection.Five landmarks that may not stand the test of timeExtreme weather is playing havoc with five of the greatest landmarks of all time. The temple of Epicurean Apollo and The Sphinx in Egypt are both in danger.The sanctuaries of ApolloA documentary from the History Channel looking at three famous Greek sanctuaries of Apollo: the Sanctuary of Apollo in the island of Delos, where Apollo supposedly was born; the Sanctuary at Didyma of Miletus; and the sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi.Works of art – timelineThis is a really useful timeline of ancient art in Egypt from 500AD to 100AD. With everything from an amulet to an textiles, this timeline matches key events with works of art – and you can click on the individual pieces for more information.