Olive groves opaque with pollen, meadows carpeted with wild flowers, melting snow water gushing down mountain-sides before sinking into underground streams to reform as icy tendrils that curl about one's feet on early morning swims from empty beaches. This is springtime in the Mani, the far-flung central peninsula of the Peloponnese. Uncluttered and pristine, it is a wild place; the people once infamous for banditry and the landscape contrasting between arid, ochreous rocks scattered with ruined tower citadels and cypress-strewn olive groves leading to the clear, blue Ionian sea. Affluent Athenians drive for hours to reach their weekend villas here. We were staying at the Notos Hotel (0030 27210 73991, notoshotel.gr, studios from €95 per night), a stylish and peaceful retreat built into the rocks above the broad shingle beach of Kardamili. In the evenings we joined the Athenians in the amiable bars of this small village, where Byzantine streets lined with castellated houses of golden stone lead to the sparkling sea. Above the village, tiny domed churches, some little bigger than beehives, pepper the hillsides, each one filled with colourful frescoes like Byzantine jewel boxes. During a two-hour walk we came across seven. Some were still lit with the morning's devotional candles, others were encrusted with silver icons; one was even being used as a part-time goatshed, but all were coloured with vivid devotion, 19th-century faces gaily painted in where 13th-century ones had worn away. The perilous road to the Inner Mani leads from the lush hill groves of Kardamili to a bleached splendour of rock and tower, and there are many nameless little beaches for a replenishing snorkel along the way.Until recently, many Mani villages could be reached only by sea or precipitous donkey tracks. This was due in part to the topography and poverty of the area but also a strategic defence against frequent coastline attacks from invading armies, not to mention pirates. Over the centuries, homes became increasingly like fortresses and as the population grew they turned in on themselves to fatal effect.The villages are famed for their tower houses from which rival families shot each other with cannons in vendettas that lasted generations. Shattered towers scatter the hilltops like miniature castles and the feeling of a shuttered inner-world remains in the crumbling hamlets, silent and brooding under the glare of the southern sun. In Aeropolis, we chanced upon market day and found cafes filled with huge, thick-thighed men in army fatigues, ready for a day's hunting in the mountains. They slugged back liquor, railing against the injustices of municipal bureaucracy on the independent Maniot spirit, stopping for a genial inquisition of our morning travels before jumping into pick ups with their snarling dogs. People drive all the way (a four and a half hour slog) from Athens just to have lunch at nearby Takis Taverna (+27 733 51327) and, as you sit on turquoise painted chairs surrounded by geraniums right on the water's edge, it is easy to see why. Often, in a setting so perfect, the food can be a disappointment, but not so here. It is one of those restaurants you dream of finding in Greece. When we arrived, fresh fish were being gutted on the steps leading to the water below us before being added to a vast and variegated array on a marble slab. We chose our fish, they were slapped on the coals and on to our plates. Families beside us tucked into heaped platters of lobster spaghetti, but our straightforward meal of grilled bream, mountain greens and extremely palatable Greek wine will stay with me for years to come, for during our meal, a loggerhead turtle swam by, just two feet from our table. A local celebrity, she comes every year to snap up the fish scraps among a shoal of goal-hanging fish. After coffee, we dived from our chairs and swam with her in the broad blue bay.·  Inntravel (+44 (0)1653 617949, inntravel.co.uk) offers one week at the Polyminia Apartments, Kardamili, from £589pp including Gatwick-Kalamata flights and taxi transfers.