Whatever else is going to have to go in the great fire sale of the Greek public sector, whoever else will suffer, the country's prime minister made clear yesterday that one group will be safe: its creditors. Speaking on television, George Papandreou was adamant: "Our national red line is to avoid bankruptcy."So a nominally socialist government will whack up VAT and go to war with its civil servants, cutting jobs, wages and pensions – all in the name of keeping the bond markets sweet. The itemised list of cutbacks that Mr Papandreou has to make is so long and so major and so deeply contentious that even Germany's chancellor Angela Merkel yesterday described it as "very ambitious". Not that Athens is left with much choice: if it wants to remain in the European single currency, it has to make them. And the other members of the eurozone have to force Athens to take the scorched-earth road if the contagion from Greece to Spain and Portugal is to be contained.But here is the thing: when it comes to austerity, Greece is not an exception, merely an extreme case. Other southern European countries have been driven to swingeing cuts and, since the global economic crisis has led to a rise in borrowing by governments around the world, major economies will soon follow. Indeed, whoever receives the poisoned chalice of British prime minister this week will be forced to do much the same. All leaders will have the same calculation on their minds: do this, or go bust.Except that in some desperate cases it may be that going bust and bilking one's creditors is a better option than making impossible cuts and warring with voters. That is the message one takes away from a paper published by the International Monetary Fund. In The Costs of Sovereign Default, Eduardo Borensztein and Ugo Panizza looked at what happened to governments from Argentina to Malawi once they declared they could not pay their debts.The bottom line is that any country ending up in such distress will not find its prospects harmed much further by formally defaulting. Growth is affected – but then, the debtor country is probably already in a slump. Sure, investors ask for more interest on any loans they extend to insolvent nations – but only for a couple of years. The IMF researchers ask, "How long is the markets' memory?" – and the answer appears to be: not long at all. This is not the conclusion of a bunch of pinko economists, but the global equivalent of a giant debt-counselling service, one that spends its time organising bailouts. No country would want to go bankrupt – but once it is as good as bust, it may be more sensible to own up and manage the insolvency as fairly as possible.