 2.35pm BST A new op-ed piece by Nouriel Roubini argues that eurozone leaders should give serious consideration to an early break-up of the single currency.Roubini reckons that the eurozone is on a very dangerous course, by relying on a huge injection of liquidity into the system to keep Spain and Italy afloat while Europe wrestles with issues such as fiscal union, a single banking system, and economic reforms.He dubs this strategy betting the house to save the garage". Here's a flavour, from Project Syndicate:Just consider what must be overcome: economic divergence and deepening recessions; irreversible balkanization of the banking system and financial markets; unsustainable debt burdens for public and private agents; daunting growth and balance-sheet costs in countries that pursue internal devaluation and deflation to restore competitiveness; asymmetrical adjustment, with moral-hazard risks in the core and insufficient financing in the periphery fueling incompatible political dynamics; fickle and impatient markets and investors; austerity fatigue in the periphery and bailout fatigue in the core; the absence of conditions for an optimal currency area; and serious difficulties in achieving full fiscal, banking, economic, and political union.If a gradual process of disintegration eventually makes a eurozone breakup unavoidable, the path chosen by Germany and the ECB – large-scale financing for the eurozone periphery – would destroy the core central banks’ balance sheets.More here.And on that cheery note, I'm shutting down for the day. We'll be back in the morning, and crossing our fingers for an end to the summer lull.Until then, goodnight! 2.35pm BST Italian opposition party Lega Nord (or the Northern League) is calling for a referendum on Italy's membership of the euro. The vote could be held in 2013, alongside the next general election (when prime minister Mario Monti steps down).Roberto Maroni, Lega Nord's secretary general, told La Repubblicathat the party wants to collect "millions of signatures" in support of a referendum. He also claimed the plan is "not an isolated one in Europe.”Here's more from Maroni, with thanks to Open Europe (who have also uploaded the whole interview):My objective would be for such a referendum to be held in all [eurozone] member states before the 2014 European elections. This is why I am going to meet the euro-critics in other EU member states.What I would like to see is a new eurozone with Northern Italy in the euro. But in order to get there, a referendum is needed first. The most important thing is that democracy should decide, not bureaucracyMore here... 2.35pm BST Europe's stock markets are closed after another languid day's trading.FTSE 100: down 31 points st 5833, - 0.54%German DAX: down 27 points at 6946, - 0.4%French CAC: down 1 point at 3449, - 0.03%Spanish IBEX: up 4 points at 7128, + 0.06%Italian FTSE MIB: up 124 points at 14656, + 0.85%Even less excitingly, on Wall Street the Dow Jones is up 3 points....But on a slightly more long-term view, world stock markets are around 6% higher since Mario Draghi declared that the euro was irreversible at the end of July.Capital Economics warns this evening that we could see a stock market correction:Sentiment could change very quickly if – as we suspect – the crisis in the euro-zone flares up again during the next few months. Meanwhile, the ongoing weakness of the global economy could dampen spirits, too. Not only does global GDP growth appear to have slipped below 3% on an annualised basis in Q2 this year, its lowest level since early 2009, but we also expect no improvement in the second half of 2012. 2.35pm BST The New Statesman has chased up the 20 economists who in 2010 backed George Osborne's Plan A (to eliminate the UK structural budget deficit), and tried to establish whether they've changed their mind.Two years on, with the UK shrinking, nine of them now reckon the chancellor should change course*. One is standing firm, and the remaining ten were either on holiday or unwilling to give a view.More here.* - this includes Danny Quah of the LSE and Michael Wickens of York University, who both argue that there is much less danger of UK borrowing costs spiking if Osborne relaxed his deficit reduction targets. 2.35pm BST Canada's finance minister, Jim Flaherty, has set the tone for Angela Merkel's visit (which kicks off tomorrow) by warning that the eurozone crisis was far from fixed.Flaherty criticised European leaders for not making more progress, and warned that the Canadian economy would suffer if the situation worsened. Asked about the crisis, Flaherty replied pithily that:Not enough has been done.He also reiterated that Canada will not provide more funding to the IMF to help finance the eurozone. 2.35pm BST Greece's immediate future in the eurozone will be determined next month, when the Troika publishes its report into the country's performance against the terms of its aid package.As Yannis Koutsomitis points out on Twitter, we don't know for certain what that report will say:Can German officials pls explain how the heck they know that Greek program's way off track since everyone's waiting for final Troika report?Ten days ago, the Troika left Greece with encouraging words for its government's efforts to cut spending and bring the deficit under control.However, given the delays caused by the rerun general election in June, it seems very likely that Greece will be behind schedule on some of the Troika's measurements.Philipp Rösler, German economy minister, struck a hard line last month, saying:What’s emerging is that Greece will probably not be able to fulfil its conditions. If Greece doesn’t fulfil those conditions, then there can be no more payments.But it ain't necessarily so. Back on 1 August, Christine Lagarde gave Greece fresh hope by pledging to stand by the country through thick and thin.Lagarde, the managing director of the IMF, told reporters in Washington:The IMF never leaves the negotiation table ... We are in Greece at the moment ... and we are engaged in dialogue with the Greek authorities.(thanks to Nick Panayotopoulos for reminding me about Lagarde comments. Nick, like Yannis, is a well-informed commentator on the crisis) 2.35pm BST Three interesting pieces of economic data out of the US.1) The Empire State index, which measures manufacturing output in the New York region, fell into negative territory for the first time since last October. At -5.9 in August (following +7.4 in July), it suggests conditions have worsened. However..2) Industrial production across the US rose by 0.6% during July, slightly better than expected.3) Foreign buyers cut their exposure to US debt in June. A net total of €32.4bn of Treasury debt (issued by the US government) was bought during the month, down from $45.9n in May. China remained the biggest buyer.There was a bigger drop in demand for US corporate debt – cutting their total exposure by $22bn. 2.35pm BST Greek officials are briefing that Antonis Samaras will certainly broach the issue of an extension to Greece's financial programme when he meets Angela Merkel, Francois Hollande, and Jean-Claude Juncker next week.But they also say that this will not be a formal, official request for budget targets to be relaxed. More a gentle inquiry.One government spokesman told Reuters:The matter of extension is already being debated in Greece and abroad. Its official submission is a different matter.He added that "Our key priority is to regain our credibility by showing our determination" to hit reform the Greek economy. That commitment, though, has already been tested by the ongoing struggle to find €11.5bn of budget cuts. 2.35pm BST Megan Greene, eurocrisis expert at Roubini Global Economics, is concerned that Greece's decision to informally freeze government spending could backfire (see 8.49am for details):The Greek govt has imposed a spending moratorium. Would you pay your taxes if your govt stopped providing services and paying down arrears?She also fears that Antonis Samaras will struggle to persuade the rest of the eurozone that Greece's fiscal targets should be relaxed, calling it:A very hard sell for the Greek government.Germany's position is that the Greek Memorandum of Understanding is fine as it stands.And even if Samaras can get Berlin and Paris onside, it also has to persuade its Troika of lenders. The International Monetary Fund might refuse to accept a restructuring, on the grounds that other countries would demand similar treatment.For example, Greene predicts that it would be very hard for the Troika to resist pressure from Dublin to restructure Ireland's promissory notes (which were agreed under painfully high interest rates at the height of the crisis).The Troika, she points out, made its opposition to any relaxation clear soon after June's election.Another hurdle for Samaras to clear... 2.35pm BST Greek prime minister Antonis Samaras is expected to present his case for Greece's financial programme to be relaxed next Friday, August 24, to Angela Merkel in Berlin (see 7.53am for details of his proposal)He is then due in Paris the next day for talks with Francois Hollande.Samaras was due to warm up for his Merkel meeting by hosting Luxembourg prime minister, Jean-Claude Juncker, in Athens on Wednesday, August 22. 2.35pm BST The euro has weakened slightly against other currencies, and just dropped through the $1.23 mark (down half a cent at $1.228) (correction: some euro symbols crept in there briefly)Jeremy Cook, chief economist at World First, blames a general mood of unease in the foreign exchange markets today:market boredom = uncertainty = bearishness = today's market 2.35pm BST Jane Foley, Rabobank's currency expert, reckons eurozone leaders may agree to Greece's request for its austerity targets to be relaxed, given the deeply troubled state of its economy.However, Germany remains the big obstacle.Foley told clients this morning:In view of the very significant recessionary conditions it is easy to understand why Greece wants to cut only 1.5% from its budget deficit target each year rather than 2.5%.What is less clear at the moment is the reaction of key eurozone politicians. There have been signs of exasperation from some German politicians with respect to Greece’s fiscal outlook. In this context a two year extension to the plan may appear to be acceptable. 2.35pm BST A thought on this morning's UK unemployment data. At 8.0%, Britain has a significantly lower jobless rate than the eurozone (11.2%), or America (8.3%). Yet it's the only one in recession.Is the data faulty, or is Britain rewriting the usual rules?Howard Archer of IHS Global Insight suggests three possibilities:Either the economy is doing appreciably better than the national accounts data show, the labour market is doing significantly worse than the hard data show, or productivity has genuinely weakened sharply.The jury is currently very much out as to what the actual answer is but it could very well be a combination of all three.Another theory doing the rounds this week is that UK firms have resisted laying staff, off in case the economy recovers, but could be forced into cutting headcount if the situation gets much worse.This graph, from Scott Barber of Reuters, shows how UK productivity per worker is pretty low in historical terms: 2.35pm BST UK unemployment has fallen, data just released showed, in a rare boost for the government.The number of people out of work in the three months to June fell by 46,000 to 2.564m, which pulls Britain's unemployment rate down to 8.0%.The more recent claimant count, which measures the number of people claiming jobless benefits in July, dropped by 5,900 last month. Economists had expected a rise of 6,000.Most of the improvement came in London, according to the Office for National Statistics. That's shows that the "Happy and Glorious" Olympic Games had an effect on the labour markets. 2.35pm BST Just in, the Bank of England voted 9-0 to leave UK interest rates unchanged at 0.5% at its meeting this month.The Monetary Policy Committee also voted 9-0 to leave its quantitative easing programme at £375bn (although some members of the committee came close to voting for yet more QE).Update. The minutes also include this warning about the eurozone crisis:The global economy had continued to slow and very substantial risks remained in the euro area. These could, if they crystallised, have a considerable impact on the stability of the global banking system and on economic activity in the United Kingdom.Even if a disorderly outcome were avoided, it was probable that the continuing threat of such an event would weigh on domestic economic activity for some time to come.You can see the minute here (pdf) 2.35pm BST This is Juan Manuel Sanchez Gordillo, a member of the regional parliament for the United Left party in Andalucia, who has won fame in Spain for his role in Robin-Hood style raids on supermarkets.Activists have visited a number of supermarkets in Andalucia, filling up trolleys with food before scooting through the exits without paying. They say the move is a response to the harsh downturn in the region, where one in three people are unemployed.Seven people have been arrested since the practice began.Sanchez Gordillo has become the public face of the robberies, as Reuters reports this morning;"There are people who don't have enough to eat. In the 21st century, this is an absolute disgrace," he told Reuters this week in an interview in the Atocha train station in Madrid, tugging on his graying Fidel Castro-style beard.Sanchez Gordillo says he wants to draw attention to the human face of Spain's economic mess - poverty levels have risen by over 15 percent since 2007, a quarter of workers are jobless and tens of thousands have been evicted from their homes.But not everyone is impressed. As government spokesman Alfonso Alonso put it:You can't be Robin Hood and the Sheriff of Nottingham.But Sanchez Gordillo seems keen to wear both hats, and has begun a three-week march in support of anti-austerity campaigners. Reuters interview with Sanchez Gordillo has just gone online here. 2.35pm BST Nice piece by Greek newspaper Kathimerini this morning, explaining how Greece's government has imposed an effective, unofficial, spending moratorium. That means a freeze on any outgoings except public sector salaries and pensions.The move is meant to tide Greece over until it receives its next tranche of aid this autumn. Athens has already spent several billion euros less than planned, but unpaid bills are still mounting up:From ekathimerini:According to Finance Ministry data, the total expenditure on investment and operating expenses in the January-July period should have been at least 4.4 billion euros more than it actually was. At the same time, debts to suppliers since the beginning of the year have risen 15.4 percent, or 887 million, and have come to total some 6.6 billion euros. 2.35pm BST After gently rallying for several days, European stock markets have taken a dip this morning.FTSE 100: down 30 points at 5834, - 0.5%DAX: down 22 points at 6951, - 0.33%CAC: down 13 points at 3436, - 0.4%Traders seem to have lost faith that central bankers might unleash another stimulus package soon – on the grounds that yesterday's US economic data was better than expected.Chris Weston of IG Index explains:Where a renewed asset-purchase programme by the Federal Reserve was consensus two weeks ago, this view is probably 50/50 today and we feel there is certainly scope to for the Fed to stay put for now and wait until after the November US elections and into 2013.It's so quiet in the City at present, with trading volumes at their lowest levels in many years. Talking to traders, they reckon most people are sitting tight in preparation for a dramatic September. 2.35pm BST The Greek government document obtained by the FT (see 7.53am), states that a two-year delay to its current reform plan would cost €20bn That might be optimistic – there were reports last month that such a delay would actually require between €30bn and €40bn of fresh funding (due to the deterioration in Greece's budgets in recent months).More here.If true, that larger figure might well need some contribution from Greece's eurozone partners (something which Samaras's current plan avoids). 2.35pm BST Elisabeth Afseth, analyst at Investec, believes that the Greek government probably has a solid case for requesting a delay to its austerity plan, but predicts opposition from Germany.She writes:The arguments for a delay may be sound, but patience is running very thin after serious delays to the first programme and renegotiations are coming less than 6 months into the second bailout.Wouldn’t be surprised if we see some German politicians expressing an opinion on the proposal over the next few days, though serious discussions will come in September when the troika returns to Athens. 2.35pm BST Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the eurozone crisis.Greek prime minister Antonis Samaras will formally ask for the terms of the county's aid package to be relaxed next week, the Financial Times is reporting this morning.The FT has got hold of a document outlining Samaras' plans for his meetings next week with Angela Merkel and François Hollande. This shows that Samaras will insist that Greece can only recover if the pace of reform is slowed.The proposal includes spreading cuts over the next four years (not two as currently planned), and a less pacey approach to cutting the Greek deficit (lowering it by 1.5 percentage points, not 2.5 points as under the plan agreed earlier this year.Such a plan would be costly, though, as the FT outlines:According to the document, Greece would need additional funding of €20bn to support the budget as the annual deficit reduction in 2013-2014 would be smaller than planned. However, Athens is proposing to find the money without seeking help from eurozone partners.Funds would be raised from an existing IMF loan, issues of treasury bills and, Greece hopes, a postponement in the start of repayments of its first EU-IMF loan from 2016 until 2020, when it is due to begin paying back its second bailout loan.We've known for a long time that the Greek government wants to relax the terms of its austerity plan; but how will Merkel and Hollande react? Several German politicians have already signaled their opposition to cutting Greece any more slack, so Samaras could face a chilly reception in Berlin next week...We'll be tracking reaction to this story through the day.Also coming up: the latest UK unemployment data is released at 9.30am, along with the minutes of the Bank of England's latest meeting.