A campaign has been launched in Greece by tourism officials against bars serving "bombes", cocktails of spirits that are being blamed for increasingly bad behaviour in holiday resorts.The campaign, which will see police officers and scientists conducting random checks of nightclubs and bars, comes amid mounting evidence that unsuspecting holidaymakers are being sold drinks laced with lethal doses of industrial spirit. Adulterated alcohol is believed to be behind the death of a British teenager who collapsed after a binge-drinking session outside a nightclub in the resort of Laganas on the island of Zakynthos last month."In certain areas, like Malia on Crete, bombes are a real problem," said Sophia Nova, a tourism ministry official. "We may talk a lot about the attitude of tourists and their excessive drinking but often it's the alcohol that's at fault. If we don't solve this problem and get rid of bombes, Greece's image will be tainted." Mixing alcohol with industrial spirit to make beverages go further is an old ruse long employed by some unscrupulous bar-owners in Greece.In recent years, however, the bombe appears to have grown in popularity with proprietors eager to attract customers with cheap drinks. Doctors have likened the cocktails to "a small bomb that goes off in the brain". In letters to the country's interior, finance and development ministries and leaked to the press this week, tourism minister Aris Spiliotopoulos described the drinks as a menace that threatened to bring Greece into disrepute. He urged the government to not only set up special "anti-bomba" patrols but to allow places of entertainment to undergo control-checks late into the night. "Until now officials have only been able to conduct such checks until 2pm which is a bit of a paradox when it's clearly such a big issue," added Nova."With these new rules, they'll be able to go into bars at any time of the night and day." Chemists at state-run laboratories, as well as food control officials, will be seconded to the drive. "It's all part of our effort to discourage the wild behaviour that, sadly, is often encouraged by tour operators in Britain," she said. "We're not interested in quantity but the quality of tourism in Greece." The campaign comes as authorities intensified a crackdown on alcohol-fuelled tourists running amok in resorts nationwide. Many young Britons, often enjoying their first unsupervised holiday abroad, were arrested this week on Crete. The arrests followed an "urgent order" by the island's leading prosecutor, Nikos Markakis, for emergency services to settle the "uncontrollable situation" in Malia, a retreat that caters almost exclusively to young UK holidaymakers and where exasperated locals last year staged protest demonstrations. Since the start of the tourist season bad behaviour has reached new heights with Britons being rounded up for having sex in public, possessing counterfeit euro bank notes and staging drunken rampages through the town. With authorities showing a new resolve to stop the antics, British tour companies yesterday advised people "to respect local laws" in resorts that not that long ago were quiet Greek fishing villages.