Looking at the riots in Greece over the last few days, and probably for a few more days yet, there is a tendency to blame it all on weak and corrupt politicians – to point the finger, as Kat Christofer did here, at the failure of politics to guide a nation. Greece is, so the argument goes, really just a third world country. If it was going to happen anywhere, it's hardly surprising it happened there.But this view has no substance. Are riots in France that last weeks on end a demonstration that France lacks a viable democracy? Do race riots in Bradford herald the end of British society? Describing the trouble in Greece as an inevitability is a dated view.Greek politics definitely has its flaws. Corruption is alive and well, particularly within the Greek Church, which is separated from the state only in theory. Dynasties reign nationally, regionally and locally down to the village mayors. The police can appear somewhat lazy in their application of the law.But hold on. Aren't we, in Britain, suffering a crisis of democracy right now in the Damian Green affair? Cash for honours, deputy leadership funding, yachts off Corfu all point to a less-than-proud record here. So I don't think these riots can be explained simply by blaming the politicians – that's the easy way out.To me this comes down to the Greeks' cultural psyche, their attraction to collective disobedience. Greeks are wedded to striking – anyone who has ever flown with Olympic Airways knows that. Booking a flight doesn't necessarily mean catching a flight. Much like the French, Greeks like to flex their trade union muscles as regularly as possible. Every other week someone is on strike – the train drivers, the taxi drivers, the airport staff, teachers, students. That's right, students. Pupils of all ages, not just university-goers, have been known to lock their teachers out of school. Many Greeks also like to argue – everything is a national conspiracy. Every night without fail, the TV stations dedicate part of their evening to a "debate". By this they mean splitting the screen between four or so speakers (the record I have seen is 12), picking a subject and letting them loose on each other. The general rule is whoever has the loudest voice wins. Take that culture of resistance and pride – add in the fact that the country is effectively broke, with jobs hard to come by – and you have a combustible mix. All it needed was a spark, found in the tragic shooting of a 15-year-old boy, and you get mayhem. But even then it's only a minority of thugs and hooligans that have taken to the streets. The majority of Greeks, whatever their grievances, are welcoming, kind and passionate people, hugely proud of their history and of their status as Europeans.But it's the stupid, mindless actions of the few, spurred on by notions of anarchy and irresponsible opportunistic public figures, that is now giving Greece, and its democracy, a bad name. I honestly believe most people will be utterly ashamed of the football hooligans running amok in city centers.It is the height of selfishness to run around throwing bricks at people's shops, burning out cars for the thrill of it. Let's not paint it as anything else. There is nothing romantic about a "revolution in the streets". This doesn't come close.If the mob's anger was directed solely at the state maybe it would be fathomable. But what does a local shop-owner struggling to make a living have to do with the state? A bunch of self professed anarchists trashing their own city does not make a political movement.And the shameful thing is that most of those people who have taken to the streets have piggy-backed on a genuine tragedy. There are questions that need to be answered both at police level and political level about what happened. But those people running around throwing stones have probably forgotten all about that. I don't mean to oversimplify the problems Greek society faces. But democracy is what society makes of it, and right now the minority are embarrassing everyone, themselves most of all.