The election of a centre-left socialist party in Greece bucks the trend of a European Union that has swung to the right. And the good news is that, in George Papandreou, Greece has a prime minister who is not only a decent man but one with a vision for his country. The emergence of yet another Papandreou as prime minister (his father, Andreas, was elected to the post three times) engenders cynicism. But Papandreou junior is not to the manor born. As foreign minister in the 1990s, he masterminded the policies that led to a tangible improvement in relations with Turkey and Albania, which was no easy feat.Born in the US and educated in Ontario, Stockholm, the LSE and Harvard, he is closer to Scandinavian-style social democracy than to Greek nationalism. (His return home prompted a newspaper column devoted to his problems in speaking Greek.) But he stuck to his guns. He believes, for instance, in governing by consensus, which is not the first concept that comes to mind in normally fractious Greek politics.The bad news is the size of the task. His two predecessors, Costas Simitis and Costas Karamanlis, came to power promising transparency and an end to cronyism and grace-and-favour government. Mr Simitis brought his country into the eurozone, but achieved only incremental change on the reform front. Mr Karamanlis failed altogether. Mr Papandreou also promises a fresh start. His agenda is large: to reform government, the pension system and the bloated public sector; to increase the tax take; and to crack down on illegal immigration through Turkey. These problems are systemic, so entrenched in the way the state functions that they defy party politics. How can any government reform the state when the system is nobbled by kickbacks and vested interests at every level?Greece is thought to lose $17.5bn in unpaid income taxes and $13bn in other taxes annually – six times the sum that Mr Papandreou has promised to invest to stimulate the economy. The black economy is even bigger, between a quarter and a third of national income. So the big question is: how can he clean up government and boost the economy without feeding the beast he is trying to tame?Mr Papandreou is unlikely to be given much of a honeymoon. In Brussels his government will seek a two-year extension to the time when the budget deficit, already the second-largest in Europe, has to be halved. But in return Brussels will demand a major reform of the Greek pension system. That will require agreement from the public-sector unions. Mr Papandreou will have to not just manage a crisis-ridden country, but lead it – a task of a different order of difficulty.