Saturday afternoon: YorkAll the way down to London I am wondering if this method of reaching Greece is a mistake. The train announcements seem to confirm it: "We'd like to remind you that the cafe bar is now closed." Then at Newark: "There will be a replacement stagecoach to Grantham." A stagecoach! Did I hear that right? Maybe it is appropriate, I muse later, staring out of the coach window at a wet Lincolnshire: after all, I had let my son Con talk me into reaching our Greek island holiday by train rather than low-cost airline, all to save on carbon emissions. Were there once people who said, "No thanks, I won't take the newfangled train, I'll stick to the stagecoach. The environment needs the horse manure." They probably got shoved on to "replacement ox carts" between Newark and Grantham. Curiously I find the interruption to the service adds a bit of excitement. And we arrive in London on time.Sunday morning: St Pancras, LondonThis is the starting line. We wait to be called to our Eurostar train. No one speaks to us, and we speak to no one. Where and when does the talking begin, I wonder, because one of the benefits of slowing your journey down - apart from the carbon smugness - ought to be a compensatory increase in the quantity and quality of human interaction.What I want from this trip, I decide, is a real journey, an old-fashioned journey, a struggle to reach my destination that turns into a life experience. With slicker transport systems and every passenger distracted by iPods and laptops, that kind of thing is getting hard to find in Europe. I want to make friends and enemies, get drunk with pirates and poets, cross the border at midnight with a Serbian princess under my cloak.Such things are clearly forbidden at St Pancras station. There is a group of bohemians with musical instruments on the platform, but they don't get in our carriage. We're stuck with Mr and Mrs Avoid-Eye-Contact, even though we are soon having breakfast opposite them. As train breakfasts go, it's quite good, and there's an accompanying card to inform us that this is a carbon-neutral journey. I query, out loud, if they remembered to include the actual card in their calculations. Con feigns discovery of another smaller card, announcing that the first card is carbon neutral, and another smaller one, and so on. Mr and Mrs A-E-C stare into their scrambled eggs as we dive under the Channel.Sunday lunchtime: ParisWe have half an hour to walk to Gare de l'Est. No one speaks to us, but we don't care: it's nice weather and this is Paris. We board the SNCF to Zurich and a lady with lovely painted nails brings us an excellent packed lunchbox for €19.80. We rush through Picardy, which is mainly yellow, and then past Strasbourg which is largely green. Wooded hills and vineyards. The earth wrinkles up into ridges and we blast through. At Basel there is a noticeable improvement in the graffiti which has adorned the entire line from London. It's now more colourful. Maybe soon someone will speak to us. Sunday evening: ZurichWe stroll up the river, enjoying the views of medieval buildings and distant mountains. I reckon that this is the point at which an air traveller would catch us up. Given the airport waiting times, and journeys out of and into town, we would have probably beaten the plane to Zurich. But now we are moving into the darkness: the zone where it is really madness. We hear the mocking voices: You took the train! You could have been here yesterday!After eating in an outdoor cafe, we board the 20.40 night service to Vienna. And then, 10 minutes into our journey, while I am standing in the corridor, it happens. There is no warning, just momentary eye contact, a subtle change in body language, and then the man next to me says, "We've been at a conference in Zurich - what about you?"I jump, startled and a bit afraid. Is he . . ? I glance around. Yes, he's definitely talking to me. We've hit the border. I'm into the human zone.It turns out he's a mathematician who is studying "how to solve complex problems like blood flow." He gets into an explanation of parallel computing and algorithms. My body begins to feel heavy. Blood flow becomes a conscious effort. Maybe this human interaction business is overrated. Monday morning: Central AustriaWe are woken at 6.30am for breakfast as we roll across Austria. "Asia begins at the Landstrasse," someone once said, and there is certainly a hint of the east in the waisted curves of the church domes.We have arranged to spend all of Monday in Vienna, rejoining the railway in the evening. However, it turns out that Vienna is mainly closed on Mondays. We find one gallery open and visit the Oskar Kokoschka exhibition which is a tremendous discovery. One of his last works, Time, Gentlemen Please, from 1971, actually brings tears to my eyes - the only time that usually happens is when someone stands on your foot at the Royal Academy. Ironically the painting is from the Tate in London and I must have walked past it several times. Only by shifting it somewhere far away has it managed to penetrate my consciousness."It's marvellous," says a woman in an elegant suit. Could she be a Serbian princess? No, she is a management consultant on her lunch break. We discuss the paintings. Other people discuss the paintings, too. Afterwards Con and I wander through a load of Paul Klee, dehumanised sterility in comparison. No one talks in there.Monday night: ViennaThe 19.48 to Belgrade leaves on time. At last we're in a train where you can open the windows and lean out. Wonderful. Others obviously feel the same sense of freedom and we all lean far out the windows and wave madly. In the next compartment is Deng from Hong Kong with his girlfriend, May. They have been touring Europe by train and are now heading for the climax of their holiday: Greece. "I am so exciting," says May whose English falters occasionally. "I always want to go to Greece. It is my number one. I cannot believe we arrive day after tomorrow." In fading light we rattle towards Hungary. At the border the Hungarian police actually kick the door open. Con sleeps through it and the impossibly seductive conductress apologises for the noise, adding, "Sserbia iss beautiful, lovely. Don't believe your newsspapers, it iss the besst." She is Serbian, needless to say.We pass Budapest in the dark and reach the Serbian border where we stop. The police are very polite, but they are unhappy about Deng and May. "With Hong Kong passports, you need a Serbian visa! Go back to Austria!"The last we see of our Chinese friends is them being led away by men with pistols. Suddenly the night takes on a sinister edge. The uniforms have the old-fashioned cut of east European dictatorships. The ghost of Graham Greene stalks the corridors searching for characters.Tuesday, dawn: BelgradeThe sensation of moving steadily into unknown lands has now become enjoyable. We are not exactly lingering anywhere, but the gradual changes in landscape, architecture and faces is giving a real sense of our destination's location, close to the Balkans and the Orient. None of that could happen with a plane. Belgrade is certainly different. It has wild graffiti that really means something: "Your God is dead!" and "1389" - the date of the Battle of Kosovo, which Serbia lost. The streets are full of animated people, the women showing plenty of bra strap and the men chain-smoking. Cigarettes are so cheap, you're losing money if you don't smoke. We wander into a restaurant and glance at the English menu which has been translated with admirable directness: "Bowels" is a starter, while main courses include "Young bulls sex glands". We take a table, breathe in deeply and finally order the spaghetti. By late afternoon we are exhausted and wishing we had taken a hotel room. Instead we have a strip wash under a tap on the station platform along with some swarthy Albanians who smoke while washing. Con nips aboard a stationary train to use the toilet. Everyone else on the station is swiftly reminded that railway toilets in Serbia are just holes in the floor. The Albanians hold their sides and laugh vigorously through clenched cigarettes.We board the 22.20 to Thessaloniki via Skopje. This train is sparsely populated, but a skinny Macedonian sidles up. "Can you help - I'm €7 short of money for my Greek visa. My friend is waiting at Skopje so I will borrow it from you and pay back there." I give him €10 and we never see him again.Wednesday, dawn: Southern SerbiaI wake as the sun rises. We are rattling gently southwards and the air has a warmth in it previously absent. The fields are filled with courgettes and pumpkins growing around sweetcorn. We stop regularly and listen to cicadas and birdsong. In the distance, above the walnut trees, pointed minarets prick the skyline, a sight that annoys our golden-haired Macedonian conductor: "Kosovars! They have moved in here. Pah!" He is a motorbiker in his spare time and full of admiration for "your Isle of Man Titty". I think I know what he means.We cross into Macedonia, a country that has been forced to call itself the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia by its neighbouring state, the Former Ottoman Backwater of Greece.Skopje station is a brutalist concrete monster, but soon after we are into lovely scenery as the line plunges into the gorge of the river Vardar. At Veles the motorbiking guard talks darkly of massacres and pogroms. "The communists killed everyone who was against them after the second world war, and buried them here."We pass acres of polytunnels where tomatoes grow. There are peaches, nectarines and apples. "Macedonia is an antique country," he says proudly. "Our language is 8,000 years old. If Alexander the Great were here, I could chat to him.""What about?" I enquire innocently.He laughs cynically. "The Kosovar problem."As we enter the Demir Kapija (Iron Gate) Gorge we spot an otter in the river. This is the most spectacular part of the journey: trees tower around us and we plunge down towards the hot plains. Emerging from the gorge we are in a verdant Mediterranean land. The river is glimpsed through the dark green of holm oaks. In the vineyards, mule carts stand in the shade while men tend rows of beehives.As we approach the border I chat to Helena, an Athenian teacher. She has just done a rail tour of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia. "Thanks to railways," she says with a laugh, "I discovered that I am a Balkan. We Greeks always pretend we are different to our neighbours, but now I found that we are not."The border crossing is very slow. I get told off for taking photographs. Wednesday afternoon: ThessalonikiAt Thessaloniki we pick up the Athens train. A man sits in the corridor playing folk tunes on a melodian. My mobile pings into life and informs me that my credit cards have been used in a fraud and the bank has taken the precaution of cancelling them all. We arrive in Athens penniless, tired - but strangely elated. We've already had lots of laughter and made some friends, and our holiday is only just beginning. No princesses appeared, unfortunately, but we understand a bit about Greece and her neighbours that we did not before. Rail travel, real travel - you can't beat it. And we saved some carbon, too.Getting thereInterRail passes for five days of travel in a 10-day period with Rail Europe (0844 848 4064, raileurope.co.uk) costs £229 (age 26+); £146 youth (12-25); and £115 child (4-11). Ten days of travel in a 22-day period costs £330 adult; £220 youth; £165 child. Passes entitle the holder to a passholder fare on Eurostar of £50 each way, but it is possible to get a regular fare from £59 return by early booking.Passholders may have to pay for seat reservations on high-speed and overnight trains. National Express (0845 600 7245, nationalexpress.com) from York to London costs from £12.50 one-way if booked well in advance.Getting backEasyjet.com flies from Athens to Gatwick, Luton and Manchester.