I'm walking up the steep slope of Benog Mountain, in the Garhwal Hills of northern India, in search of one the rarest birds in the world. The Himalayan mountain quail, called Pahari bater in Garhwali, has been extinct for more than 100 years. The last confirmed sighting was shot in 1876.In May a friend sent me an article from the Garhwal Post written by a British trekker who claimed to have seen a covey of the mountain quail 13 years ago while returning from a hike up Benog Mountain.Unlike some extinct species – think passenger pigeon – the mountain quail (Ophrysia superciliosa) had never been common. According to my copy of Salim Ali's Birds of India, it had always been restricted to two small geographical areas in the western Himalayas. Only 10 examples of the birds are held in museums around the world.Benog Mountain is opposite Cloud End, an old colonial bungalow dating back to the days of the Raj and surrounded by forests of scented deodar, oak and rhododendron. It is now a forest resort and, situated on a 2,000- metre ridge, it offers a welcome respite to the sweltering summer heat of the plains below.In colonial times Benog Mountain was a popular picnic spot for the British. From the summit one can see the whole range of the Garhwal Himalayas, including Nanda Devi, at 7,816 metres one of India's highest mountains.There is a bridle path to the top of the mountain built by Sir George Everest, who lived nearby and used mules to carry his heavy survey equipment to Benog to map the Himalayas as part of the Great Arc of India survey.Today there is only a small white Hindu temple, sacred to the local goddess Jwala Devi, on top of the mountain. In 1993 the Indian government, somewhat belatedly, designated the area as the Benog mountain quail sanctuary.I return to Cloud End – happy but mountain quail-less – after a three-hour walk. The current owner, Digvijay Agarwal, is standing on the veranda in dark glasses and a bush jacket. "Have you ever seen the mountain quail?" I ask him. He looks at me startled. "Yes," he says, "several times, but I have never been able to take a photograph to prove they still exist."Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com