Sir Arthur said, "stuff and nonsense" (or words to that effect). "We can't station British troops at Bangalore. It might be healthy up there, but there's not enough water." In 1805 Wellesley left India and the troops were moved up to Bangalore on the Deccan highlands. No doubt they suffered from water shortages as we still do today.The earliest rulers of Bangalore knew that even a small community could only survive on the Deccan if water was carefully conserved. Artificial lakes were created round the city and were joined by water channels. As governments changed and land values increased, many lakes disappeared and channels became blocked. We are in a strange position because, at the end of our road, we have the memory of a lake.Parks are important in modern Bangalore, where few people have gardens. Our local lake has become a park. There is still a lake in the middle, and walking round it is a morning exercise for many of our neighbours. There are groups of women and retired men who do their socialising then. They walk together every morning, exchange news and gossip, and plan other meetings. Some groups bring bread to throw at the large, whiskery carp that live in the lake and enjoy the resultant feeding frenzy. The more romantic sit and watch the birds flying over the water.We realised quite soon that while these groups were social, for others the park provided a moment of privacy. Ours is a traditional neighbourhood, where large families live in small dwellings and the women are often together in one room while the men are in another. In the morning, we pass shy young couples holding hands on secluded benches. They are in new arranged marriages and slowly beginning to get to know each other. Older couples also use their time in the park this way. As they walk, they can discuss family matters and, away from the house, express themselves in non-traditional ways. One morning we walked towards an elderly couple, both walking fast and vigorously, discussing some arrangements. Suddenly, the husband took his wife's face between his hands and gave her a smacking kiss. We didn't need to hear what she said because the body language was so clear."Get away! Be decent! What will people think?" But then they exchanged a warm, private smile.