Some drift towards their destiny. For others, it all hinges on a single moment. It was like that for me, says Mihir Bose. Now 64, he travelled to Britain from India to study more than 40 years ago and has since moved back and forth, exploiting his status as a returning resident. It seemed the ideal arrangement for a young man pulled between dreams of making a name for himself here and a hugely privileged, less romantic lifestyle in India. And it was ideal, until an immigration officer at Heathrow said: "If you want to live here, live here." "I had to decide; do I go back to India and continue as an accountant and give up being a writer, or stay? I thought if I went back, I would always kick myself." So he stayed, to the annoyance of his father, an industrialist who envisaged a life for his son more lucrative than journalism.It's been some career: 22 books, a high-profile column in the Daily Telegraph and a pioneering appointment as the BBC's first sports editor. But that wasn't the point. "He never understood why I left such a privileged life," says Mihir. "And he missed me not being there. I regret not telling him that I loved him. But I have never regretted the choice I made."We're having a sad debate now about migration, says Mihir. All pound signs and statistics. "What you don't hear are the personal stories." So he's telling his story in words and music on the east London stage next week. And one point he's keen to make is that when we focus on the numbers served up by Migration- Watch and the benefit scrounger stories, we belittle ourselves. "I didn't come for money. I came for values. I grew up on Wodehouse and Just William. I could have made more money where I was. There was something else."We forget the something else, he says. "The freedoms and opportunities so obvious that we take them for granted. We forget the values. So we scarcely believe that anyone else might prioritise them."Mihir's dad died in 1984 and last year an ensuing ritual took the writer from west London to the banks of the Ganges. He wore his panama hat: a symbol of the choice he made, and of his membership of the MCC.