In the humid, palm-fringed surrounds of the annual Indian Science Congress in Kerala, the country's top researchers and politicians had come together to discuss what they could do to make their nation more powerful in science and technology. The congress was on a scale unimaginable anywhere else in the world – thousands crowded into huge white tents to hear lectures by physicists and rocket scientists, while wide-eyed schoolchildren posed for photographs with Nobel prize winners. Enthusiasm wasn't even weakened by the midday heat, which caused some visitors to faint while queueing for a nuclear power and space exhibition.It was there last year that the prime minister, Manmohan Singh, made clear India's big plan for its technological future: There's no doubt about it: the country is furiously pursuing development through science and technology. The aim is to more than double investment in research and development, which could put it in the same league as Japan and the US.Most industrialised countries spend around 2% of GDP on research and development. Right now, India spends 0.8%, placing it alongside South Africa and Brazil. By next year it hopes to ramp this up to 1.2%, and in the longer term is determined to reach 2% – well ahead of China, on 1.5%. The UK, which spends around 1.8%, is freezing its science budget in cash terms for the next four years (which means a fall in real terms). So India's trajectory could eventually see it outpace Britain – once the world's science powerhouse. And it's a trajectory reflected in the rise of the world's 11th largest economy, with a GDP growth rate of around 9% – putting India hot on the heels of Russia and Canada, and already wealthier than Australia and Spain.This might sound surprising to some: India has about as many illiterate adults as the entire US population, and even I needed convincing that it really does have the ingredients to become a science superpower. But although it's true that many laboratories are rough and ready, and IT companies tend to focus more on back-office outsourcing for western firms than in-house innovation, India's scientific revolution has already begun.Among the 600,000 engineering graduates produced every year is a growing cohort of innovative geeks. In the months following last year's congress, I travelled the length of India, from the rural cotton belt to slick IT parks. I saw how expertise in western software really is starting to transform into a culture of originality. In Delhi and Bengaluru young entrepreneurs are developing a voice-based internet, which promises to both localise the web to the smallest communities and make it accessible to anyone with a simple mobile phone. Bangaluru has regular meet-ups for design and tech folk, the buzzing environment reminding them of Silicon Valley. This is one of the reasons that India's software industry is set to be worth $12bn by 2015.Though most Indian laboratories struggle for high-quality equipment, hundreds of biomedical scientists are pooling research to develop what may be the first effective cure for tuberculosis (which kills two Indians every three minutes) in 40 years. The Open Source Drug Discovery project, funded by the government on a fraction of what Big Pharma would require, is creating the world's biggest online repository of information about the TB bacterium and how to combat it.The engineering sector saw a growth in job creation of 63% last year, according to India's Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry. And in the coming year, India is expected to create between 10 and 15 million jobs, particularly in biotechnology and IT.As in Japan decades earlier, scientists are creatively overcoming shortfalls in resources to ensure quality of research; and engineers are inventing cheap technologies for the benefit of everyday people. India has become a nation of passionate, hard-working geeks.The focus of last year's congress was India's ambition to send an astronaut into space by 2015. A manned mission may may seem like an extravagance for an emerging economy, but it's just another sign of a nation that can already see the time when states will need a presence in space to assert claims to extraplanetary resources. The west may think India is still in the gutter, but it is looking at the stars.