The four helicopters trailing giant flags had passed an hour earlier; the tanks and fighter jets would come later. Now, it was the turn of a formation of sword-wielding, stamping, infantry in golden turbans to entertain the crowd packed into the grandstands halfway between the stately India Gate and the vast presidential palace in Delhi’s centre.The Verma family – mother, father, son and daughter – had come from the eastern outskirts of the Indian capital to watch the show. “It was necessary to come. I am a proud Indian ... we have to remember our victories, our sacrifices. We have to remember what we can do, and what can be done. This will frighten some people and that is a good thing,” said Priyaranjan Verma, 43, a finance manager for a freight firm.The “some people” he was referring to were the 190 million or so inhabitants of Pakistan, or at least their rulers.Sunday’s parade marked the climax of a month of events in India commemorating the golden anniversary of the 1965 war with the neighbouring country. The partition of India had occurred 18 years before 1965, when the country gained independence from Britain. Pakistan and India have each claimed victory in the inconclusive 60s conflict, one of four they have fought. But over the decades both nations appear largely to have forgotten this war, with history books focusing on the more dramatic clashes of 1947, 1971 and 1999.It surprised some onlookers then when the government of Narendra Modi, the Hindu nationalist politician who won a landslide election last year after promising to bring economic development and make India “respected”, ordered a high-profile, month-long celebration of his nation’s “victory” in the 1965 war. The event is reported to have cost more than £3m, and has included military displays in provincial towns, giant newspaper adverts, commemorative coins and stamps, as well as a team of naval personnel motorbiking 1,200 miles across India.Modi opened an exhibition in central Delhi devoted to the war, commenting that “the valour [and] sacrifice of our armed forces during the 1965 war remains etched in the memory of every Indian”.The 60s conflict started when Pakistan fomented violence in the disputed Himalayan former princedom of Kashmir and ended with a UN-sponsored ceasefire followed by an exchange of captured territory. The war entailed fierce fighting, particularly between tank units, and it is thought both sides suffered more than 3,000 casualties.At the opening ceremony, Manohar Parrikar, India’s defence minister, said the exhibition commemorated “the first major war that India won”. He added: “Some people raise the question whether India won, or was there a stalemate? Even as a nine-year-old kid I was of the firm opinion that India won hands down.”Some historians’ opinions differ. “It was inconclusive and that is recognised … even by those involved in the conflict. We actually gave up what little territory we seized and by no yardstick can it be claimed a victory,” said Pallavi Raghavan, a specialist in relations between India and Pakistan, working at the Centre for Policy Research, in Delhi.However Dilip Hiro, a journalist and analyst, wrote in a recently published account of relations between India and Pakistan that “[India] won by not losing … [Pakistan] gained nothing from a war it initiated”.The war fought between the two states in 1971, however, was a conclusive defeat for Pakistan. A tentative peace process which followed a further confrontation in 1999 has been frozen since an attack in Mumbai by Pakistan-based militants in 2008. The attack in Mumbai, India’s commercial capital, targeted luxury hotels, commuters, a Jewish centre and tourist sites. There have been several intensive exchanges of artillery fire in the past year, while India continues to blame Pakistan for unrest in Kashmir.Pakistan reacted to the celebrations in India by upgrading its own annual Defence Day, which traditionally marks the 1965 war. Normally a relatively low-key affair, the ceremony held on 6 September was transformed into a big television event, with parachute drops by special forces, air displays and exhibitions of military hardware at various sites around the country.At the main ceremony, at army headquarters in Rawalpindi, the army screened video re-enactments of key battles against Islamist militants.Pakistan’s powerful army chief, Raheel Sharif, used the occasion to deliver a sharp warning to India that it would “pay an unbearable cost” if it ever resorted “to any misadventure”. He added: “The armed forces of Pakistan are fully capable of dealing with all types of internal and external threats, may it be conventional or sub-conventional, whether it is cold start or hot start. We are ready.”His speech was a riposte to the remarks of his opposite number, the general Dalbir Singh Suhag, who said India was ready for the “swift, short, nature of future wars”.India’s army has long been planning for a “cold start” in any possible confrontation with Pakistan, which would allow it to quickly retaliate, fielding military units with little preparation and thus countering its smaller neighbour’s ability to concentrate forces more rapidly.Sharif also struck a hard line on Kashmir, saying it could “no longer be put on the back burner”, although few foreign policy experts think Pakistan will ever gain control of the whole region.Amid the army’s publicity drive there were signs of a surge of patriotism, even bellicosity, among sections of the public. A newspaper account of a lecture at Karachi University, at which the historian Akbar Zaidi questioned the popular narrative that Pakistan won the 1965 conflict, provoked a storm of anger on social media, with many alleging the newspaper was in the pocket of India.“With the celebration of the victory in the 1965 war round the corner, there can be no bigger lie [than] that Pakistan won the war,” he was reported to have said. “We lost terribly in the 1965 war.”Raghavan, the Indian historian, said the focus on conflicts ignored the long history of dialogue and exchange between the two nations. “The warfare has always been contained, never all-out. Each time there is an episode of violence it is followed by an episode of engagement. There is always much good will on both sides and the reasons for that are as durable as the reasons for going to war.”The sentiment was not universally shared at the parade ground in Delhi.“These are bad people but we are not frightened of them. Why should we be when we always win?” said Verma, as he quickened his pace to avoid missing the motorbike display team.