Diana Quick is telling me about the morning of her father's death. The actor, famous as Julia Flyte in the 1981 TV series Brideshead Revisited, was an 18-year-old student at Oxford Univeristy. Leonard Quick, a prosperous dentist, was 50. He was waking up in the family house in Kent when he had a heart attack. "He was in his prime," his daughter, now 62, tells me. She is speaking softly, in a clipped voice. "It was a coronary. He was taken to hospital and made comfortable; the belief was that they'd got it in time. But he had a second attack, and died."This moment, Quick says, marked a huge turning-point in her life. Before her father's death, she had led a charmed life. She had got into Oxford at 17 to study English literature and was not only beautiful and clever, but funny, too - she would soon be in The Oxford Line, a comedy revue, with John Sergeant, Simon Brett and Nigel Rees. She epitomised the 60s - one of those mini-skirted girls who were the first generation to go on the pill. She even knew Mick Jagger. On the morning of her father's death, Diana Quick was cycling, on a pink bicycle, to a lecture by Isaiah Berlin.When she got back to her college, Quick found a note in her pigeonhole. It said: "Contact your tutor IMMEDIATELY." Her tutor, Kathleen Lea, told her to sit down. Everything that had happened before this moment had gone right for Diana Quick; later, her friends would tell her that she had been so confident that she was "hard to take". Her close friend Hermione Lee, also an Oxford student, would say: "You were insufferable, you know."Kathleen Lea told her what had happened. Stunned, Quick made her way back home, to the heart of her grieving family. That day, she says, was a blur. She arrived at her parents' - now, suddenly, her mother's - big Edwardian villa on the outskirts of Dartford to be met by her mother, Joan, her older sister, Julie, and her brothers, Clive and Richard. They went together to see Leonard's body. Quick remembers that his ears were "blackish-blue" with pooled blood, and that this was the thing that made her sure, beyond any doubt, that he was really dead."You don't consider it, do you?" she says. "You feel immortal and you feel those about you are. Very few people I knew had died. I didn't really think about getting old and dying." There is a silence, while we both think the same thought. Leonard Quick was not old. "He was 50," she says. "From where I am now, that seems cruelly young."But his death was hugely significant in another way. Until that moment, his daughter had known virtually nothing about his early life. And now she was full of questions. For one thing, his funeral was to be at a Catholic church. She hadn't known he was a Catholic. She knew he had grown up in India, arrived in England at the age of 17 and never went home. She had met his father and stepmother, her grandparents, only twice, briefly, even though they had moved from the subcontinent to Surrey. She hadn't really questioned the fact that the two senior Quicks, Bertie and Nora, had never visited their son's house. Their names were hardly mentioned. Why?"I had an intimation that there was something I didn't know," says Quick. "It was never discussed. My father was a very warm, gregarious, sociable person who had many interests. He lived his life very much in the present, full of activities and the next project. He had many hobbies. He was not given to retrospection. There are lots of things that I would have wanted to know about his life, that I suddenly couldn't ask. And my mother blocked any questions about it - she either didn't know, or she wasn't telling." I am talking to Quick in the bar of a London hotel across from the Thames; she says she has spent the last 10 years looking for the answers to the questions her mother wouldn't answer. The result of those 10 years is A Tug on the Thread, one of the best family memoirs I've read in a long time. Quick - who, as a young actor, was photographed in French Vogue by Cecil Beaton and was once described as "the most beautiful woman in the world" - is still good-looking. She is dressed in practical trousers and a white shirt. The impression I get is of a fierce intellect just beginning to blossom - she spent years playing alluring, mysterious women, then years playing slightly older women who were cracking up, and then, as she puts it, a series of "bonking grannies".She has been married, once, to the actor Kenneth Cranham, and had a long relationship, now over, with the actor Bill Nighy, with whom she has a 24-year-old daughter, Mary. Her divorce from Cranham was amicable: "We went Dutch on the divorce; it cost us £16 each." There was no acrimony over the splitting up of household items - on the contrary, it was all "No - you take it." Later, she introduced Cranham to Charlotte Cornwell, with whom he had a daughter. Although, she says, the two have split up, her daughter with Nighy and Cranham's daughter with Cornwell have an almost-sisterly relationship. Quick seems uncomfortable talking about Nighy. All she will say is that they were together and now they are not. And that she lives in the house she shared with Nighy "with friends - it's a very good arrangement". And that a married man propositioned her recently. "He explained to me that his parents, who were public figures, had a 19th-century marriage. I said: 'What does that mean?' And he said: 'You get the heir and the spare, and you do what you like.' And I said: 'Well, I'm not old-fashioned enough for that.'"Still, she's quite bohemian and laid-back. But her characters are usually uptight and controlling: women who are obsessed with propriety and who cut off their families. For instance, there was Eva in the Diane Samuels play Kindertransport, a Jewish woman whose mother had saved her from the Nazis by putting her on a train bound for England. Later, when the mother reappears in Eva's life, she rejects her - because, as Quick says, "the cost of re-opening those old wounds is too high". Then there was Murielle in Simone de Beauvoir's play The Woman Destroyed - a tragic, spiteful bitch who alienates her husbands and children. And Mrs Alving in Ibsen's Ghosts, who has spent her life trying to cover up the unsavoury facts about her husband, and destroys herself in the process. And, of course, Julia Flyte, who, like her father (played by Laurence Olivier in the television series), spends her life denying her Catholic faith, only to be pulled back towards it by, in Evelyn Waugh's phrase, "a twitch upon the thread". This, of course, is why Quick calls her book A Tug on the Thread. She came from a family steeped in denial, and it is this denial that she has been playing out ever since. For the book, she traced her family history back to her great-grandfather, Christopher Quick, who enlisted in the army as a teenager and sailed to India in the early 1870s. He had a drink problem and spent some time in jail. At the age of 32, he married an Anglo-Indian woman - someone whose parentage included both English and Indian forebears. The couple had three Anglo-Indian children, one of whom was Bertie, the grandfather who ended up in Surrey but was never mentioned in Diana's house.Bertie Quick did well. He became a dental surgeon in the foothills of the Himalayas, and also a general surgeon who patched up soldiers wounded in skirmishes on the north-west frontier. He had three children, one of whom was Leonard, and two houses. But, as an Anglo-Indian, he was never admitted to the pukka clubs - he would always be outside the pale. However, he had a plan: he would encourage Leonard to study dentistry in England, so that when his son came back home, Bertie could join forces with him in a newly anglicised practice. It would be enough, just, to bring the Quicks back from the pale, and possibly enough to satisfy Bertie's horribly snobbish second wife, Nora.But it was not to be. When Leonard went to London to study dentistry at Guy's hospital, he fell in love with Joan, Diana's mother. He didn't want to come back. And so began a titanic struggle. Bertie cut off Leonard's money; Leonard nearly went hungry; Leonard could see no way of completing his studies, and therefore becoming a dentist and able to marry Joan. But Joan's father lent Leonard the money he needed to get himself through his course. Leonard married Joan, and was cut off by his family in India. Later, as the Raj began to crumble, Bertie and Nora moved to England, where they had never lived. Leonard and Bertie never spoke. Bertie died in 1966; he outlived Leonard by six months. Neither Diana nor her siblings have any memories of Bertie at Leonard's funeral.One of the things that Quick has done so well is to show how the forces of snobbery and racism work their way through families, generation after generation. She has also written a book that describes the social conditions in the Raj better than almost any other I have read. She talked to many Anglo-Indians, some of whom "passed for white"; one man would only speak under a cloak of secrecy. He lived in the home counties and everybody thought he was English. "He thought his friends would look at him differently," says Quick - and he might have been right. "He kept saying: 'Let sleeping dogs lie.'"She misses her father. If he was still alive, he'd be in his 90s now. "I'd have had a companion," she says, "because we always did get along so well. But if he hadn't died, I don't think I'd have got to know my mother in the way that I did." She spent a lot of time with her mother - years of mother-and-daughter holidays. Joan Quick died three years ago, of Parkinson's disease, in her early 90s.She remembers with huge fondness her childhood home: the big villa with bow windows and a balcony added by Joan's father. "It was very warm and welcoming; there were lots of nooks and crannies. There was room to go away and have privacy, which is something I always craved. The house, she says, was always untidy. Always full of people. "Always ringing with 'Has anybody seen my...?' and 'Who's had that?' And if you opened any cupboard, half of its contents would fall out."My parents liked to go dancing, and they encouraged all of us to bring our friends home. My brother had a skiffle group, and there would often be dancing in the house. And my parents would come and dance with us." I can imagine them, too - the teenage Quick, dancing; her brother and his friends bashing out the music; and Leonard and Joan joining in. Perhaps it is 1965. Diana Quick doesn't know it yet, but this is the end of her charmed life.• A Tug on the Thread: From the British Raj to the British Stage by Diana Quick is published by Virago at £17.99 and is available at the Guardian bookshop.