My parents escaped from Tibet in 1959 and I was born in India in 1962. During the journey, many people became sick and many also died from the heat, including my elder sister. When my parents reached Nepal, they stayed there for two years and then moved on to Shimla. In India they had a language problem, which made it difficult for them to work, and so they struggled to provide food for the family. My mother found work in the street, making roads, along with many other Tibetans who were also working on the roads.  When I was seven years of age, we moved from Shimla to Dharamsala, and we lived in a small tent near the bus station. My mother and father had no work there, so my father used to go into the jungle to cut down trees. Then one day, the Dalai Lama's sister Jetsun Pema, was passing by, and in seeing our condition she picked us up from the road and took me and my younger brother to be educated in a school.The school was like a Tibetan children's village for orphans or semi-orphans, meaning for those who have parents who cannot support them, as they don't know how to live in India. At that time, there were around 3,000 children in the village, but now there are a lot more, and although I don't know how many, there are a lot more than people know about. This school was the best thing in my life because my mother was unable to make the money needed to support us. Then when I was twelve years old I became very sick and spent a lot of time in hospital. On one occasion I nearly died – I had malaria three times and then I had tuberculosis. It meant that I could not finish my studies, but the school looked after me, and then when I was better, the principal decided to select some of us to go on courses.I was to be sent to Delhi for a nursing course, but my mother said that I was too sick and too weak to go there, and so instead she selected for me to do handicrafts. For three years I did tailoring in the handicraft centre, making school uniforms and many other things, and then after that they sent me to Ladakh.It was there that I met my boyfriend who was in the Tibetan army, and then I became pregnant. I spent one and a half years there, during which time my first child was born. Although we had a house and food, it was still difficult for me. It was just too cold, and so we talked together and decided that I should leave Ladakh for a warmer place. So from there I went to Rajput, to a Tibetan women's centre, where I trained again in tailoring, and worked there for three more years.But my husband was not good with me - he was always drinking and he started beating me. Then I was pregnant again, and my sister was so worried about me that she decided to help me start a business. Although she could not support me financially, she gave me some things to sell and through that, I started the business .Then when my younger son was five years old, my husband died from alcoholism and I was left to struggle with two young children.During the next ten years I moved to Ladakh, Goa, and Kerala – I was the first Tibetan to go there. Then I started a business in Varkala, Kerala, where I stayed for three years. But the local people in Varkala were very bad – they were always surrounding me and watching how much money I was making. Then they started making problems for me, by demanding money from me and telling me that this was their place and I should not be there.I moved to Kovalam, where at first there was not much of a problem, so I moved my mother there. Again, I have so many worries here with the neighbours. The restaurant people beat my sons for no reason and again I am living in fear. There is no peace in my mind and I cannot concentrate on my business because I keep thinking about other things all the time. There are a lot of disturbances in my mind, so I am thinking of moving again, for the last time. I am thinking it might be the same everywhere, but at least you get peace for one year. Maybe I will move north to Maharashtra – I have heard that it is a place where the tourists come. I will move with only my sons this time. Now they are aged 20 and 24 years, and I want to do something to help my elder son who is very talented. He does Thanka painting which is very demanding and I want to send him to Missouri to do his studies. Otherwise he will have to do business and business is not good. I am an independent woman and I can work hard. Even if I have a problem I don't ask people – I have my pride. We were born in India, but we have no Indian citizenship. We cannot buy any land or property here. We are not allowed an Indian passport and so if we want to go abroad, we have to apply to the Tibetan Government for an identity certificate, which can take a very long time (although some smart Tibetan people do have an Indian passport, but I don't know how). Talking makes me feel good. You can't always cry alone, sometimes you need somebody to share the feelings.• Karma was interviewed by Jill Fordham.