If you don't like it when Jews complain about being singled out, the slaughter in Mumbai should give you food for thought. In an attack that was in all other respects indiscriminate, two of the terrorists were specifically sent to the one building in the city where there were sure to be Jews. If terrorists intended to deliver a message that Jews can be attacked with impunity even in places where barely any of them live, it was received loud and clear.I visited the Chabad House in Dharamsala over the summer and remember thinking how easy it would be for terrorists to wreak havoc there. Chabad-Lubavitch is one of the largest Hasidic Jewish sects. Where Ultra-Orthodox Judaism is known for its rejection of the outside world, Chabad bucks the trend. On the instructions of its late Rebbe, Menachem Mendel Schneerson, Chabad emissaries were dispatched to every corner of the globe, with instructions to provide religious life and emotional support to the local Jewish community. Today, there are Chabad houses all over the world, from New York to Kinshasa, from Mumbai to Bishkek, tending to the needs of tens or hundreds of people. I have never particularly appreciated the proselytising aspect of the Chabad mission. It still irritates me when I am accosted in a Tel Aviv street by a chabadnik asking me to lay tefillin. But this is outreach exclusively to the secular Jewish world. Unlike evangelical Christians, Chabad are not interesting in converting those around them, and make great efforts to be a quiet, harmless part of their local community. In this sense, the Mumbai attacks mark the end of their innocence.In the midst of the maudlin clamour for explanation, one thing is clear: the terrorists who targeted Mumbai wanted to kill Jews. In succeeding in this goal, they instantly gave the lie to the disingenuous suggestion that Israel is the most dangerous place on earth for a Jew to live. And in choosing their target, they also gave the lie to the idea that this was some kind of proportionate response to the oppression of the Palestinians. If that was their agenda, they could have targeted the Israeli consulate. Instead, they attacked a Jewish communal centre, and in the process killed a Hasid from the Satmar movement, known for its virulent anti-Zionism. If you think this to be ironic, by the way, this means you fail to see the wood from the trees.We are frequently told that Islamist terrorists – whether from South Yorkshire or South Asia – are merely expressing their anger at injustices perpetrated against Muslims in Afghanistan, Iraq, Kashmir and Palestine. Why do these injustices lead them to violence where others don't? What about the plight of Muslims in Iran, Syria and China? Why does this not make them want to launch terrorist attacks? When will people begin to recognise a problem for what it is? India has now become the new frontline, absorbing provocation after provocation, while showing admirable restraint in response (if only Israel would occasionally follow its lead). In the summer, I wrote unequivocally in favour of Kashmiri self-determination, emphasising the human rights abuses Indian forces have committed there. In this sense, the situation is just like Palestine: it should be perfectly easy to argue for self-determination for Kashmiris and Palestinians without descending into apologetics when lunatics hovering at the fringes of their independence movements decide to mow down civilians. I always used to respond with cynicism when told that my synagogue in London is tightening its security procedures. Now I know they are right to be worried. For the Jewish world, Mumbai is proving to be a 9/11 moment. Suddenly, every Chabad House in the world has become a potential target. This, unfortunately, is the disproportionate power of terrorism in the internet age. Remarkably, though, Mumbai also offers inspiration. Rabbi Gavriel Holtzberg and his wife Rivka were killed in the attack but according to reports, a replacement is already preparing to go to Mumbai to run the Chabad centre. There is even the suggestion that Rivka's parents might take up the position. To an unreconstructed secularist, this is deeply humbling; the perfect embodiment of Barack Obama's famous election-night words: "To those who would tear this world down, we will defeat you." May we all be lucky enough to have Chabad's resolve. 