Nebraska’s attempt to import from India a drug needed to carry out executions months after the state legislature banned capital punishment in the state failed last month because of mishandled paperwork, according to BuzzFeed News. The news site acquired documents that said a shipment of sodium thiopental from India never left the country for Nebraska because of “improper or missing paperwork”. The drug import is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration, which has warned the state that the order is illegal.Last month, the ACLU of Nebraska asked the US Attorney’s office to investigate the state’s “ongoing efforts to obtain lethal injection drugs from a foreign source”.Before Nebraska lawmakers voted to repeal the death penalty, state officials said in May that two of the three drugs needed to carry out lethal injections had been ordered. The state already possesses the third. Nebraska abolished the death penalty in May, after lawmakers overrode the governor’s veto of a bill supported by a majority of legislators. As lawmakers pushed for an end to capital punishment, KETV NewsWatch 7 reported that Nebraska paid Harris Pharma $51,000 for the two drugs: sodium thiopental and pancuronium bromide.Nebraska Correctional Services spokesperson James Foster confirmed to Buzzfeed that the state had not been sent the drug but did not know why. FedEx said that the package was returned to the sender because the paperwork in India was incorrect. Foster did not respond to a query from The Guardian about why it was trying to important the drug. In June, the FDA sent a similar warning to Ohio, which had sought to import sodium thiopental into the United States. US states with capitol punishment have faced increasing difficulty obtaining drugs for use in execution since a boycott by European-based manufacturers. Some have turned to specialty compounding pharmacies, whose identities are kept secret by state laws. Others have sought to return to earlier methods of execution: the electric chair in Tennessee, and the firing squad in Utah.Nebraska is the first predominantly Republican state to end capital punishment since the 1970s. Death penalty supporters are pushing for a referendum on the bill to be included on the November 2016 ballot. 