Nikhil Dey has a law degree from India's most prestigious university, but you wouldn't guess it from the way he lives his life. The 50-year-old activist makes his home in a mud hut in a tiny village in Rajasthan, in northern India. He earns a salary of about £2 a day, India's minimum wage.The frugal lifestyle makes sense for Dey, who works for an organisation called Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS), which roughly translates as "the organisation for the environment of workers and peasants"."I've had the privilege of being part of an extraordinary story," says Dey, who cites India's 2005 enactment of a Right to Information Act as a major achievement for social activism in the country.The law, which has been described as a highly ambitious example of transparency legislation, requires the Indian government to respond within 30 days to any citizen's request for the publication of government information. It also obliges public authorities to "computerise" their official documents. The law was passed after more than a decade of campaigning from transparency activists. MKSS was one of the first groups to become involved in the fight."It was a local struggle that grew into a national campaign, and a national campaign that grew to become a law, and a law that has contributed in every single day and at every single moment toward sustaining a movement," says Dey.Dey played a prominent role in pressuring the government to adopt the act, but insists he can take little credit for its passage."It wasn't that the right to information was some great idea that [came from] people like me or my senior colleagues from the English-speaking, university-educated world," he says. "It was ordinary people who were fighting for minimum wages and public works.""Today we travel all over India, and we learn about how creatively the right to information is being used by the most ordinary people against the most powerful of forces," Dey says. "The energy, the power behind it, and the support for it is really amazing."What does transparency mean to you? "It's a concept like truth. To me, it actually has everything to do with power and the balances of power. The right to information actually helps completely break those constant illegitimate concentrations of power. It empowers the person using the right."Why is access to information important in development? "Development is a loaded term. Development for whom? Development by whom? Who decides? Who makes the choice? Unless you have complete free information, unless you have an opportunity to make prior informed choices, unless you have full access to information, you cannot really participate in the development process … [Access to information] allows for more equitable development and access to development for all poor and marginalised people."What is the one piece of information you most want released?"That's not a question that I would like to answer … I don't have a single bit of information [that I would most like to see], because it depends on where I am located. If I am in a poor person's home, concerned about getting my rations, then that information is life and death. If I am concerned about my wage, then that information is life and death. If I am in an area where a nuclear power plant is going to come up, then the information about why, who, what equipment, what the safety measures are – very, very technical questions – become my life-and-death questions."