With millions of votes to be cast, India’s general election is one of the biggest political events on the planet. Navigating this landscape can be tricky, so in addition to the Guardian’s coverage of the polls, we asked readers and followers of the Guardian’s social media accounts who are based in India to recommend the online voices they follow.Who are the bloggers, tweeters or Facebook users that provide an alternative view of events in India and the election?Thanks for all your suggestions – you can add others in the comments on this post. In a series of posts we will hear from a selection of those nominated, starting with Politicalbaaba, a blogger on Indian politics from Mumbai who writes under a pseudonym. Politicalbaaba started the blog in July 2013 and tweets as @Politicalbaaba.Economic development – India's growth story is a shambles. Job creation is very low, corporate and investor confidence is also low while job security for people employed is a key concern. The threat of a rating downgrade is looming large if an unstable government comes to power. Persistently high inflation is eroding the purchasing power of the people. Depreciation of the rupee has long-term consequences for an economy which is a net importer. If a strong decisive government doesn't come to power, India will be pushed back another 5 – 10 years, so economic growth is on top of the agenda, especially for the youth, who form a significant part of the population now.Most politicians in India are not available online but social media is a powerful tool that they can't ignore any longer. A politician online makes him a commoner: people can interact with politicians (previously the privilege of only journalists) and ask questions and get answers. The tool is very powerful and can help politicians articulate their views. In traditional methods of electioneering, people used to get to know of their views only through print or digital media. On social media you get to hear it from the horse's mouth. It makes you feel he/she is one among you, so I'm disappoionted that they are not using this powerful medium.In a variety of ways: Parties that do not have a social media presence will find it increasingly difficult to connect with the young voters.Who are the online voices in India that help provide an alternative perspective on the election? Let us know in the comments and share your views of everyday India by using the GuardianWitness contribute button.