Last autumn, I left my desk in the Futures Entrepreneurship Centre at the University of Plymouth to spend a packed and fascinating week in India, as a guest of the British Council. I first travelled to Bhubaneswar, the capital of Odisha (formerly Orissa) and one of India’s fastest growing cities, to meet with academic colleagues and students and to look at various social enterprise projects and programmes. Run by universities, these projects cater to hundreds, sometimes thousands of people. One such micro-enterprise programme provides training and enterprise space for potentially hundreds of slum dwellers and their families.  Related: Affordable housing challenges give way to inspiring social enterprise solutions  The project is called “Urban Micro Business Centre” and is a joint venture between the Government of Odisha, the Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation, an employment training agency and Centurion University. It was in India that I was introduced to the concept of “livelihood” as a driver for social business programmes – so obvious, but so infrequently articulated in the UK.  We often express the social value of social enterprises without referring to the fact that they create decent and sustainable jobs for the people engaged in them, and are not part of the low wage, low value economy.I also visited a vocational training space for young people of tribal origin that offers employer-related training, guaranteeing work for their successful learners, and most impressively, a school for tribal children with 22,000 pupils – all residential! In Plymouth, we value our partnership with our local authority, our partner colleges and the local social enterprise network. We like to think we touch many people with our provision.My experience in Bhubaneswar gives us some perspective on the size of programmes needed in India – and indeed at a UK level. There is a certain humility when we review the size of our programmes and our investment in them. Social enterprise development programmes in the UK are disparate and uncoordinated, lacking coherence and diminishing potential impact. There are lessons to be learned about the importance of doing and making provision at scale. Scale aside, there were many similarities. As is the case in the UK, social enterprises in India form as a response to a real social need and are inspired by the passion and innovation of a few key people.  Related: The Social Stock Exchange: unlocking capital for social and environmental good I encountered real enthusiasm for social entrepreneurship from business school and institute of management students in Bhubaneswar. Here in Plymouth, interest in social enterprise is widespread amongst students too and they can access opportunities to learn about the subject across all our course delivery – not solely in the Faculty of Business. Indeed, we offer a wide range of learning opportunities for staff and students and our social enterprise community, through workshops, conferences, informal learning events, competitions, and the provision of incubation space.At the end of the week, I participated in a UK – India university dialogue on social enterprise that was hosted and co-ordinated by the British Council in New Dehli. As one of the UK delegates I was privileged to meet the Indian university staff and social entrepreneurs who attended. Whilst keen to explain and promote our ideas and activities here at Plymouth, I was also fascinated to hear about the breadth of expertise in Indian universities around the development of entrepreneurs in general, and social entrepreneurs in particular. We academic promoters found ourselves with much in common, and were keen to develop further links between institutions.Whilst most social entrepreneurship learning in India seems to be in business school postgraduate programmes, we also heard about university-run incubation programmes and facilities of various kinds. The Indian delegates repeatedly mentioned the role that social enterprise can play in providing a livelihood for their graduates, whilst UK contributors focussed on student experience, research and curriculum development and external partnerships.  Related: The World Bank and British Council back social enterprise in Morocco We also had really useful contributions from three Delhi-based social enterprises, demonstrating the passion, commitment and innovation that characterises our sector, whether in the UK or India. Particularly impressive was a women-only cab firm called Sakha Consulting Wings Pvt. Ltd. They set up to provide safe transport for women and children, and also to give livelihoods to women by training them as cab drivers. These drivers are able to become the chief breadwinner in their households, due to regular, fairly-paid work. Another social enterprise that participated in the dialogue was Green the Gap, which manufactures stylish laptop bags and other goods from recycled car tyres and similar materials – fantastic from both a consumer and ecological perspective. Their success served as a good reminder that many social enterprises flourish despite receiving very limited outside support.Moreover, these social entrepreneurs were insistent that we academics should consult them about the shape and type of any future provision of social enterprise teaching – a great reminder about keeping it real and relevant to our various audiences that is apparently as true in India as in the UK. So what did I bring home along with the purchases from the emporiums and markets of Delhi? First, Plymouth is in the first stages of developing an alliance with Centurion University in Bhubaneswar, which hopefully will become a lasting legacy of the British Council dialogue. Second, the British Council is planning to build on this first dialogue to create a sustained UK-India project – and Plymouth will hope to be part of it. Third, the journey was a reminder to centre our efforts to support new and existing social entrepreneurs within and outside our student population.Finally, it left me with a sense of belonging to a truly global movement.Judith Reynolds is the director, Social Enterprise University Enterprise Network, University of Plymouth. Until taking up her current post, Judith ran a very successful social enterprise support agency, enabling hundreds of social enterprises to develop across the south west of England. In this capacity she was responsible for the development and management of a revolving loan fund for social enterprises across Devon which ran for over five years. She was also, with other delivery partners, responsible for the design, development and management of a number of specialist business support programmes working across a range of funding streams including ESF and ERDF, European Community Funds, Single Regeneration Rounds 1-5 etc. In her current role with Plymouth University, she is responsible for the development and management of social enterprise working across the campus with staff and students, and forming partnerships with key players in the region to devise and deliver a range of social enterprise support. This has resulted in the formation of a delivery cluster with a current in year budget of over £100,000 for local support delivery, and the awarding by the Cabinet office of a social incubator project with a value of almost £1m.Content on this page is paid for and provided by the British Council, sponsor of the International hub