Some might have thought it ambitious, others foolhardy, but the World literature tour returns in triumph from a stop in Indonesia with more than 80 recommendations. There's Pramoedya Ananta Toer of course, saluted by Dr Sebastian Groes as the Conrad of the East, even though "such a claim would misrepresent the extraordinary powers – and life – of this wonderful writer, and selfless human being", but there's also Ahmad Tohari, hailed by sastraalibi as a "True voice from [the] Indonesian countryside", Dewi Lestari, cited by Zaa_rathustra as "my favorite author in Indonesia", and many, many more. Thanks again for all these marvellous suggestions.With many posters professing a similar level of ignorance to my own when it comes to Indonesian letters, the discussion below was perhaps most memorable for the image of uniriri's father reading out novels from the Api di Bukit Menoreh series "whilst acting out all the martial arts Silat moves". Despite helpful links from posters such as irhafidz and BambangS I suspect that only reading will counteract the feeling of literary uncertainty surrounding the destination – a mood which seems to be borne out in much of the voting for the tour's next destination. With strong showings for Argentina and Japan, voters seem to have plumped for literary cultures rather more familiar on western bookshelves.Thirty years after the publication of Midnight's Children, the links between western publishers and India are so strong that this month's stopover almost feels like visiting an old friend. Booker winners galore followed after Salman Rushdie's 1981 success, making Mumbai as much part of our literary landscape as Manchester, the hustle and bustle of New Delhi a familiar mirror of the hurly burly of New York. But as well as plumping for your favourite Vikram Seth – are you A Suitable Boy, or do you prefer the views from The Golden Gate? – we're looking for leads into the languages beyond the colonial.We're searching for books which capture something of the Indian experience – interpreted in the widest possible way. We're after novels, plays, poetry and non-fiction, whether in English or not yet translated. We're even after writing which captures something of the Indian diaspora. All you need to do is visit the boxes below, filling in the country – that's India this month – the title, the author, the translator and some indication of why it's great. And don't forget to fill in your vote for our next destination. Even if you haven't got an Indian diamond to suggest, your votes still count – anyone for Colombia?