• If you're planning on taking a substantial number of train journeys, it will work out much cheaper to buy an Indrail Pass from Shankar Dandapani at SD Enterprises who represents Indian Railways in the UK. If you can, stop by his office in Wembley for face-to-face guidance. Shankar has incredible knowledge of the railways and is worth his weight in gold. 103, Wembley Park Drive, Wembley, Middlesex; +44 (0)208 9033411, indiarail.co.uk , info@indiarail.co.uk• Make reservations as far in advance as you can. Unless you're taking a short-distance passenger train, arriving at the station and hopping on is not an option as seats are booked up to 90 days in advance.• Book tickets at the station's foreign tourist desk if there is one. Check indianrail.gov.in to find out which cities have one. Many trains offer a small number of "tourist quota" tickets even if the train is fully booked for lndian residents. Anusha Thawani on the first floor of New Delhi station is excellent and goes out of her way to find last-minute seats.• Learn the lingo. You might find your ticket says "RAC", which means reserved against cancellation. If someone else cancels a reserved ticket before departure, you will then be promoted to a confirmed seat or berth. You can still travel with an RAC ticket and will be given a seat, but you may not be offered a berth at night. "WL" means waitlisted, so you should check the sheet of paper stuck by the carriage door to see if your seat is confirmed.To check routes, names and times indiarailinfo.com is an excellent site that doesn't crash under heavy traffic and offers clear, comprehensive information.• Never accept tickets from touts or visit side-street agents claiming they will find you a confirmed seat. Indian railways has one central computerised system and it's safest to do all bookings at a station counter.• You can buy tickets online at the official government-sponsored website irctc.co.in, but it is a bit confusing to navigate. Most people find cleartrip.com a lot easier and worth the small extra booking fee.