Steve Herzfeld has just spent five years of his life caring for his elderly parents as they succumbed to Parkinson's and Alzheimer's, deteriorated and finally died. But the family's story is extraordinary and even uplifting. Faced with crippling medical costs, Herzfeld took his mother and father from their home in Florida to India and managed to give them such a high level of care in the oceanside city of Puducherry (formerly Pondicherry) that they appeared to regain some quality of life and even dignity.Herzfeld, 58, is a teacher of Transcendental Meditation (TM) and since 1982 has been involved in long-term research into advanced yoga techniques. Looking after your family is something that the founder of TM, the late Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, always encouraged in his disciples, so Herzfeld was able to take time out from the project, based in Fairfield, Iowa, without any problem.He began caring for his parents full-time in 2004. His mother, Frances, then 87, was virtually unable to speak coherently, he says, as Parkinson's disease gradually reduced her to "someone who was as helpless as an infant and also, in many ways, as lovable". His father, Ernest, then 91, despite still being able to converse in German, French, English, Italian and Swiss dialect, was also incapable of looking after himself, as he had lost his short-term memory to Alzheimer's. "Like Mom, his disease was progressive and, towards the end, he was mentally like a two- or three-year-old child," Herzfeld says. Initially, Herzfeld was able to care for his parents in their Florida home. But when his mother had a fall, he realised he needed far more help than he could give them. Putting them in the cheapest acceptable home available would have cost $6,000 (around £3,700) a month, and they did not have that kind of money. More than that, Herzfeld did not want to take this route: he had noticed a marked deterioration in his mother's contentment when she had to spend a few weeks in a home after the fall. Looking at all possible options, he considered Mexico and India as affordable locations. A host of reasons - including knowing India well and having friends there - made him opt for Puducherry, where the climate is similar to that of Florida and there is a supply of English-speaking care professionals. But every step of the move had to be planned in detail. The airline agreed to take Frances and Ernest only because a doctor friend flew out with them and took responsibility for them door to door. Another friend organised a house for them and set up the electricity, cable TV, air conditioning, furniture and broadband. Looking back, Herzfeld says the main thing he would have done differently would have been to hire staff before their arrival: it took him five difficult weeks to find a nurse. But once staff had been found, he could give his parents a much higher standard of care than would have been possible in the US for his father's income of $2,000 (£1,200) a month. In India that paid for their rent, a team of carers - a cook, a valet for his father, nurses to be with his mother 12 hours a day, six days a week, a physiotherapist and a masseuse - and drugs (costing a fifth of US prices), and also allowed them to put some money away. Herzfeld does not claim that his parents were happy - but says they were able to get pleasure in the smaller ways that become more important when one's horizons narrow. Ernest - always a strong character, who had been a single-handed sailor to the age of 82 - still wanted to make decisions in his life. He enjoyed discussing the menu with the cook and adapted so well to a healthy Indian vegetarian diet that he was able to come off his cholesterol-lowering medication. Frances's devoted nurses spent 12 hours a day trying to make her comfortable and did things like braiding her hair. "In India, they really like older people," says Herzfeld, describing how the staff seemed to regard his parents as their own family.Frances died in 2007, eight months after they arrived, while Ernest died last August. Herzfeld has returned to his previous life in the US. He does not recommend his path to everyone - there are, clearly, huge cultural differences. But he believes that India could teach the US and UK a lot about care of the elderly. "In America, healthcare is done for profit, so that skews the whole thing and makes it very inhuman in its values," he says.