A child of the late 80s and 90s, I was a young girl when satellite television was introduced in India.It brought along an overdose of Bollywood, soaps and reality TV, which I feel has been brutal on India's girls. In response to youth culture prompted by these changes, the moral police has been raising its head, targeting young girls.Perhaps it is due to the ubiquity of information and dramatisation of the news media, but I feel that violence against women in India has increased greatly during my lifetime. While it has become increasingly easier for urban Indian women to work even after marriage, the expectations on them remain cripplingly unrealistic.As I sought out strong Indian female role models while growing up, I found that phenomenally powerful women abound. India's first female police officer, Kiran Bedi, has influenced tens of thousands through radical prison reforms, daring to question the practices of generations of men before her. She is bringing India's women centre-stage in the fight against corruption. Women are CEOs of large companies, philanthropists, and icons of style and grace.We're a country of over a billion people, with a large young population, deep socioeconomic disparities, and an ancient democratic tradition. It should come as no surprise that youth movements working for equality are everywhere. The promise that India's girls hold can be felt in the electrifying energy around young female doctors and IT workers, and girls who ferociously compete for the best grades with their male classmates.I was the first girl in my extended family to travel abroad alone for study. For this, my mother faced much character assassination. I have been lucky to have had parents who responded by trusting me unconditionally.These are the people we must celebrate on International Women's Day: apparently ordinary men and women who blaze trails at the risk of violence and ostracism. Development progresses due to them, inch by inch, from one generation to another.I do believe that our time has come. I believe in my generation – and I hope you will too.