India has the highest number of undernourished people in the world. According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) that figure currently stands at 217 million and more than 30% of children are born underweight. Against this backdrop, lack of refrigeration in rural India is leading to millions of tonnes of fresh produce going to waste every year. India is the largest producer and consumer of milk in the world; 130m tons of milk are produced annually by rural farmers in India, yet a significant proportion of this is lost.Lack of a reliable electricity supply is one of the biggest challenges. Around 400 million people are without access to a reliable power supply, and some communities consider themselves lucky if they get 10 hours of electricity per day.It's hoped that innovation can help solve the problem. Refrigeration company Promethean Power has developed a new thermal battery which led to the creation of a Rapid Milk Chiller (RMC), which is now being deployed in the agricultural areas of Maharashtra, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu. The Rapid Milk Chiller uses a combination of software and reconfigurable hardware from National Instruments (NI). The aim is to eliminate much of the waste, drive up nutritional standards and improve the livelihoods of millions of rural dairy farmers.The impact of chillingMilk production in India tends to come from millions of individual farmers who have one or two cows and produce five to 10 litres of milk each day. They take that milk to a village collection centre where milk from about 30 to 50 farmers is accumulated. From there, it will quickly be transported to a chilling centre. The process occurs twice a day, as milking is carried out morning and evening.Not only does twice-a-day transportation come at a high cost in terms of diesel but, in India's hot climate, milk spoils within five hours so time is of the essence. In the hot season, farmers can lose as much as 30% of their milk to spoilage.The five-hour window to chill the milk makes it unviable to collect milk from locations that are distant from the chilling centres. The obvious answer is to chill the milk in the village where it is produced. In some cases this was previously addressed by use of diesel generators, but that meant higher capital and operating costs, not to mention noise and pollution.A thermal battery could be a solution. Unlike an electrical battery, it stores energy in the form of thermal energy.By making ice, you store energy, and when you melt the ice, you release energy. This is the key to rapidly chilling the milk and storing it. The thermal battery uses the five or six hours of electricity that is available in the villages to charge the battery, and when the power goes out it continues to function.The Rapid Milk Chiller, which is capable of chilling up to 500 litres per collection, gives farmers the ability to chill and store milk even when grid power is out. The milk can be cooled to 4C in a matter of seconds, arresting bacteria growth and improving milk quality.There are now a number of dairy companies using the Rapid Milk Chiller, including Hatsun Agro, Amul and Heritage Foods.The leaders of the project believe that the use of diesel generators can be dramatically reduced. From a social perspective, improvements in the quality of milk supplied can increase its nutritional value, which could have economic benefits for the rural communities where they are based.With the potential to install as many as 1,000 milk chillers in the next five years, with the hope that each new RMC system can help more than 30 farming families, thereby having a direct impact on approximately 30,000 dairy farmers and one million milk drinkers in India.The plan is to expand the technology globally to other countries with large rural areas that are off-grid or only partially serviced. The same principle can be applied not only to milk but other perishable items such as fruits and vegetables.Rahman Jamal is National Instruments technical and marketing director for Europe. NI supported the Rapid Milk Chiller through its Planet NI programmeThe role of business in development hub is funded by Business Call to Action. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox