Rabiah is smiling. We're sitting in an emergency ward amongst rows of tiny beds filled with tiny children. They're all hooked up to intimidatingly large machinery. Mothers sit next to them, eyes tired and angst-ridden, faces drawn. Ten days ago Rabiah's ten-month-old twins were admitted to the same ward with life-threatening cases of respiratory tract infection. "I thought they were going to die," Rabiah tells me.19-year-old Rabiah and her family are victims of Hurricane Aila – a brutal storm that affected the lives of millions of people in the Bengal region. Rabiah's family were rescued by an initiative to help malnourished families in the area.On-site doctor Subho Paul offers more insight into the twins' condition. "Illnesses like this start with a common cold," he says. "In the UK they'd be given a dose of Calpol."Here in India, however, underlying cases of malnutrition lead to such low immunity that even a small virus can throw a young child into a life-threatening state. These days it's not simply poverty that keeps families from being well-nourished: many can afford to eat but just don't know what to buy. Common misconceptions, such as choosing formula milk over breastfeeding, and expensive processed imports over local, nutritious fruit and vegetables, along with poor levels of hygiene and low rates of immunisation, all play a part in the shocking fact that a child in India dies every 15 seconds. Even more shocking is the fact that 70-80% of these life-threatening diseases are entirely preventable.With this in mind, the Child In Need India (Cini) was born. For over 35 years, teams of doctors, health workers and volunteers have been fighting to remove malnutrition from India's rural communities. Cini adopts a long-term approach, recognising that if you teach a mother how to help her own children, this new-found wisdom will have an effect on generations to come.Dr Paul shows me how people like Rabiah are helped to start changing their behaviour. "Ten days ago, she would have been far too worried about her babies for us to preach to her about feeding habits," he says. "First, we have to help the child."Once the baby's condition is stable enough to leave the emergency ward, mothers are admitted straight to Cini's very own nutritional rehabilitation centre. Each mother and child is provided with a room, where they are taught about good nutrition and preventative healthcare under the guidance of fully-trained health workers.Today the kindly Dr Debjani teaches a session on nutrition using coloured stripes of the Indian flag (red for protein, white for carbs, green for leafy vegetables). I'm intrigued by the animated, engaged responses to the doctor's questions. These women are enjoying their learning experience.The health workers in the nutritional rehabilitation centre are strong, sisterly women with a background in supporting inexperienced mothers. Along with the role of mentor, each health worker is trained to form a personal bond with each mother individually, so that they feel able to discuss intimate problems like domestic violence or sexual health.Awareness spreads from village to village through word of mouth. "All we ask from the people is that they share what we have taught them," explains assistant director Abinash Gine. "Not all women can make it directly to our centre, but if one woman can pass on a few things to her neighbours then, gradually, the whole community will gain."Cini raises funds through its 'Sponsor a Mother' programme to train mothers to run self-help groups in their own villages. Individual women take responsibility for 20 households at a time, holding monthly meetings to offer advice about pregnancy, education, family planning and the local services and support facilities that are available.Deep in the village of Jandatpur, I am faced with a surprisingly different scenario. Sanoka, 15, is telling me about the birth of her daughter, Rubsa. "It was a complicated birth," she says. "I had to visit the hospital many times because I had a lot of pain."Sanoka's medical records report a persistent abdominal pain, eventually resulting in an early birth through caesarian section. Women in rural India have died of lesser conditions. Her own young age puts baby Rubsa in a high-risk category for malnutrition-related problems.But Rubsa smiles at me with a chubby, round face. Her medical card shows that she's well off the malnutrition charts and up-to-date with all of her vaccinations. Sanoka's family eat a varied diet of protein, rice and local vegetables, from which she feeds her child seven times a day.I am astounded. Everywhere I go in Jandatpur and the surrounding villages, strong, healthy families beam back at me with a surprising defiance. "We don't have malnutrition here," they tell me. "It just isn't a problem."But this wasn't always the case. A spritely 72-year-old grandmother from the same village, Ingala, reveals a different story. "When I was a mother we weren't allowed to talk about it," she explains. "Pregnancy was a source of great shame. We weren't even meant to leave the house."Ingala gave birth eight times, and feels lucky that six of her children have survived. All of them were delivered in her own home. "Back then we didn't even know that hospitals existed," she laughs. "When the baby started coming, I just called out for help."Back at the emergency ward I meet Sashma, whose son Gorpal is so malnourished that he doesn't even have flesh where his buttocks should be. At two years old, he weighs only five kg; ten kg less than his optimum weight. At every touch from his mother he cries out in pain.Sashma is unable to pay attention to the doctor, to look away from her child or even to smile. I think of 15-year-old Sanoka: strong, healthy and competent, already expecting the best from the health service. I realise that this is how her life should be. These women deserve the chance to keep their children alive. "You're in good hands," I want to tell Sashma. "Things are moving forward."• Abigail Palmer is a freelance writer. Cini is running a 'Sponsor a Mother' scheme in the run-up to the UK Mother's Day celebrations.