In India, transgender people – or hijras – have been discriminated against for centuries and in legislative terms since the early days of British crown rule. Denied identity papers and passports, most have lived as outcasts in abject poverty, earning their living as sex workers or by flaunting their sexual appearance. In 2005 Jeeva, aged 32, was angry that authorities mocked transsexuals like her. Once, she says, a policeman “called me ‘it’ as if I were an animal. He pointed at me and called out to the other officers, ‘Look at it! What is it?’”In her city, Chennai, there were estimated to be 2,000 third-gender sex workers, most of whom practised unprotected sex and had never been tested for HIV or Aids. Five years later, Jeeva’s dreams had begun to be realised. Her state, Tamil Nadu, had been the first in India to recognise transgender people, granting them ID papers and so opening the doors to mainstream life. Now they could attend university and start up businesses, and they qualified for bank loans. The changes also removed many obstacles to having stable partners, therefore reducing promiscuous behaviour. Jeeva earned a BA degree in sociology, and made plans to study law. In 2007, she formed the Transgender Rights Association, to support and protect her community.In 2014, in a landmark ruling, India’s supreme court recognised transgender people as a legal third gender. Nevertheless, Jeeva continues to advocate for transgender rights as well as to spread awareness of safe sex.Jeeva says: “Transgender people faced many dangers in the times before recognition, before the availability of surgery. In those days we had little choice but to sell ourselves. Now times are better, much better, for there is less discrimination. Yet there is still much work to be done.” In 2005, Ayaaz, from Chennai, was 10. The previous year, his father developed a fever and a chronic cough. He was admitted to a TB hospital, where he developed mouth ulcers so severe he could not eat. He grew very weak and died after a few days. At the time, Ayaaz’s mother didn’t know he had died of Aids – she didn’t even know about the illness. After Ayaaz’s father died, both his mother and six-year-old brother Aftab tested HIV positive, but Ayaaz and his two-year old sister were negative. Ayaaz left school because he needed to support his family. He worked sorting second-hand clothes for his uncle’s business, a 10-hour shift for 10 rupees (14p) a day. Ayaaz’s mother searched for work, wanting him to study, but she couldn’t afford to be without his income. Ayaaz’s mother still found it difficult to accept her status. “Being a woman of faith, I wondered, ‘Why me?’” she said. “I was very angry with my husband as my younger son was also infected. I want to provide my children with a good life for as long as I can.”Ayaaz missed four years of school but – thanks to a neighbour and teacher who both tutored him and helped to support the family – he was able to resume his studies. In 2010, aged 15, he was one of the top students in his class. He and his brother Aftab’s prospects had improved because orphanages had taken them in. Ayaaz’s mother missed the support of her eldest son, and found life difficult, surviving with the wages of menial cleaning jobs. She was often overcome by tiredness due to her antiretroviral therapy.In 2011, Ayaaz had to give up his education again. “I didn’t want my mother to be alone,” he said, his voice full of emotion. “If I went back to school now I wouldn’t be able to work and support the family.” Nevertheless, Aftab, who was desperately undernourished and ill, had to be left in the care of an orphanage. Once a year Ayaaz and his mother would make the four-hour bus journey to visit him there. In most Indian orphanages, children receive few visitors because many parents can afford neither the bus fare nor the loss of a day’s income. Aftab was one of 33 HIV-positive children at this orphanage. The staff – all of whom are also HIV positive – administered the free antiretroviral therapy. Across the country, infected children have been stigmatised, expelled from school, even stoned to death. An infected orphan – the sole survivor of a family of seven – was kept in a yard like a dog, forbidden to come indoors, until rescued by aid workers. Aftab has kept his medical status secret from classmates at school. “I never tell anyone,” he says. “If I did, I am frightened that they would snub me.”