Preamble: You know those anxiety dreams you get? Like when you stand up to give that deal-sealing presentation and realise that you've forgotten to put your trousers on. Again. Or when you go for a job interview but can't even spell CV, let alone describe what's on yours. Followers of the England cricket team used to be well acquainted with the cold sweats. Even until recently, a night's slumber could be suddenly, heart-thumpingly disturbed by the mental echo of a Chennai 2008 or a 51 all out. Men and women with stronger constitutions than I have woken in the middle of the night screaming the name of the south Australian ground out loud.Not any more. This England team gives the opposition nightmares and it would be no surprise to hear that even the Little Master has been going to bed with his bat for the last few weeks, to ward off the nocturnal spectre of Jimmy and his swingers. Andrew Strauss's side may be 3-0 up in the series but, at The Oval, there's been no rest for the wicket. In 33 intense overs yesterday evening, the bowlers ripped into India's flagging line-up once again and, weather permitting, England have an excellent opportunity to wrap up a second consecutive victory by an innings. The last time India lost by such a margin twice in the same series was in 1983, at the hands of West Indies.So, English cricket is no longer responsible for your fret dreams. That doesn't mean they don't still occur from time to time, though, does it? And not just because of the cheese. I still sometimes wake to discover, thankfully, that my university finals took place several years ago and it doesn't matter if I haven't read any of the books. But enough about me - what's your story?Less chat, more hat: The bid for the sun hat signed by England's three hundred-makers at Brisbane last winter currently stands at a round £300. Not bad you might say - but with all proceeds from the auction going to the Mines Advisory Group, it would be remiss not to aim higher. Email your price to the OBO and the highest bidder at the end of the series gets the prize.The first email of the day and it's a doozy: "Dear Sir," begins Vladimir Harkonnen - a phrase to chill any OBOer's heart. "I wish to protest against the careless use of the word whitewash which has crept into our latter-day demotic tongue. Especially as applied to England's annihilation of India, the term is inadequate. A better way of expressing it would be to say that England have Rochestered India. See: John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester, finest poem The Annihilation of Nothing. I trust you will correct your phraseology forthwith." Didn't Rochester write a lot of blue poetry? In which case, we might just as well say that England have Rogered India. But then, this is a family show, so we'll stick with whitewash, until the guardian style guide dictates otherwise.The England team are out on the pitch, and the crowd greet them with warm applause. The sun is struggling to break through low cloud cover, from the looks of it, and there's the suggestion we might get a spot of rain at some point during the morning.Not that such inconvenience would throw England off the scent, you feel.34th over: India 104-5 (Dravid 57, Dhoni 5) Hey ho, away we go, with Stuart Broad to bowl the first over of the morning. He starts with a no-ball. Try again, Stuey. His next delivery takes the outside edge of the bat but the ball stays low, bobbling its way to Anderson in the slips. Broad's line for the rest of the over is largely angled into Dravid, trying to unpick that immaculate defense, before the final ball, an away swinger, is left by the batsman. "While the recurring finals anxiety dream is, indeed, a nightmare, waking to discover that you never have to take another exam is truly a fabulous moment of recompense," notes Steve Busfield, our man Stateside. True, it's a huge wave of relief that washes over you. Hang on, what time is it in New York? Have you just woken up from that very dream, Steve, and come to comfort yourself with a soothing session of the cricket?35th over: India 108-5 (Dravid 59, Dhoni 6) It'll be Graeme Swann at the other end, naturelment. Dhoni goes after the spinner's first ball, sweeping hard but missing, pad rather than bat coming into the equation. Swann appeals but the result is a leg bye to Dhoni. That, though, is a huge shout, again for lbw against Dhoni. The India captain stepped outside the line of off and lifted his arms above his head, offering no shot whatsoever. The ball would have had to have come back a fair way, and Simon Taufel decides it wouldn't have done enough ... only for Hawk-Eye to adjudge that it would have clipped the top of off. As Bumble says, though, it would have been a guess to give that out.36th over: India 109-5 (Dravid 60, Dhoni 6) Broad beats Dhoni with a devil of a delivery (perhaps a devilry?), the batsman pushing forward outside off uncertainly. That's just the line for Broad. "Morning Gardner, morning everybody. I've got tickets for tomorrow, so the most pressing question is how substantial a picnic to take. Can your reader(s) offer any suggestions?" According to our esteemed bookmaker friends, England are 3-1 to win today, Josh Robinson. So maybe you should consider breakfast and little more?37th over: India 111-5 (Dravid 61, Dhoni 7) Already Swann has got his twirl on, looping the ball from on high into the right-handers, getting a juicy amount of grip from the surface of the pitch. Dhoni attempts a flick off his pads, with the ball falling just short of Andrew Strauss at midwicket. "Sat in the Lock Lower this morning drinking in (literally) the wonderful atmosphere at the Oval with three friends, one of whom is at his first Test match, in fact his first ever game of cricket. Being a football fan he's just as mystified with the fact he can buy a beer at 11am as he is with the intricacies of the beautiful game. We're enjoying schooling him, I'm sure he'll have the hang of it soon. Who cares, when Swann's on?" I'm sure the ingenue will be, er, safe in Guy Hornsby's hands.38th over: India 111-5 (Dravid 61, Dhoni 7) [Whistles through teeth] Two chances come and go in Broad's over and, such is England's excellence these days, you feel they should have taken one of the them. The first, a mix-up between Dravid and Dhoni, sees the former sent scampering back to the non-striker's end, with Kevin Pietersen's throw from cover only a few inches wide of the stumps, even though he only had one and a half to aim at. Then Broad induces a thick-ish edge from Dhoni, but the ball dies a little on its way through, bouncing a fraction before reaching Strauss at first slip.39th over: India 113-5 (Dravid 62, Dhoni 8) Swann weaves away Shelob-like, looking to snare himself a hobbit. He's got an excellent record here at The Oval, from his handful of appearances, and you feel that a breakthrough is never too far away. "As far as I am aware it was Thom Gunn rather than Rochester who wrote The Annihilation of Nothing. Did Vladimir Harkonnen mean Upon Nothing instead?" says Justin Horton, adjusting his monocle.40th over: India 113-5 (Dravid 62, Dhoni 8) That's a maiden from Broad to Dhoni. "Even more ridiculously, I'm currently in California, it's 3am and I've just written this about the football match I attended a few hours ago: Robbie Keane's LA Galaxy debut." I haven't read Steve Busfield's blog, but I expect to find a reference to it being Keane's boyhood dream to play on the west coast, when I do.41st over: India 118-5 (Dravid 63, Dhoni 12) Dhoni really does look like a man trying to guess which cup the magician has hidden the ping pong ball under against Swann. He goes back, he goes forward, he sweeps, he attempts to leave ... He survives. And he gets a four, when an attacking shot takes the glove and skids through the thicket of fielders and away to the fence. Time to hand the mic to Martin Rutherford: "Padding up is such a horrible tactic. It's cricket's equivalent of feigning injury. It's anti-cricket. I think you've got to give the benefit of the doubt to the bowler when batsman pads up outside off. It is always hard to guess where the spinning ball will go, so the deterrent against shots like Dhoni's is to favour the bowler if the decision is close." If you don't know what the bejesus is going on, I guess you can't blame the man from abstaining.42nd over: India 126-5 (Dravid 71, Dhoni 12) This India pair are battling away admirably, Dravid watchful and upright, Dhoni living by his wits. The former tucks four off his pads from Broad's first ball but then gets a tad lucky with another boundary later in the over, a thick edge from a wide ball that arced past the diving fielder in the gully.43rd over: India 131-5 (Dravid 73, Dhoni 15) An over of binary solo. Swann's figures now read one for 44 from 15. "Come on, surely exams ain't all that?" chirps Ryan Dunne. "I graduated in May and having to write shite for a couple of hours, once a year at once, sounds a lot less onerous than the rigours of grown-up working life. And surely the worst dreams involve e.g. ex-partners, and the best involve sexy celebrities?" Er, yeah, the rigours of grown-up working life. That does give me nightmares. Thankfully I've never experienced it.44th over: India 131-5 (Dravid 73, Dhoni 15) It's time for Jimmy and his swingers and he's immediately on the money, honey, beating Dhoni with a textbook away-ducker. It didn't help that Dhoni was on the walk, trying to chip the ball on the up. He's a curiosity at the crease, far more energy and invention than technique. I suppose that's why he's got his own shot. Alex Sharp, meanwhile, has found his subconscious invaded by Agent Anderson: "You mention in today's preamble that it wouldn't be surprising to find that Sachin goes to bed each night haunted by images of 'Jimmy and his swingers'. I too am now slightly preoccupied by more than just the cricket... Enough to induce anxiety dreams all round.45th over: India 137-5 (Dravid 77, Dhoni 17) As Mike Ahterton observes on Sky, Dravid and Dhoni have rotated the well against Swann, which denies him a sustained attack, as he managed against Raina yesterday. Six runs from the over, all run.WICKET! Dhoni 17 c Prior b Anderson (46th over: India 137-6) That's why Jimmy Anderson strolls through the canyons of Indian minds, leering like a clean-cut boogie man. He does the hokey-cokey with Dhoni, going out, in, then out again, the batsman only able to get a nick through to the keeper as he pushed at a length ball. So that ends Dhoni's skittish stay at the crease.46th over: India 137-6 (Dravid 77, Mishra 0) This may be a dead rubber but I can still smell burning. India send in Amit Mishra - rather than Gautam Gambhir, who didn't open yesterday due to concussion - and the visitors still need more than 250 runs to avoid the follow-on. England are playing with matches.47th over: India 141-6 (Dravid 80, Mishra 1) Dravid goes deftly back to Swann, flicking away the ball for another three runs. He has been immaculate once again this morning. "Me again," hollers Josh Robinson. "There's something very, very strange about following a game at this stage in the knowledge that I want to see what's left of it tomorrow, ideally in something of a contest where India have a chance of saving the game. Dropped catches, for example, lose their frustrating character, and become almost desirable."48th over: India 145-6 (Dravid 80, Mishra 5) Mishra stoutly defends an over of Anderson's teasers. He gets down well on a couple fired in at almost yorker length, as Jimmy seeks a quick kill. From the final ball of the over, Anderson goes wide on the crease and attempts to get the late movement that would straighten the path of the ball and defeat the defensive stroke - but there's no swing this time, and Mishra is able to turn the ball around the corner for four down to long leg.49th over: India 150-6 (Dravid 81, Mishra 9) Shot! Mishra shows he can play a bit, n'all, skipping out to Swann and depositing the ball over midwicket for four. That's the 150 up, and India are a quarter of the way there. "Morning Alan, On the entirely legal feed from Indian television I am watching here in Newfoundland, Saurav Ganguly has just described MS Dhoni as looking "comfortable" this morning. That would be the MS who could have been given out LBW playing no shot to Swann, and had an edge from Broad drop just short of Strauss. I know ex-players are more expert than the likes of me, but come on." I think, Richard Woods, in the circumstance, we can forgive Sourav being a bit one-eyed for the benefit of the Indian broadcaster, don't you?50th over: India 156-6 (Dravid 86, Mishra 10) Yes, yes, I realise 250 is a fair bit more than 150. I've got my English lit head on this morning - my maths brain cell is recharging. Dravid continues to stroll serenely through the carnage of India's tour, clipping a four through the leg side with the air of a man going to collect the milk from the doorstep. "If Jimmy is the figure strollng through the canyons of Indian minds, does this mean they're also smelling sweet essence of giraffe? (Get your dad to explain.)" Is that a Bonzo Dog Doodah Band reference, John Starbuck?51st over: India 157-6 (Dravid 86, Mishra 11) Swann will continue, still looking for a break this morning. On the commentary, Sanjay Manjrekar is paying tribute to Rahul Dravid, who is unobtrusively closing in on his third hundred of the tour. "We all dream of a team of Rahul Dravids" doesn't quite work, does it? And, though the man can keep wicket, he might struggle to take them, even though his one Test scalp (in 157 Tests) came at a cost of 39. I wonder who that man is, dismissed by Rahul's off-break (obviously I could find out but that would completely confound my rhetorical device).52nd over: India 157-6 (Dravid 86, Mishra 11) Despite the ball being more than 50 overs old, Anderson is still getting a decent bit of hula on it. He continues to switch between the in- and out-swinger, which fairly bamboozles Mishra, who is twice caught on the crease, his pads taking the brunt of the blow. One looks a decent appeal, though the ball was probably swinging too far down leg. That's maiden, which Mishra knew very little about. "Given that England have played well as a team, and it would unfair to pick between, say, Pietersen and Bell or Anderson and Broad, perhaps Dravid should be given the Man of the Series award?," suggest Harry Tuttle, who is in charitable mood. "Could anyone begrudge him that?"53rd over: India 170-6 (Dravid 99, Mishra 11) Dravid suddenly steps on the gas, reaching out to swipe Swann away for four over mid-wicket, then hopping back to play a silky cut shot through point for another boundary. He clips another four off his pads, which draws praise from a man who knew a thing or two about elegant stroke-making, David Gower. Those boundaries move him on to 98, though he very nearly runs himself out from the final ball of the over, attempting a quick single to mid-off, diving to make his crease as the throw skidding just wide of the stumps.54th over: India 172-6 (Dravid 101, Mishra 11) England turn, a little belatedly perhaps, to Timmy Bresnan. I'm not sure that Dravid has given up on Mishra but he's certainly eager to reach his ton. Bresnan keeps him waiting until the fourth ball, which he skims off the face past the slips for two - that's a marvelous knock, Dravid's second hundred as a fill-in opener. And to think, Tendulkar won't even consider moving up from No4!55th over: India 172-6 (Dravid 101, Mishra 11) Swann runs through a maiden to Mishra. You wonder, really, how India are in this position, given the decent state of the wicket. "It strikes me, reading the OBO whilst at work - that now England seem to have mastered the fundamentals of playing cricket, I'd perhaps like to watch some of it. Sadly the chances of me getting five days to sit around watching cricket are - not entirely coincidentally - exactly the same as my chances of winning the lottery. Such a shame that when cricket was on the BBC and I used to get six weeks off every summer we were rubbish." Nick Evans finds another good reason to pine for those lost school days. Though I'm presuming you do get weekends off, even now?56th over: India 173-6 (Dravid 102, Mishra 11) "Has Martin Rutherford (over 41), bless him, forgotten England's infamous initial anti-Warne strategy? I can't blame him, it was pretty embarrassing." Eamonn Maloney spots a Ministry of Information 'adjustment'. Although, to be fair, it's not like that tactic (or any English tactic) worked against Warne, is it?57th over: India 177-6 (Dravid 104, Mishra 13) Mishra gets a big step in against Swann, with his forward defensive solid enough to prevent the ball popping off the pad and into a danger area. There were shouts of "catch it" but the ball landed pretty safe. "Surely we can do better than Bonzo Dog Doodah band references in these virtual hallowed halls?! For example, here's some India-set *genuine* comedy to take away the bad taste of all those characteristically unfunny Family Guy clips yesterday," says Ryan Dunne. And I thought, from the title of your email (India, Tigers), you were going to link to this. Looking at it again, have you just mixed up Zulus and Indians? *cough* Rascist *cough*58th over: India 178-6 (Dravid 104, Mishra 13) Bresnan has needed no warming up here, immediately finding his line and length like an experience angler. "Look, can we stop all this dream talk? I fear tonight I'm going to end up having nightmares where Jimmy's swingers doggedly pursue Tendulkar while a stadium full of Rahul Dravids look on." That would be an improvement for some of the regulars around here, I think, Phil Sawyer.59th over: India 183-6 (Dravid 104, Mishra 13) England turn to Pietersen, to give Swann a break. Though it means an increased workload for Matt Prior, as KP keeps bunging the ball down the leg side. He really does send down some utter filth, does Pietersen, though his height does make him awkward to play. And there's an appeal for a bat-pad catch of Mishra, again, but replays show there wasn't an edge.60th over: India 191-6 (Dravid 104, Mishra 21) Mishra is riding his luck, here, which is as much as you can ask from your No9 (promoted one). Actually, given the standards set by England's lower order, perhaps you can ask for more these days. Anyhoo, Mishra gets a life when he edges Bresnan along the ground, through the slips and away for four. Later in the over, he gets down on one knee and merrily thrashes a square drive for another boundary. He's definitely holding his end up.61st over: India 193-6 (Dravid 106, Mishra 21) Dravid reports to kicking Pietersen away outside off-stump. Erratic as he is, he does get bounce, which is was Dravid is worried about. Two runs tickled into the legside mean that this is now India's best partnership of the innings. Here's JP Churchouse, with the request the OBO has been waiting for: "Had a semi productive afternoon here in HK putting together a playlist of songs named after people. So far I have - Clint Eastwood - Gorillaz, Sigourney Weaver - John Grant, Franz Schubert - Kraftwerk, Barbra Streisand - Duck Sauce, Andy Warhol - David Bowie. Need to get to at least 12. Please help." What about Fred Titmus?62nd over: India 198-6 (Dravid 106, Mishra 21) Bresnan beats Mishra's outside edge with one that just held it's line. He also chucked five wides down the leg side but we'll allow him that, this once. England just beginning to look a little short of ideas, for the first time in the innings.63rd over: India 208-6 (Dravid 107, Mishra 30) After Dravid picks up a single, Mishra gets caught out by Pietersen in the flight, the ball thumping into his pads as he stepped out for a yahoo. Ian Bell then almost effects a run out, but Mishra was aware enough to get back to his crease. He then crashes another couple of boundaries, one pulled through leg, the other glanced off the face. KP scratches his head. "As a typical Australian who grew up playing endless games of life or death back yard cricket where England was the hated enemy (lots of arguments on who was England - usually resolved with agreement to disagree) my worst dream was along the lines of having to say "congrats England you are the best". So well um, damn, can you tell me how long before West Ham kick off? Regards and you're going ok, considering." Considering what, eh, Michael Quin? I think I'll direct you to a website I've heard is very useful, for that kick-off time.64th over: India 211-6 (Dravid 108, Mishra 32) Swann comes on for an over before lunch. He might get one more after this, though even he is struggling to get much out this surface now. "In honour of Dravid…..Pink Floyd, The Wall!," suggests Robin Parker. And here's Keith Allman, invoking a much-loved (at least, as far as that description can apply to a football official) Scottish referee: "Whilst I'm sure your inbox has already collapsed under the weight of suggestions, may I venture Hugh Dallas by Mogwai? It's sport related after all. And presumably the only post rock suggestion you'll receive."65th over: India 211-6 (Dravid 108, Mishra 32) This is quite a canny move, I think: Strauss has brought on Ravi Bopara. He's quite quick, despite being ostensibly a military medium-pacer, and he can swing the ball. He has taken 134 first-class wickets, despite Beefy Botham's suggestion that he doesn't bowl enough. And he almost makes it 135, as Mishra gets a leading edge, the ball looping towards mid-off where it drops a yard or two short.66th over: India 218-6 (Dravid 109, Mishra 38) There will be time for Swann to pop his collar and roll through one last over. Shouts of "ooh" and "aah" as Mishra pushes forward at one, appearing to get an edge on to his pads. Talk of snaffling the tailender with the last ball before lunch is scotched, however, as Mishra strolls insouciantly out of his crease to dump Swann over the long-on boundary. That was as jaunty a six as you'll see. In response to JP Churchouse's request, George Brough has sent in the succinct: "Scritti Politti - Jacques Derrida". And Owen Jones says: "Songs named after people - Super Furry Animals get two with one stone with 'Venus & Serena'. Topically, The Duckworth Lewis Method, in their entirely cricket themed album, had 'Meeting Mr Miandad' as a fine tune." In a VW camper van - a very fine tune indeed.LUNCHRight, I'm off to do as the England team do, so Tom Lutz will be your sounding board for the afternoon session. Send your thoughts to tom.lutz@guardian.co.uk.67th over: India 218-6 (Dravid 109, Mishra 38)Afternoon. Whisper, it but India may actually break 300 for the first time in the series here. Of course, there's the whole everything-else-about-this-tour-has-been-a-shambles thing but small steps, eh? Bopara bowls the first over of the session and Dravid attempts an un-Dravid waft at a wide one, which he misses. After that he calms down and we start with a maiden.68th over: India 221-6 (Dravid 110, Mishra 40) Three runs come from Bresnan's first over after lunch: Mishra's looking pretty comfortable out there. Here's Paul Thompson: "A suggestion for JP Churchouse (over 61): James Brown by Cabaret Voltaire." How about Lenny Valentino by the Auteurs. Although that's an amalgam of two people but that makes it even better two people for the price of one.69th over: India 224-6 (Dravid 110, Mishra 43)  Graeme Swann is back on. There's an early shout for lbw but the umpire shakes his head but it was iffy whether it would have clipped leg-stump or not.70th over WICKET! Mishra b Bresnan c Bell 43, 228-7 What a catch! Bell leaps magnificently at short leg to take one of the catches of the series so far after a miscontrolled pull from Mishra. Gambhir is in after his head-knack earlier in the Test.71st over: India 232-7 (Dravid 114, Gambhir 0)  Mishra's gone but Dravid's till here: he smacks Swann's first ball of the over to the boundary. Dravid has now faced 30,000 balls at Test level. "On a point of order, supposedly the song 'Venus and Serena' by the Super Furry Animals was in fact named after the lead singer's pet turtles - so Owen Jones's suggestion may not qualify," says Charlie Brendon. "But this raises an obvious question: How many other examples are there of songs named after pets named after famous people?" Nine. There are nine. Including Venus and Serena. I had cats called Vic and Bob but Vic died early on so Bob was left on her own for 17 years and no one ever got my joke. Least of all poor, dead Vic.72nd over: India 232-7 (Dravid 114, Gambhir 0)  Bresnan attempts to unsettle Gambhir – with his bad had – with a few short balls but he copes well enough "For JP Churchouse (who, with a name like that, I hope plays first class cricket) and his challenge: excitingly, U2's The Unforgettable Fire album gives a 2-fer of Elvis Presley and America and MLK! (I know that U2 are probably not cool enough for the Guardian, but still)," says Ryan Dunne. No problem, it's only the sports desk so we don't need to worry about being out of the loop musically. Still ... U2.73rd over: India 233-7 (Dravid 115, Gambhir 0)  Big shout for lbw on Gambhir but it was bat first. Actually, just bat. "Madness did Michael Caine," says Steve Clark. "It'd be nice to quip that 'And not a lot of people know that' but I suspect I am not unique in suggesting this." Correct.74th over: India 239-7 (Dravid 119, Gambhir 1)  Dravid is rattled around the left knee and limps forward for a leg bye. Seems to have shaken it off though - he cuts Bresnan for four a few balls later. Here's The Oldest Member: "A thought, involving lots of ifs, buts and maybes. In the previous Test there was some discussion on the OBO of whether Alistair Cook might be on the field for the entire match. It was shown to be a rarity (and Cook didn't manage it). Dravid is showing the resilience, and the majority of his teammates the frailty, so it is conceivable he might carry his bat for this innings, the follow-on be enforced and he then might bat through the next innings as well. Raising the question: has anyone ever been on the pitch for an entire Test match and ended up on the losing side?"75th over: India 239-7 (Dravid 119, Gambhir 1) Cook nearly takes a diving catch to dismiss Gambhir. Would have been an excellent take though. "Our cats have been named (Kit) Marlowe, Dryden, Chaucer, Byron, Spenser, Shelley, Swinburne and Sheridan," says John Starbuck. "Sadly, all except the last have died of old age or motor vehicles, but there's nothing like having a system and sticking to it." My next cats will be called Smyth and Bull.76th over: India 246-7 (Dravid 125, Gambhir 2) Kevin Carter by the Manics is coming in very strongly on the song titles front. KP serves up a pie for his first ball of the session and it's smacked for four.77th over: India 247-7 (Dravid 126, Gambhir 2) Just a single from Swann's over. Here's something to cheer us up on a so-so English summer's day from Martin Dixon: "From a cold and rainy São Paulo - Sigourney Weaver by John Grant. In fact the whole song is on this very riff." OK, it's winter in Brazil right now but still nice to think even Brazil has its off days.78th over: India 250-7 (Dravid 128, Gambhir 3)  Pietersen and Swann continue to whirl away as we wait for the new ball, Gambhir will be glad he can find his way in with Pietersen bowling.79th over: India 251-7 (Dravid 129, Gambhir 3) "Mermaid Avenue, the album by Billy Bragg and Wilco of lyrics by Woody Guthrie, music by Bragg and Wilco, has a three-fer of songs with people in the title: Ingrid Bergman, Walt Whitman's niece (I assume he had one), and Christ for President," says Paul Connelly. You've just taken the riff to a new level, Paul.80th over: India 253-7 (Dravid 130, Gambhir 4) Gambhir is rattling along with four from 30 balls. New ball is due next over, his runs may run slightly then, which is worrying for the neutral. "Following from an earlier missive to Mr Gardner, our cricket/test virgin, Andi, is having a storming time so far today," says Guy Hornsby. "A few sheets to the wind, he's grasping the rudiments of test cricket: Dravid's obduracy, Swann's wizadry, liver compromiser, the OBO and TMS. He's flirting with Superiority, and I haven't even broached the legend of Gary Naylor yet. Plenty of overs left in the day for further drinking, sorry education."81st over: India 253-7 (Dravid 130, Gambhir 4) England take the new ball at the first opportunity and Jimmy Anderson will bowl. In facthe has bowled and it was a maiden. "Yes, I'm another Phil Sawyer. Not the one who comments regularly. Spooky, I know," says Phil Sawyer (the other one). "We had two kittens named Bodie and Doyle. All well and good until Doyle went to join the feline choir invisible after only a few months. So Bodie's had to deal with a sole existence for 10 years and we've trotted that story out to anyone who's asked. Which has been everyone." Just direct them to this report from now on. We need the readers.82nd over: India 258-7 (Dravid 131, Gambhir 8) Broad's back on and Dravid clips his first ball, a full toss, for a single. Strauss brings in a gully and short leg for Gambhir. He gets his first boundary, down to fine leg, though and Broad isn't at his most penetrating. "Afternoon Lutz, afternoon everybody," says Josh Robinson. "Amazing how a single wicket, even that of a (promoted) no 9, can transform me from a state of hoping that they'll fall quickly enough that India don't avoid the follow-on, to hoping that they'll fall slowly enough that they'll be play tomorrow. I feel as if I'm approaching a state of mild split-personality syndrome."83rd over: India 259-7 (Dravid 132, Gambhir 8) Gambhir is hanging around but he looks lethargic and sluggish, which I guess isn't that surprising from someone who's had concussion. "Piazza New York Catcher by Belle and Sebastian isn't really all about Mike Piazza, the New York Mets catcher, but he does feature, hitting three-eighteen and catching every day. It's hot and nice here in Maine, USA by the way," says Hank Laurence in Maine, USA. Which is hot and sunny.84th over: India 261-7 (Dravid 133, Gambhir 9) Broad comes in wider at Gambhir but he's till seeing it out doggedly and the ball squirts away for a single. "Does the term 'all-rounder' now only refer to a player who averages about the same with both bat and ball (usually about 32-33)," asks Max Banjo. "Or can it be used to refer to a player who's very good at both? There's a player in the Engliand team averaging 45 with the bat and 23 with the ball and Atherton and Warne and plenty of other commentators have been discussing England's lack of an all-rounder to be the fifth bowler. Can't someone even suggest that Tim Bresnan might have some potential!?"85th over: India 261-7 (Dravid 133, Gambhir 9) A bit of swing from Jimmy before he has Gambhir ducking under a bouncer. It's a Phil Sawyer war: "There's another Phil Sawyer on the block (81st over)? So if he's the other Phil Sawyer, what will you be labeling me? The original Phil Sawyer? Phil Sawyer Prime (which would be hugely inaccurate and undeserved)? That idiot Sawyer (which is what Mac Millings usually calls me)?" More importantly what happens if another Phil Sawyer turns up? We could make a programme out of this if Dave Gorman hadn't already done it.86th over: India 263-7 (Dravid 134, Gambhir 10) Dravid and Gambhir are seeing off the new ball well here. A bit disorientating having two batsmen of this quality on the pitch at seven down. "A good cricketing one from Captain Sensible - Sir Donald's Son," says Phil Withall. The song's called Sir Donald's Son, I think no one's suggesting Bradman fathered a pop star. "All about The Don and the pressure of being the son of a legend. And Steve Earle did John Walker's Blues about the American Guantanamo bay detainee."87th over: India 263-7 (Dravid 134, Gambhir 10)  The ball isn't swinging about too much, which has made life more comfortable for Gambhir in particular. "That bloke doing the recording of names in song titles should do Jonathan Jonathan by the brilliant brit country rock combo The Rockingbirds," says the Guardian's very own Martin Farrer. I didn't know any of my colleagues actually read this. I may have to look at my punctuation. "It's about Jonathan Richman, as in the Modern Lovers. And the Rockingbirds frontman, Alan Tyler, is a big cricket fan and may even be watching the live blog." That's drinks.WICKET! Gambhir b Broad c Pietersen 10, 264-8 India are happy to defend with the ball not doing much – there is talk of rain tomorrow afternoon so they may well have half an eye on the draw. Or even 22 eyes. Oh! Broad gets extra bounce and Gambhir fences the ball to Pietersen.88th over: India 267-8 (Dravid 134, RP Singh 3)  Big shout for lbw on Singh's first ball but it was drifting wide. He flicks the next ball away for three, it was in the air though.89th over: India 276-8 (Dravid 135, RP Singh 12) Successive fours from Singh and, suffice to say, Jimmy isn't happy. Both weren't what you'd call classy shots but he looks like he's ready to swing the bat, which shou;d make things amusing. "I wouldn't presume to want to start a war with Phil Sawyer Classic (85th over)," says Phil Sawyer Lite. "Mind you, his updates have caused me issues in the past as I've had to convince my boss that I haven't been glued to OBO while I was supposed to be working." Ah, the perils of Being Phil Sawyer.90th over: India 277-8 (Dravid 135, RP Singh 13) Singh has strike again. He catches the ball on his gloves and Bell sprints in to see if he can take a (very cheeky) catch. But Singh opens his hands and the ball plops to safety. "Is this Rockingbirds frontman (87th over) THE Alan Tyler?," asks Ryan Dunne. "His recent parody of a Tendulkar story and the internet commentators thereon is one of the funniest things I've read recently."91st over: India 285-8 (Dravid 135, RP Singh 21) India need 392 to avoid the follow on. Singh gets closer to that target, smashing the ball past Anderson for four. And gets another one to end the over. This is quite good fun. Our friends on the picture desk have put together the best images from today's play.92nd over: India 290-8 (Dravid 140, RP Singh 21) Dravid skims a ball through cover for four. A small milestone here: India now have their highest score of the series. That says a lot about the series. Here's Hardeep Dhillon on the names in songs riff: "Maybe a cheeky one with my own name - How Deep is Your Love by the Bee Gees/Take That, who are actually singing 'Hardeep is Your Love'." I think Gary Barlow was discussing how key you were to his career on X-Factor the other day actually.93rd over: India 295-8 (Dravid 140, RP Singh 25) Swann is back on. He has a big shout for lba against Singh but it was going pretty high. Next ball is dispatched for four. The tail enders have enjoyed themselves against Swann in the last two Tests "Surely the person who is most often namechecked in song titles is Jesus," says Richard Mansell, not unreasonably. Him and Tim Da-Dee-Da-Dee-Da.94th over: India 300-8 (Dravid 146, RP Singh 25)  Bresnan's return is greeted with a four by Dravid. The next ball, miracle of miracles, India reach 300 for the first time in the series. Appropriately, it's Dravid who gets them there. Without him they'd have been lucky to get to 200 in a few of the innings. Then...WICKET! b Bresnan c Anderson, Singh 25. India 300-9 Singh's entertaining innings comes to an end. Anderson takes a good catch, doing well to hang on to a ball that comes at him just above head height.WICKET! c Morgan b Bresnan Sreesanth 0, India 300 all out Sreesanth has a slash at a wide ball and Morgan takes the catch easily. Dravid has carried his bat and will need to come in again in a few minutes: the signs are England will enforce the follow on.Confirmation that England have enforced the follow on.  "Oh great. Now it turns out that by simply existing I'm managing to ruin someone else's life (89th over). Mind you, this does not surprise me. I've often suspected this to be the case. From now on I'm going to have to call myself Phil (not the other Phil Sawyer, the one who's working) Sawyer whenever I email in," says Phil (not the other Phil Sawyer, the one who's working) Sawyer.1st over: India 9-0 (Sehwag 5, Dravid 4) Poor old Dravid trudges out to face Jimmy Anderson again. Still, at least Sehwag has had plenty of rest. He nearly chops the first ball on to his stump but it runs away for four. "Now that the two Indian bowlers who served up the maximum filth while bowling - Mishra and RP Singh - have batted like competent ones, should India consider giving the new ball to Sehwag?," wonders Arvind Ramanan. I guess the problem would be getting England to bat again in the first place.2nd over: India 9-0 (Sehwag 5, Dravid 4) Sehwag as a waft at Broad's second delivery. He doesn't make contact though, which is just as well for Prior who doesn't quite take the ball. He calms down after that scare and leaves the rest of the balls in the over. Here's Sanjeev Sinha: "Now that this tour has been a farce for every Indian except Dravid, which cricketer's house will most likely be stoned and ads discontinued (or reduced)? Dhoni or Tendulkar? I really do hope India is rid of the bullcrap hero worship after this series. They have been slaughtered so badly, this England team could have been accused of war crimes. On the other hand, the Indian team's performance also ranks nothing short of a crime."3rd over: India 19-0 (Sehwag 14, Dravid 5) Sharp running from India off the firsr delivery gets them a single. Sehwag then hits Anderson for successive fours. The first is off a full toss, the second is off a ball that leaves him little room but he still manages to cut it away. Anderson looks unhappy, not sure whether that's through injury or being thrashed about.4th over: India 23-0 (Sehwag 16, Dravid 5) Sehwag wants to go for three but Dravid isn't quite as fresh as him and is ahppy to settle for two. "Tell Phil (not the other Phil Sawyer, the one who's working) Sawyer not to be too despondent," says Phil (the one who's normally working, but isn't today) Sawyer. I suspect neither of us are Phil Sawyer the ex-member of the Spencer Davis Group and renowned New Age musician. Neither are we Rear Admiral Phillip G Sawyer, United States Navy. There's a lot of us about." Well, four at the last count.5th over: India 25-0 (Sehwag 16, Dravid 7)  Jimmy nearly strikes, it brushed Dravid's pads but was just going over the stumps. A much better over from Anderson who had looked wayward in the first two of his overs. "Whilst on the subject of names in song titles, how about the 1995 hit for Australian band TISM - (He'll Never Be An) Ol' Man River all about the demise of River Phoenix and a host of other celebrities who died from excess," says Oliver Waters. "It even has the prophetic line 'Odds on it'll be Michael Jackson next.'" It wasn't a massive stretch to guess the Michael Jackson one though, was it?6th over: India 25-0 (Sehwag 16, Dravid 7) One of Jimmy Anderson's delieveries kept very low in the last over. Not great news if you're trying to save a test. England have a team conference on how to deal with Sehwag's attacks. Broad gives him very little width and that does the job. For now. And that's tea. Alan Gardner will be your host for the evening session.TEA7th over: India 25-0 (Sehwag 16, Dravid 7) Howzit? There are, I think, 28 overs left in the day, with Rahul Dravid looking to extend his lead at the top of the balls-faced in Test cricket list. The Wall might still be standing at the end of today, just as he was at 11am this morning, but I can't see Sehwag being able to contain himself. It should be fun either way. Hello ...REFERRAL! Dravid 7 c Cook b Swann (7th over: India 25-0) Darn, the jinx didn't quite work. Dravid called for the review immediately after Rod Tucker had raised his finger and that's because he knew that the ball had not hit his bat before ballooning off the pad to short leg. There were two sounds, but the second was the toe of the bat jamming into the ground, so the decision is overturned and Dravid endures.8th over: India 27-0 (Sehwag 17, Dravid 8) It will be Broad gliding in from the other end, left arm thrust out at the delivery stride, his right uncoiling like a striking snake to spit the ball at Virender Sehwag. Sehwag leaves one, which was well judged, the delivery floating a few inches past the off timbre. "Since this is a cricket strand discussing songs with people's names in the title, surely the most appropriate track would be Telemachus Brown's 'Wrong About Justin Langer'?," offers Jamie Kirkaldy. Would that be featuring former South Africa sort-of-quick Roger Telemachus on vocals, Jamie? Two for one.9th over: India 31-0 (Sehwag 17, Dravid 8) Ah, me, Dravid gets another life, though he's surely deserved them after his efforts in the series! A regulation off-breaks from Swann fails to turn (in fact, it almost appears to doosra in the opposite direction), taking the thinnest of edges on its way past Dravid's defensive push. Prior, behind the stumps, was also defeated, with the ball running all the way for four - though umpire Tucker signals them as byes. Dravid is the kind of batsman to make you rue such misses.10th over: India 33-0 (Sehwag 18, Dravid 8) There's some more shenanigans behind the bowler's arm, with Sehwag pulling away during Broad's run-up. Come on people, sit down and watch the flippin' game, eh. Think of it as like being in the theatre, except with a lot more booze. Two singles off the over. "Now I've got Phil Sawyer envy (4th over). I wish I was Rear Admiral Phillip G Sawyer. He sounds much more dynamic than myself (mind you, I'd like to think he sometimes gets called in to explain to his superiors that he's not spending all his time on some Limey sports blog)." That was from Phil (not the one who's normally working but isn't today, the musician or the rear admiral) Sawyer, in case you were wondering.11th over: India 43-0 (Sehwag 23, Dravid 9) Speaking of the theatre, there's more drama in this Swann over than your average Alan Bennett production. First the close fielders again go up for a bat-pad offering against Sehwag but, as with the Dravid appeal, there was only pad involved. Viru responds by clumping the next ball through the covers for four, a booming shot that whistled away like a volley from a rifle. He then essays a loose drive at Swann's fifth delivery, completely misses and whirls round to see the ball disappearing to the boundary for byes, having turned past the stumps and evaded Prior on its way through.12th over: India 48-0 (Sehwag 24, Dravid 13) Dravid pings an on-drive down the ground off Broad, a glorious shot. Good job India remembered to pack this guy, eh? "With a name like Phil Sawyer, you kind of expect to be confused with at least quarter of world's population. But imagine my surprise when a couple of years ago I got an email asking me whether I can start a new job … in Florida. After a short investigation, it turned out there is another Alexander Agranovsky in Orlando with a CV remarkably similar to my own … I don't know why I did not just got on the plane and turn out there on Monday." Where do you hail from Alexander Agranovsky? And would the other Alexander Agranovsky have fancied swapping Orlando for, say, Burnley, if the mix up had been made the other way round?WICKET! Dravid 13 c Cook b Swann (13th over: India 49-1) Again England are hopping around, claiming a catch at short leg. Tucker, once bitten, turns down the appeal but Strauss calls for the appeal straight away. It's very, very difficult to see evidence of an edge, either via Hot Spot or slow-motion replays, so you'd think the onfield umpire would not be overruled ... Hang on, he has been! Dravid is out!13th over: India 49-1 (Sehwag 24, Dravid 13) Well, Dravid accepts the decision with the good grace you would expect but I really can't see how the third umpire could have been sure that Tucker's original call was wrong. England couldn't give a fig either way.14th over: India 54-1 (Sehwag 25, Laxman 4) On comes Bresnan to bend his back. A single to Sehwag takes India to fifty and brings the new batsman VVS Laxman on strike and Yorkshire's finest has him groping outside off straight away. The India No3 then gets four down to third man as he tried to withdraw his bat - credit to the bowler, but Laxman is off the mark. "Continuing the sterling riff of today, I was always a fan of Space's Ballad of Tom Jones, featuring Cerys Matthew, which neatly segues into Catatonia's Mulder & Scully. That all feels very much of another era. To update our day at the Oval, Andi, our cricket debutant, has had to leave, but I'm sure Pulp's sublime 'Do You Remember The First Time?' will carry him home." Was the full eight-hour experience too much for him, Guy Hornsby? You've got some work to do.15th over: India 59-1 (Sehwag 30, Laxman 4) Sehwag tees off golf-style, chipping Swann's first ball down the ground for four. He looks to have got his eye in, at the fourth attempt. "Phil Sawyers should think themselves lucky. Dan Smiths are so common that my sister went out with one for 5 years, paying NO regard to the incest rumours that the family tree would spark among our descendants." You'd think at the very least it would have conjured up some scarring mental images. I was actually emailing my friend Dan Smith earlier today. Or is that still you?16th over: India 60-1 (Sehwag 31, Laxman 4) Sehwag is correct in his defence against Bresnan, sitting back in his crease and presenting the maker's name to the bowler. This one should make it into the fourth day, which will make Josh Robinson and a few thousand others happy. "Surely the most appropriate cricketing song with a name in the title is 'David Watts' by the Kinks referring to the Scottish cricketer (David) Fraser Watts. We all wish we could be like him, as he was voted 24th most eligible bachelor in Scotland in a Scotland on Sunday special feature in 2006." Is that like being the 24th tallest man in Lilliput, Oliver Waters?17th over: India 63-1 (Sehwag 32, Laxman 5) I think there's going to be plenty of work for short leg and leg slip this evening, as another Swann delivery pops off the pads, sparking excited yelps all round. It's like an episode of the Inbetweeners when one of them sees a girl. In fact, like every episode of the Inbetweeners. "Dravid decision," says Kathleen McKenna, ungrammatically. "Surely there has to be definite evidence to overturn on-field decision? Maybe third umpire agrees with Michael Vaughan and thinks Dravid applied vaseline to his bat." I agree, I don't see how the third umpire could have been that confident. I haven't seen a side-on Hot Spot replay and Snicko is apparently inconclusive.18th over: India 64-1 (Sehwag 33, Laxman 5) Just one run off Bresnan's over. "Odd about Phil Sawyer. I was under the impression he was dead. The is a distinct recollection of attending his funeral in Ohio about 6 years ago. Of course I have given little attention to his movements since then," says Paul D Greggson, although his email address is David R. Hartman. This is getting confusing.WICKET! Sehwag 33 b Swann (19th over: India 64-2) There's the death rattle of timbers shivering and India's chances of saving this game are disappearing up the Swanny. It was the regulation off-spinner, which Sehwag had been keen to take on, but this gripped and turned enough to beat the attempted drive and topple the bails, the ball striking middle stump about halfway up.REFERRAL! Tendulkar 4 st Prior b Swann (19th over: India 68-2) Has Tendulkar been bamboozled? He edged his first ball for four, playing for spin where there was none, and then was again beaten outside off-stump, Prior whipping off the bails with Jack Russell-ish tenacity. Tendulkar had lifted his foot - but he'd jammed it back down again by the time the bails were broken, so he survives.20th over: India 75-2 (Laxman 5, Tendulkar 8) Chances of Tendulkar getting his 100th hundred on what is likely to be his last innings in England? That would raise a few smiles, though it would scarcely make up for the disappoint for followers of India after this series. The players are taking drinks, so here's Math(ematic?) Scott with a whip smart song/band/name suggestion: "Surely Dravid should be known as Tenacious D?" And here is Johnny B: "I once went to watch a Grindcore band known as LBW at a dark, dingy Indie club in York. They wore cricket whites and had a catchy little number known as 'Geoffrey Boycott Twice Twice', in which every word in the song was repeated twice, twice. Not that anyone could understand what they were singing about of course."21st over: India 77-2 (Laxman 8, Tendulkar 9) Laxman and Tendulkar exchange singles off Swann, who's enjoying his more central role in proceedings, after having to watch the pacemen steam off with the plaudits in previous Tests, as Alexander Agranovsky notes. "Graham Swann is also quite a popular name – so popular, in fact, that there are at least two of them who look exactly the same. I am glad that England have managed to locate the right one for this game, after letting his lookalike to play in the previous 3 matches." He's had a quiet series but that's really a reflection of little England have needed to turn to him.22nd over: India 81-2 (Laxman 8, Tendulkar 13) "Come on India," a female voice can be heard calling. She sounds a bit forlorn, like a mum urging her child on to finish the sack race even as they fall on their mush for umpteenth time. Tendulkar caresses a four off of his pads, a top shot. "I really hope the BCCI do a Bucknor on Davies and have him removed," writes Amirali Abdullah. "I looked at the replay 15 times - no hotspot, no discernible sound, and the only hint of the minutest deflection might be if you saw the replay from the cover camera. And with the ball turning prodigiously to leg, it's very hard to gauge. There's no way a third umpire can give that out without some guesswork. I'm lenient on on-field umpires, because that's very hard. There's no excuse for a third umpire sitting comfy and looking at 15 replays." I agree.23rd over: India 93-2 (Laxman 20, Tendulkar 13) Laxman takes three consecutive fours off Swann, though the second was via an inside edge that was played so late the bat was still almost horizontal as the ball squeezed its way past the stumps and down to fine leg. The first was more authoritative, thrashed through cover, while the third again had leg slip interested as Laxman attempted a back-foot swivel that deflected off the glove.24th over: India 96-2 (Laxman 22, Tendulkar 14) Chance dropped! It was a difficult opportunity off Laxman, who was looking to on-drive Anderson, on in place of Bresnan. He played late at the ball and got a thick edge that seemed to wrong-foot Strauss, who was moving left and then had to plunge right, getting his fingertips to the ball as it burst through and away for a couple. "Does anyone feel like Dravid is Matt Le Tissier, having just been sent off in a last game Southampton relegation dog-fight, watching in the dressing room, having fought all season, on his own... the chumps he was playing with throwing away the last chance to salvage some pride... Feels like that somehow..." I know India have been bad on this tour, Keiran Betteley, but I don't think they've quite descended that far yet. They're not Bangladesh.25th over: India 102-2 (Laxman 22, Tendulkar 20) Tendulkar cuts hard for four and that brings up the hundred for India. There's still some work to do, if they're going to make England bat again, particularly with Gambhir's dodgy noggin to factor in. "TMS have just had a correspondent claim that Hotspot showed a clear nick, from a front-on view, which is what the 3rd umpire saw. Can't argue with that (or can you?)." Well, John Starbuck, that's interesting, as I'm pretty sure the front view of Hot Spot showed no such thing. There was a mark on the bat, but that was visible before it became adjacent with the ball, and it didn't seem to get any more intense afterwards. The Sky commentators seem to be of the same opinion, from that front angle.26th over: India 102-2 (Laxman 22, Tendulkar 20) A maiden from Anderson. Sky have come up with a boiled down Snicko, with as much of the background noise removed as possible, which appears to indicate the thinnest of edges as the ball passed the bat. Of course, it may have been a correct call, and Dravid didn't seem outraged by it but the principle holds that the third umpire should really be overturning decision that are manifestly wrong.27th over: India 107-2 (Laxman 22, Tendulkar 24) Tendulkar swishes three with a back-foot force off Swann, before Laxman is hit on the knee roll, the ball looping up over Little Ian Bell at leg slip. There wasn't any bat involved, though. Later in the over Tendulkar pushes a defensive shot firmly back towards Swann, though the ball doesn't carry all the way. "Surely the most appropriate cricketer/song title mesh is [effing]Hell, It's Fred Titmus by Half Man, Half Biscuit?". Keep up, Jos Roberts. I did that one all the way back in the 61st over.28th over: India 115-2 (Laxman 22, Tendulkar 32) Some eejits behind the bowler's arm again hold up play, while Tendulkar twice takes four off Anderson, though I didn't see how as I was talking to Lutz. Whaddyagonnado? Anyway, Dan Lucas makes a good point: "Interesting take from Amirali on the umpires there (22nd over). Personally I hope the BCCI pisses off and stops thinking it can have umpires removed just because they don't like a decision."29th over: India 118-2 (Laxman 24, Tendulkar 32) It sounds ominously like there might be a Mexican wave rippling around The Oval, signalling The Death of All Sport. Three runs off Swann and India are ticking along quite nicely.WICKET! Laxman 24 b Anderson (30th over: India 118-3) Bowled 'im! Laxman has been done by an almost identical jaffer to the one that did for him at Trent Bridge. In truth the delivery didn't do an awful lot, but it was superbly directed, decapitating the top of off-stump and too quick for the Indian batsman, who played slightly down the Bakerloo there.30th over: India 121-3 (Tendulkar 34, Mishra 1) Mishra is the new man at the crease, as India hedge their bets, sending out a tailender who's actually quite handy as nightwatchman. If England can nip him out as well, they'll be happy as a bloke with a name that almost rhymes but doesn't quite. Like Barry.31st over: India 124-3 (Tendulkar 34, Mishra 4) Swann is into his 13th over of the innings, and his 34th of the day. England are coiled around the visitors, gently squeezing them into submission, like Jake 'The Snake' Roberts with his python. Soon, very soon, India will be able to sleep. Oliver Waters is back with heartbreaking news: "Unfortunately for the women of Scotland, according to the Kinks David Watts is "gay and fancy free". The editors at Scotland on Sunday did not take this vital piece of information into account whilst compiling their bachelor list back in 2006." There'll be four more overs before the close.32nd over: India 124-3 (Tendulkar 34, Mishra 4) Anderson sends down a maiden to Mishra, who's fairly handy with the bat. If he could bowl, he'd be an all-rounder.33rd over: India 124-3 (Tendulkar 34, Mishra 4) England may have missed a trick here - Prior broke the bails after Tendulkar had gone forward to Swann and missed the ball but, even though the batsman shifted his foot off the ground as he tried to make sure he was back, no one appealed. The replays show that Tendulkar's foot was just in the air, even though it was for a fraction of a second, as the wicket was broken. It wasn't quite like this Laxman dismissal in the Caribbean a few weeks ago, but it was just as out.34th over: India 128-3 (Tendulkar 34, Mishra 8) Mishra gets four off Anderson's final ball, despite Pietersen's dive on the boundary. "Why did Dhoni sent in Mishra as a nightwatchman? Shouldn't he have sent in Raina as a nightwatchman to protect Mishra?" Arf and, indeed, arf, Sanjeev Sinha. Right, one last over for the day. Can England get another wicket and put a tin lid on this match?35th over: India 129-3 (Tendulkar 35, Mishra 8) Tendulkar deals comfortably enough with Swann, taking a single off the fourth delivery and that is pretty much that. There might be one or two anxiety dreams for him tonight - having escaped that stumping, there'll be plenty turning up at The Oval tomorrow expecting him to finally reach that landmark 100th hundred. If you can't get a ticket, then you're welcome, as ever, to partake of the OBO's reasonably priced hospitality once again. Thanks for your emails. See you tomorrow, bye!