So India plans to severely limit "tiger tourism" – the economic highwire on which tiger survival and protection teetered for the last 30 years. Anyone who has seen the ugly charade of wild tigers being hemmed in by trained elephants only for hordes of tourists to shoot them with cameras ought to be pleased, shouldn't they? Well, no, not exactly. The decision, unhappily, probably means that the tiger can now be exterminated in peace and quiet – directly by the poachers, and indirectly by the illegal loggers. Both of these destructive criminal groups are being ably defended and emboldened by elements in India's corrupt political classes, its feeble law enforcers and its porcine business community.The tiger, as everyone knows, is in deep trouble. From an estimated 40,000 animals in India a century ago, the number is now down to around 1,400, according to the most recent national tiger census in 2008. Four sub-species are now extinct. In January 2005 the Sariska national park was forced to admit that all of its supposed 35 tigers had been killed after a group of students from the Wildlife Institute of India searched the park and couldn't find any, an exposé that also uncovered how park officials had been falsely exaggerating tiger numbers for years. Some experts argued that numbers might have fallen below the minimum for a viable population, something that would mean certain extinction in the wild.It was never tourists that undermined the tiger protection campaign. When tigers disappeared from Panna and Sariska Parks, it was tourists and local nature-lovers who blew the whistle on park officials who had gerrymandered the tiger statistics, hiding losses to poachers. There is further evidence from eminent tiger scientist and whistleblower, Dr Raghu Chundawat, that increasing tourist numbers have actually helped tiger preservation in Madhya Pradesh, the so-called tiger state, probably by making poaching more difficult. No doubt there is a problem with tourism and tigers right now in India. Rising visitor numbers has led to a rapid growth in wildlife lodges and resorts – development that has come, reputedly, with some nice kickbacks for officials. Most of these new sightseers are solely concerned with tigers, an obsession that has helped distract from the fact that India's wonderful forests are being damaged and many of its 500 species of animal and 1,200 birds are heading, remorselessly, for extinction. On one trip in 2009, I repeatedly ran into a jeep of tourists speeding around desperately looking for a tiger. They had driven straight past a pack of dhole, the Indian wild dog, ironically a species rarer than the tiger.How to avoid the dreadful probability of tiger extinction? One gleam of hope is that some experts, including Julian Matthews of the charity, Tour Operators for Tigers, feel that the way forward is with eco-tourism in well-managed parks - something along the lines already tried in Africa. If handled correctly, increased visitor numbers, the logic goes, could encourage good practice and ward off poachers. So change tourism, but not do away with it. Take away the elephant drives and the endless traffic jams of jeeps filled with chattering city-educated guides who often know less than the average visitor. Start some real tourism: walking and trekking in jungle areas using local guides who can point out the myriad of wonderful plants and animals. Forsyth Lodge at Satpura has made a commendable start on this, but many tour operators are not even aware that such trips are permissible. When I was in Madhya Pradesh in 2009, the then chief wildlife officer, Dr H S Pabla explicitly stated that hiking in India's parks was now legal.The ordinary park workers have a wealth of knowledge about wildlife that is routinely ignored, or simply hidden behind language barriers. Snobbery and arrogance about such communities, many of them tribal, is rampant in India, but the parks have a wealth of talent and right-minded individuals. I've been on safaris where the driver, silent because of low caste, knew a million times more than the "expert" guide, a Mumbai whizz-kid with a degree.That is not to suggest that real expertise and genuine enthusiasm do not appear at all levels of the heirarchy and it is these people, whatever their caste, tribe, or education, who are needed to lead the way out of the mess. Sensitively-managed tourism needs to be encouraged, as do the many young Indian visitors who are now in the vanguard of changing attitudes towards the environment in the country. Cutting them off from any prospect of seeing a tiger will only harm the cause.