The vote of confidence offered by the Indian government signals that George Bush might get regime change in yet another large Asian nation.It was president Bush who, in a typical snub in 2006 to the international system, said that America was prepared to accept India as a nuclear power despite the country exploding a bomb less than a decade ago. The deal was announced on the lawns of colonial Delhi and the series of political earthquakes it set off now threaten to topple the government when the parliament votes on July 22. This is a crucial moment for the world's largest democracy.  The Indian prime minister, in person an elderly, bearded, smiling, policy wonk with degrees from Oxford and Cambridge, has long sung the praises of the deal. He saw Mr Bush's three-day visit as comparable to Richard Nixon's rapprochement with China in 1973. Officials gleefully told this correspondent that the deal ushers India on to the world stage as a major power.But that was then. Two years followed where nothing happened. The left, whose support is crucial for the government's survival, vetoed the deal because it was offered by the toxic Texan and see in it an American plan to reduce India to a client state. By sticking to his guns, Singh has emerged as an unlikely political figure. Offered the job to run the country by the Gandhi family after they won the elections in 2004, he has displayed a strong impulse for change – aware that in his country the atmosphere of action can all too easily become a substitute for action.  Hence the prime minister's gamble to break with the communists. Rather than live any longer with the support of the approximately 60 leftwing MPs, he has decided to go to parliament. If that fails, he will be sent to the people.The Indian prime's message is that the world has changed, and India needs to change too. Delhi wants a seat on the security council, arguing its economic and military weight have been long unrecognised. How the deal's opponents square this demand with the fact at present the country is a nuclear rogue state remains unanswered.It seems obvious, to Mr Singh, too that no longer can India sit in splendid isolation, reinventing nuclear technology just to satisfy the deep-rooted but deluded nationalism of self-sufficiency.  The country has energy needs that in the future cannot be met solely by oil, gas and coal. Climate change too means these fossil fuels are dead. While we are all waiting for solar power to come good, nuclear – with all its problems – remains a good bet for an emerging dynamo like India. These big issues have become lost in the dust thrown up by the political fist fights of the last few days. The vote is on a knife edge – with half a dozen MPs from the extremes of India holding the balance of power. There have been accusations of MPs being offered bribes of £3m to switch sides. As regional parties have held the balance of power for more than a decade, coalition politics is a fact of Indian life. Small players wield disproportionate power. The result is that the leader of India's dalit ("untouchable") caste, Mayawati, whose remarkable political rise from humble schoolteacher to leader of India's biggest state, Uttar Pradesh, could bring down the government – although she only has 17 votes in parliament.Behind these machinations and the nuclear deal itself, lie some big questions. For some, democracy itself has not proven up to the task of modernising India, which for all its economic growth still is home to 300m of the world's poor. Others say what is needed is a period of politics-free leadership, a kind of national unity government. Mr Singh recognises India's real problem: whether a class of people has arisen in society with the capacity and ruthlessness to force through necessary changes. His bet is that this time is approaching fast.  Mr Singh's government has triumphantly promoted India as the "world's largest free-market democracy" despite socialism being written into the country's constitution. The prime minister sees Indians as being creative, confident, inventive and argumentative people with a natural antipathy to ideology – preferring to be pragmatic in their decisions.  The nuclear deal, in his eyes, is about these emphasising these traits. It is a big-bang moment for India. Not because of the deal's technical content but because of what it says about the country.