Christmas. Fraught, innit? If your family is complicated – either in the sense that it just is, because it's a family and nothing's ever simple, or in the multiply divorced, "blended" sense – the urge to opt out of full-on Christmas can be overwhelming. I have a couple of friends who are planning to spend theirs blissfully alone this year, hunkered in a Slanket, with a pile of mince pies and the telly, not because they are friendless orphans but because they've got to the point where they simply can't be doing with any of it. As the Christmas frenzy builds to its usual hysterical pitch, it's not hard to see the appeal of being alone, clad in toasty winceyette and lovingly ogling a chocolate orange. Well, up to a point. Personally, I'd start feeling a bit lonely at about 4pm. Similarly, I can sort of see the appeal of a split Christmas, but it has its limitations.A split Christmas is what all the people who simply can't countenance a "traditional" family Christmas do – they spend the day itself with their partners and children and then go haring off up and down motorways from Boxing Day onwards to go and be dutiful to the rest of their families. This makes a kind of sense – the actual 25th is relatively stress free, aside from the giant doom-cloud cast by the thought of the days to come – but I'd argue that what you gain in sanity you lose over the next few days through a combination of exhaustion, road rage, weather anxiety and bad temper. Worse, it's that very specific, extra-tiring kind of exhaustion you get when you're doing something you don't particularly want to do, and, in some cases, not even being thanked for it (someone I know has a mother-in-law who has never, not once, thanked her for a present with any tiny measure of enthusiasm – not in 15 years). Plus, there's a limit to how many Christmas dinners one can eat/paper crowns one can wear/forced rictuses of "jolliness" one can convincingly contort one's face into.Also, Boxing Day is for lying beached on the sofa, not for being stuck in a snowdrift halfway to Yorkshire with fractious children in the back and a faulty satnav. You might think that the solution to all of this is to run away – abroad, specifically. The appeal of abroad becomes overwhelming at this time of year: I can't be the only person to have fallen into a lovely daydream in the middle of vile Oxford Street in early December, hemmed in by bad-tempered shoppers and felled by a rising sense of panic about the elusive perfect present for X or Y, that involves heat, empty beaches, a fish on a banana leaf for Christmas lunch, communion with nature and a big fat no to excess and expense. One year I looked into renting houses in Byron Bay, Australia, until it occurred to me that the expense of getting everybody out there was practically akin to giving everyone Fabergé eggs in their stockings.Except that escape is overrated: there's no homesickness like Christmas homesickness. I've come to the conclusion that the only thing to do is to embrace tradition. Even if you don't have much truck with tradition, the other 364 days of the year, even if your family set-up is anything other than traditional, even if the very word "tradition" brings you out in hives and makes you think nebulous dark thoughts about dodgy political parties and "Britishness". Tradition works at Christmas and works best of all if your family isn't of the 2.4 variety. Tradition decrees that you get all your family – blood and extended, former and future, nice and tiresome, old and young – stick them in a room and celebrate the day. And, miraculously, it works.Trust me: I'm a veteran of this approach. This is my usual Christmas guest list: me, my three children, my mother, my sisters, my sisters' partners and children, the father of my sons, the father of my daughter, my two former mothers-in-law, one mother-in-law's new husband, my sister-formerly-in-law, friends who started coming for Christmas and are now part of the fixtures, and a small number of strays or randoms, plus relatives who live abroad but have decided to appear. That's for lunch itself. Prior to lunch, we have various people coming in and out for drinks. I don't know that my version of traditional is necessarily what the Daily Mail has in mind, but I don't see why nuclear families should have a monopoly.Sometimes, it's just easier to give in. I don't mean give in, as in, let's spend an insane amount of money and make our hair fall out with stress when the credit card bills come in January – though, even there, tradition is on your side. Tradition doesn't say, hey – why not spend money as though you'd just won the lottery? No. Tradition says make some fudge, knit someone a scarf, buy really cheap wine and mull it. Equally pleasingly, tradition doesn't say do all the donkey work yourself because you are a woman. It says it in many other contexts, admittedly, but when it comes to Christmas, it actively encourages family participation. And family participation engenders good feeling because it makes people feel part of things, rather than like semi-unwanted guests. My own embrace of tradition relies heavily on participation: it may sound absurd, but getting people to help peel the vegetables on Christmas Eve makes them feel useful and wanted. Especially if you chuck in a vatful of mulled wine.I have a bee in my bonnet about all of this stuff. I love Christmas with a passion. To be honest, I've always liked it well enough but I only started really loving it when I put myself in charge. I am the boss of Christmas and, without wanting to toot my own trumpet too loudly, I've got it down to a fine art. What you think about Christmas is subjective, obviously, but to me it boils down to two things – family and memories. Even people who claim not to care about Christmas, or to actively hate it, can remember precisely where they were for it; equally, a really fantastic Christmas (usually a childhood one that takes on mythical qualities in retrospect) sticks in your head for all eternity.The family/memory thing converges neatly if you have children and is, I think, particularly important if you're no longer with those children's father or mother. There was a Christmas a few years ago, shortly after I'd separated from the father of my daughter, where I became almost deranged with the desire to make the whole day extra-fantastic, purely because the alternative was so tragic – weepy mother, long silences, awkward pauses, the sense for the children that things are not as they were. This is yet another instance of tradition coming to the rescue: if you embrace the traditional Christmas, things are always as they were, even if the cast expands every few years. The tree is where the tree always was; the ancient baubles come down from the attic, as they do every year; the fairy someone made in year one sits on top of the tree, as it always did; the day's familiar rhythms are as soothing as a warm blanket.But it's more than that: your family wake up in their own beds, with their stockings lying in wait – I don't know how to explain it without sounding grotesquely sentimental, but these things matter. You could be in the smartest hotel in the world, or in a heavenly rented cottage somewhere idyllic but you would never be able to recreate those rhythms.They rely too heavily on tradition, on the fact that Father Christmas needs to watch the creaky step when going about his business, on the smell of the house, on the feel of the slightly shabby sofa you have at home, on the lovely familiarity of the day. I don't think any of this applies exclusively to children, the idea that things change and families evolve but Christmas stays the same – I am 44, and it absolutely applies to me, too; I'd like to think it applied to the rest of my grown-up relatives too. Put bluntly, Christmas reminds everyone of childhood, and what this means is that even the Grinchiest people have a secret longing for it to be wonderful.If you're wily enough to build on that feeling, it can override all others – personal antipathies, difficult divorces, Auntie Ethel quietly (or not) losing her marbles in the corner, your new stepdad not being all that. It's partly to do with safety in numbers – at the very least, chucking in a brace of assorted relatives varies the mood. But mostly it's because all adults are capable of being lovely – of setting differences aside and declaring an emotional armistice, for one tiny little day a year: all you have to do is ask them along happily and in good faith. One tiny little day that makes a huge difference.I remember December 1978. My parents had split up when I was two; I loved (and continue to love) my stepfather; I was 13. For some reason I can't remember, my dad and his wife, who lived in Brussels at the time, appeared for Christmas morning. It sounds mad, but I hadn't seen my mother and father in a benign domestic context – lounging around on sofas with glasses of wine, laughing their heads off over something or other – in my entire life. The moment passed, and the day moved on and was as lovely as ever, but I've never forgotten that particular vignette. So don't think that family Christmases aren't for you because your family isn't straightforward. Don't run away abroad, or bah-humbug yourself under the duvet. Embrace the chaos. It's only once a year, and you never know – you might even find it's habit-forming.Comfort and Joy by India Knight is published by Fig Tree, £14.99. To order a copy for £11.99 with free UK p&p, go to theguardian.com/bookshop or call 0330 333 6846