 8.11am BST Welcome to Middle East Live.As developments in the Syria crisis are now unfolding at a less frenetic pace, we have paused our live coverage and switched to a readers' edition format.The blog is now primarily a forum for readers to share links and offer commentary on developments in the Middle East and north Africa. Please post your comments below.Here's a roundup of the latest developments:• President Hassan Rouhani says he wants to reach a deal on Iran's nuclear programme in the next three to six months. In an interview with the Washington Post he said:On the issue of the nuclear file, we need resolution in a reasonable time … The shorter it is the more beneficial it is to everyone. If it’s three months that would be Iran’s choice, if it’s six months that’s still good. It’s a question of months not years.• The US secretary of state, John Kerry, will meet his Iranian counterpart , Mohammad Javad Zarif, on Thursday for the most substantial exchange between Iranian and US top officials since the Islamic revolution of 1979. But don't expect a dramatic breakthrough, warns Julian Borger:The 'deliverable' at the end of the afternoon will be agreement on when to hold the next meeting, expected to be a nuts-and-bolts session in Geneva in October, and what precise form it will take. Only in Switzerland is it likely to become evident whether Rouhani's election has brought the sides any closer together. This may be less like Hollywood and more like Iranian cinema, where the true meaning only emerges slowly and is subject to multiple interpretations.• The Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, has not discounted the possibility of a US military attack even though threatened action was forestalled when he agreed to give up chemical weapons. In an interview broadcast by Venezuela's state-run Telesur network, Assad also said his government had confessions from rebels that they brought chemical weapons into Syria.• The United States, Russia, France, China and Britain have agreed on the core of a UN security council resolution to rid Syria of its chemical weapons, according to western diplomats, but Russia said it might be another two days before all points would be agreed. A draft resolution could be presented to the full 15-nation council soon, and the five permanent members would meet on Friday to discuss a proposed Syria peace conference in Geneva, they said.• Syria's main opposition group has warned of a dangerous schism in rebel ranks after an Islamist alliance rejected its leadership. The Syrian National Coalition said the alliance was unrepresentative and that the announcement was poorly timed, according to a translation by the Institute for the Study of War.• Dozens of Nepalese migrant labourers have died in Qatar in recent weeks and thousands more are enduring slave-like conditions, a Guardian investigation has found, raising serious questions about Qatar's preparations to host the 2022 World Cup. This summer, Nepalese workers died at a rate of almost one a day in Qatar, many of them young men who had sudden heart attacks.• Egypt may eventually face its third revolution since 2011 if the country's new government does not meet the demands of its frustrated labour movement, a leading trade unionist has warned. The leader of the Egyptian federation of independent trade unions has denounced a proposed minimum wage as too little, too late.Updated at 9.50am BST