Once a regime loses the combination of legitimacy, popular support, and ability to maintain order without excessive use of force which all successful states display, it is enormously difficult to regain it. That was the lesson the Shah learned 30 years ago as his power melted away. He tried concessions; he tried explanations; he tried violence, although never in a wholehearted way; he tried sacrificing his aides and his friends. Nothing worked. Soon, he was history, and soon after that he was dead, and it was as if his government had never been. The crisis of the Islamic Republic of Iran today is not of this order, and yet, if at the end of a longer road than the one which the Shah travelled down so rapidly, the same fate may ultimately beckon for the clerical elite who preside over its affairs. They have always claimed that the political life of Iran was subject to a significant measure of consent, a claim which has not been altogether without foundation. More important, most Iranians have been ready to believe in that claim at least some of the time. Periods of disillusion have been followed by fresh attempts to get the regime to respond to popular demands. If Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader, had wished to show that the state could be responsive, he would have avoided the harsh language he used yesterday at the Friday prayer meeting at Tehran university. He would have said, or at least hinted, that the election results could be reconsidered. He would not have threatened demonstrators. He would not have attacked foreign powers. He would, in short, have faced up to the fact that his problem is that huge numbers of Iranians will not accept his mere assertion that the results were genuine. If he ever had that kind of authority, he does not have it now. They deem him to be a liar.He is not the only member of the regime whose authority is damaged. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad sat in the front row on Friday like a teacher who cannot control his class undergoing the indignity of the headmaster having to emerge from his sanctum to back him up. Whatever else he is, Ahmadinejad is not the president of all Iranians which Khamenei proclaimed him to be last Saturday. He is a compromised and weakened man. But the status of Ahmadinejad and Khamenei in a way matters less than that of Mir Hossein Mousavi. He and his backers now face a test of nerve and purpose. Will they give in to Khamenei's argument that all the presidential contenders are "part of the state," with its implication that they must now retreat from confrontation? Or will Mousavi, in particular, persist in his demand that the election be annulled, refuse to be cowed or co-opted, and refuse to ask his supporters to cease protesting ? No doubt, if he takes the easier course, there would as a reward be some redressing afterwards of the balance between factions inside the regime. But those who voted for Mousavi did not do so to achieve a mere shifting of the furniture of that kind. They wanted deeper changes.So the curious position is that, if Khamenei persuades Mousavi to submit, the Supreme Leader will have undermined the authority of the regime even more seriously than is already the case. It would then become apparent beyond doubt that the supposedly democratic levers are unconnected to the machinery of power, and that even a man as identified with the Islamic revolution as Mousavi cannot be permitted to function as a popular leader. Once before the regime forced a reformist into retreat, when Mohammad Khatami, who had achieved office but not power, saw his policies in almost every area blocked by entrenched conservative forces. Now it is happening again. Iranians do not want another revolution. They wanted the Islamic republic to respond and evolve. But there is a limit to the number of times you can go to a well which always turns out to be dry.