Iran has said it could accept limits on its nuclear programme, freezing its current capacity for up to seven years on condition it would then be free to operate without any special restrictions.The offer was made by the Iranian foreign minister, Muhammad Javad Zarif, in an interview with the New York Times six days before a deadline for the completion of talks in Vienna. It still leaves a gap between the two sides' negotiating positions: western states want Iran's uranium enrichment capacity reduced, and then frozen in place for at least 10 years, and they have a long list of conditions Iran would have to fulfil over the long term before they would allow it to function as any other state with a civilian nuclear energy programme.However the Zarif offer, if confirmed, suggests there is enough flexibility on the Iranian side at least to gain extra time for the talks beyond the 20 July deadline, which the negotiating states imposed on themselves. "I'm not here to present maximalist positions," Zarif said. "We're here to reach an agreement."Zarif met the US secretary of state, John Kerry, on Tuesday morning for a new session of talks, which Zarif described as hard but productive. "We had a good exchange of views," Zarif said, according to Iran's official news agency, IRNA.In the interview, he also said a heavy-water reactor approaching completion near the town of Arak had been sabotaged, with components being altered in the cooling system that would raise the temperature of the reactor rather than lowering it. Zarif said it would have caused "an environmental catastrophe" if it had not been spotted. He said a "foreign power" was responsible, but did not say which one.Iran has 19,000 centrifuges in two enrichment plans, of which about 9,000 are in operation. The six sides involved in the Vienna negotiations – the US, UK, France, Germany, Russia and China – want that number reduced so that it would take Iran longer, if it took the decision to build a weapon, to expel international inspectors, and make a dash to make a bomb.The west wants this theoretical breakout time to be over six months and preferably a year. Zarif said other conditions could be inserted into a deal that would give extra assurances to the international community that Iran could not make a nuclear weapon quickly.All the low-enriched uranium produced by the centrifuges would be turned into oxide, suitable for reactor fuel, and Iran would not build the facility necessary to turn that oxide back into gas, the state it needs to be in to be enriched further, to weapons-grade uranium.What is not clear is what conditions Iran would fulfil in order to be treated like other countries that have a nuclear energy programme, free of sanctions and special restrictions. One of them will be a seal of approval from the International Atomic Energy Agency that Iran has answered all the questions its inspectors have about evidence of development work on weaponisation work in the past.There would also be pressure on Tehran to carry out uranium enrichment as part of a regional consortium, to prevent a proliferation of enrichment technology across the Middle East.When asked by the NYT for a response to Zarif's offer, a senior US official said: "We have consistently said we wouldn't negotiate in public, and we're not going to start doing so now."Some of the things described in this interview they have put forward in negotiations. Some have not come up. And on some, they've shown more flexibility behind closed doors."