Another interesting thing that I just noticed, lifting my head out of Tucson, is that a new consensus has developed in Washington that Iran's nuclear capacity has been dealt significant setbacks recently. Here's foreign policy blogger David Rothkopf:My sense was also that international diplomatic and economic pressure would simply not be enough to really impede their program -- especially if the threat of the use of force to punish them if they did not back down was not credible. And the message from the administration was not tough enough on that last point. However, when last week, the departing boss of Israel's intelligence service, Meir Dagan, stated that in his view the Iranian program had in fact been set back to the point that it would not be able to develop nuclear weapons until 2015 at the earliest, it suggested that whatever was being done was working. No one, for obvious reasons, takes the Iranian threat more seriously than the Israelis (although WikiLeaks confirmed for all how worried the Iranians make all their neighbors). If they who had been saying two years ago that the Iranian threat would reach a critical level within a matter of a year or so were now saying it has been pushed out several years, it was more than just an interesting sound bite.I guess this Stuxnet virus played a big role too. I don't really understand these things very well. If any of you do, please edify us.I haven't written much about Hillary lately, but I hope she stays in this job for a while. She's the slow consensus-builder type. I can well imagine that for three or four years it'll look like she's done nothing, and then boom, we'll start seeing results. We're obviously seeing them now, if we bother to look.Of course, she doesn't talk about blasting them back to the stone age enough for some folks. Those people did a lovely job with regard to Iran while they had power. I would even go so far as to say that they are the main reason Iran wanted the bomb in the first place, but there would be no hard evidence for that claim, so how dare I!