Where does Iran sit in the G20? Nowhere. Although the country is not among the biggest economies, our population is now more than 72 million and our GDP in the 2008-2009 financial year reached $270bn. (Some estimates put it as high as $300bn.)Iran's geopolitical influence on the world economy is even greater. The nuclear issue, and the altercations between Iran and the US in recent years, show that Iran punches well above its official share of 1% ($200bn) of the world's economic output. It would have been worth including Iran – even if the G20 had to become the G21 – for the sake of bringing the country into the international fold.Iran's economy has been growing quickly, but it has been hit twice as hard as most countries by this crisis. First of all, Iran's oil price has fallen from $128 per barrel in July 2008 to $40 per barrel in recent months. Subsequently, the national income from oil exports dropped from $300m to $100m. Domestic output is expected to be $60bn lower than in 2007. It's very unusual for a country to experience a fall in GDP of as much as 15%-20%, even amid the current turmoil. Nor is the crisis the only problem Iran is facing. Sanctions against us are harming the country's economy and society. The G20 ought to realise that sanctions hurt ordinary Iranians far more than they impede the government. They are unlikely to curb religious fundamentalism and radicalism. Iranian radicals, like their counterparts elsewhere, like to be isolated and the economic crisis assists them in recruiting supporters.Sanctions encourage government corruption. By relaxing them, the rest of the G20 would encourage the US to follow suit and open up the possibility of real engagement between the two countries. Despite what Mahmoud Ahmadinejad likes to pretend, the economic crisis has made Iran more vulnerable by reducing its oil revenues.If the crisis drags on, Iran will face a huge fall in national income. Had we been invited to the G20, Iran's presence could have helped other countries to find a solution. It might have been an opportunity for Iran to rejoin the international community and enjoy a much more influential and constructive role in the world.• In association with the Global Policy Institute and the London Office of the Friedrich Ebert Foundation, Comment is Free and Germany's Zeit-Online are running a series of commentaries from countries not invited to the G20 summit. Look out for further views in the next week.