A quick burst of 6 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology teamThe attempt to grab the domains is part of a court case begun by the families of four Americans injured in a suicide bombing in Jerusalem in 1997 for which Hamas claimed responsibility.This is… odd.This is “procurement activism,” says Weiss, pointing to the fact that such iconic American companies as IBM, Boeing and Texas Instruments had defense industry bodies as their first big customers. Defense and intelligence dollars, Weiss details, fertilized the creation of everything from the Internet to Silicon Valley to the U.S. semi-conductor industry.War! What is it good for? Funding a military-industrial complex of the size and complexity needed to boot-strap a technology industry that can dominate the world.This morning, The New York Post’s Page Six reported that the Union Street Grand House in Hudson, New York, had a policy on its website that said they fine wedding guests $500 if they leave negative reviews about the hotel online. The story spread like wildfire, and lots of people went to Yelp to leave angry one-star comments about the way the USGH runs its business.Not entirely clear whether this is a reverse ferret or a genuine excuse, but either way, it’s stupid as hell.There’s more art on the Internet than in every gallery and museum on Earth. But many of these beautiful objects are trapped. They’re trapped inside of devices like our phones, our tablets, our TVs, our laptops devices designed for distraction, living between texts, tweets, football games and emails from work. So we wanted to make a new way to bring art from the Internet into your home.Can Electric Objects revive the “digital picture frame”?Six minutes later, there’s a car in my driveway. I flail to find some flip-flops and go downstairs to greet the driver, who pulls my order from an insulated bag and cooler in his passenger seat. It’s not like he has a whole pantry in there; I picked two of the four items on the SpoonRocket menu that day.Instant food is rather appealing.Both men said they had received the content from an unknown source, and had been unable to watch it all due to feeling “sickened”. The videos and image were later recovered by police after they stopped the defendants, both from Essex, in London in January on an unrelated matter.A criminal record for being sent, and then attempting to delete, obscene texts doesn’t seem the best outcome.You can follow Guardian Technology’s linkbucket on Pinboard. To suggest a link, either add it below or tag it with @gdntech on the free Delicious service.