Ayatollah Khamenei, the man who tolerates Ahmadinejad as a useful counterweight to reformists, this week gave permission for him to declare "nuclear day", a sharp contrast to the traditional Zoroastrian national "nature day" a week ago.This nuclear day was unnerving for the Iranian political classes. Ahmadinejad's speech extolling the virtues of atomic energy interrupted General Petraeus and Ryan Crocker doing everything they could to throw the book at the Islamic Republic.While the big international TV networks focused on Petraeus and how he thought things were getting better, the concern here in Iran was that both the general and the diplomat said the US would stay in Iraq long after the UN mandate expires. That and something called "AQI" which we didn't immediately understand before a presenter explained that it stood for al-Qaida in Iraq. Given that the US has paid off the Sunni insurgency to become the spooky "Awakening Council", it's not easy to see who now comprises AQI.The other concern was the blame game. It is routine here to talk about the largest emigration in human history and 1.2 million dead thanks to the US invasion so it takes some effort to understand why the twosome blame everyone but themselves. They blamed Arab governments. They blamed Syria and Hizbullah (one of Petraeus' crazy charts showed Syrian involvement with al-Qaida which is a new one on me. Someone had better tell Bashar al-Assad that he is now friends with Osama); they blamed Lebanon and they blamed Iran. They even seemed to blame Nouri al-Maliki, the prime minister, for not informing the Americans that he was going to Basra to try and clean up the elected Sadr movement there.Ahmadinejad and Maliki are old friends and perhaps the White House has only just realised. I can usually get through to the Sadr brigades' people through an intermediary. But not after the first couple of hours of testimony on Capitol Hill. One of Moqtada al-Sadr's most senior people just hung up his Baghdad mobile phone and I don't think it was because of all the killing that was going on as Petraeus was showing off powerpoint graphs like a detergent salesman.Sadr wanted to check things out, to see whether the political landscape had changed. Salah al-Obeidi, one of the public faces of the Sadrists, told me they were already in talks with the Badr brigades - so often portrayed in the media as their enemies. Lots of political comment in the cleverer western papers make no sense here. Even the trumpeted exclusives bandied about by news agencies reporting that Sadr offered to disband his militia if top Shia clerics agreed was a very old story.It's not surprising then that presidential hopeful John McCain yet again confused al-Qaida with Shia Islamists, even after his recent gaffe. But I suppose Iranian journalists in Belfast never reported on trysts between the UVF and the IRA.But was McCain making a gaffe? Or does he know about plans for Israeli or American strikes on Tehran? Perhaps, the real story of the testimony was the coining of yet another Bush administration euphemism. As if British and American journalists talking about "waterboarding" (interrupted downing), "rendition" (kidnapping), "surge" (escalation), "contractor" (mercenary) and "interrogation technique" (torture) were not enough, we now have "hydrocarbon legislation."The context of the phrase was Ambassador Crocker telling the Iraqi parliament to get a move on and pass some over. In Iran, one of the richest oil superpowers in the world, we all know that means an oil-stealing law and that US multinationals that are the selfsame donors to many congressmen want to get their hands on Iraqi and US taxpayers money.The war is a massive US taxpayer subsidy for mercenary firms like Blackwater which this week had its contract renewed by Crocker. But the big money - the trillions Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz busies himself estimating - is merely a subsidy for the oil multinationals. And their patience is being tested. No wonder Petraeus wants to talk with Crocker for 45 days and devise a "strategy." It's a bit late for that.