 4.05pm BST There's a break for ten minutes and the eight candidates are due to come back for the second part of the debate. We are going to wrap up the live blog now. Here are the key points from today's debate. • The contest seems to be shaping up into a race between Hassan Rouhani and Mohammad-Reza Aref on the pro-reform side and Saeed Jalil and Mohammad-Bagher Ghalibaf on the other, representing the conservatives close to the supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. • Aref seems to be positioning himself as the most outspoken candidate regarding state repression against students and academics as well as online censorship and restrictions on media. • Jalili came across as the most hardline figure willing to keep restrictions on media in place and unapologetic about the state's crackdown on students and intellectuals. • The candidates will meet again on Friday for their final live TV debate. The election is on 14 June. 3.53pm BST "Mismanagement is worse than poverty," says Tehran's mayor Ghalibaf in the final part of his speech. "We have been harmed more by the lack of trust [towards the government] than our poverty."RT @AJELive: #Qalibaf: Apathy is what harms us more than inflation in #Iran...lack of trust in government keeps people out of marketsUpdated at 3.54pm BST 3.46pm BST The candidates are wrapping up by using their remaining allocated time. Rezaee, who is running as an independent candidate, speaks against politicising culture and art:With political Islam, you can't manage culture and art ... We should put away our political glasses and instead put on the glasses of social Islam.In his statement, Rezaee also criticised the authorities for their lack of interest in ethnic minorities, such as the country's Azeri and Lor population:I will take away the management of art and culture from the state and put it in the hands of their owners ... I will stop the intervention of politicians in the country's sport management.#Rezai: We can fire rockets from here to there, but we get caught up in [regulating price of] chicken #Iran #Iran2013#Rezai: Where is the cooperation, where is the brotherhood, where is the humanity?...all [parties] need to get along #Iran #Iran2013Rezaie: I'll put artists/cultural figures in charge of culture, and athletes in charge of sports. #IranElection presidential debateRezaie doesn't like Tehran's architecture, it breeds violence, he says.Updated at 3.47pm BST 3.19pm BST Aref is the first candidate to address the issue of drug addiction in Iran, saying he is not allowed to give figures for "security" reasons but feels it is a widespread problem in Iranian society.Aref also criticises state repression at universities again and says academics are often questioned by security officials when invited to foreign conferences.Aref: We shouldn't have a governmental outlook on culture. We must improve our products, cant block foreign products #IranElection #مناظرهAref criticizes repression at Universities, student activists, professors. #iranelection #مناظرهA good point: #Aref said when the gov has censored the internet, users can bypass it by circumvention tools. #IranElectionAref is criticizing censorship again saying we filter the net they use anti-filtering #Iran #IranelectionUpdated at 3.27pm BST 2.55pm BST Aref says he doesn't think internet filtering or making satellite dishes illegal would be the best solution to western cultural invasion: "Exclusion is not the answer," he says. "Encouraging the youth to watch our own TV channels by producing high quality programmes is the answer."#Aref: The government's role shouldn't be to govern/limit culture, but to protect it #Iran #Iran2013#Jalili need better verbal skills re his appearance on TV; a must-have for one who is in negotiations. #Iran'ian users say: "poor Ashton..."Gharazi to Jalili: who has influenced who? have we influenced the west, or has it influenced us?Funny Jalili has used this word “capacity “for 100 times in his speech!!! But we couldn't understand his purpose #iran #debate#Jalili: "Our enemies has launched 100 TV channels against the Islamic Revolution." The God knows the source. #IranelectionUpdated at 3.05pm BST 2.46pm BST Asking a question from the speaker, Rouhani implies that Jalili is narrow-minded, saying restrictions in Iranian universities have led to a large amount of emigration abroad from the country's elites.#Rouahni: What's behind the brain drain? We've created a one-way street, driving our academic minds away, a loss of investment for #Iran#Rouhani: Some people have such a tight inner circle that they condemn anyone who thinks differently...we need to open the space #IranUpdated at 3.04pm BST 2.41pm BST There is widespread speculation that Jalili is the supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei's favourite candidate among the eight men. During a speech to mark the anniversary of the death of Khomeini on Tuesday, Khamenei said he had no favourite.“The foreign media will soon begin to say that Khamenei prefers one of the candidates. This is wrong. I have no favorite candidate,” he said on Tuesday.Here are some tweets about Jalili's speech:#Jalili says In United states they created 3 films against IRAN. #iranelection@DrSaeedJalili :Even in our nuclear program it is our culture and our demand for independence that allowed us to win #Iranelection #Iran2013Iran's Jalili thinks "Argo", "Lincoln" in service of government agenda.#Jalili: in the world of today art is serving political goals I refer to #Argo as an example. #IranelectionUpdated at 2.42pm BST 2.37pm BST Saeed Jalili is the final speaker. He has four minutes. He is praising the founder of the Islamic revolution, Ayatollah Rouhollah Khomeini, for the cultural achievements in Iran."If we use this [cultural] capacity efficiently, we will have bigger force in other areas," he says.Jalili also speaks against the film Argo, saying it shows how the enemy wants to influence Iranian society.Updated at 2.41pm BST 2.27pm BST Some tweets on Haddad-Adel's speech:#Haddadadel: And even before Islam #Iranians worshiped God...I want the young to be proud of their identity, culture & faith #Iran #Iran2013#Haddedadel: Culture is like the spirit int he body & any society's identity is linked to its culture #Iran #Iran2013Haddad Adel: In my gov't, i let young generation learn about their cultural identity & be proud of in the world. #iranelection #Iran2013Haddad-Adel: "we need an independent culture, Islamic cuture, culture is like water... bla bla bla"... thank you. #iranelectiondebate#iranelectiondebate: Haddal-Adel has 4 minutes to address culture policies, he spent 1:30 min saluting Imams & thinkers. No concrete plan...Haddad Adel:I dont mean to reject other cultures or degrade them.but wn we kw our identity,we can take/give #culture. #Iranelection 2.24pm BST Former parliamentary speaker Gholam-Ali Haddad-Adel is the next speaker. He says "Islamic culture" should be considered as the foundation of the country's society and calls for cultural "independence", saying Iran should be independent from outside influences in its cultural needs."We will be able to combat the western cultural invasion only when we fully understand our own culture first," he says.Updated at 2.26pm BST 2.19pm BST In his comments on Gharazi's speech, Rouhani uses the time to criticise the authorities for their treatment of students and academics, saying a number of university professors have been fired in the past decade and draconian restrictions have been imposed on students.Updated at 2.21pm BST 2.13pm BST The sixth speaker is Mohammad Gharazi.#Gharazi: So thinking that culture can be altered or ruled by government is untrue...people force the state to recognize their culture #Iran#Culture has impact on the policy or #policies on culture? #Gharazi #IranElectionUpdated at 2.21pm BST 2.00pm BST Some tweets about Ghalibaf's speech:Seriously I had trouble to understand #Ghalibaf statement about cultural affairs! #presidentalelection #Iran election #liveDebate#Qalibaf: Every country values its Independence...the country must produce income, culture...what matters is protection of humanity #IranGhalibaf: we should have a social & cultural approach in everything. We've not given the right to culture. #Iranelection #Iran2013 1.54pm BST Tehran's mayor Mohammad-Bagher Ghalibaf is the next speaker. (Here is Tehran Bureau's blog on why his popularity may harm his chances in the election.)Ghalibaf: we should have a social & cultural approach in everything. We've not given the right to culture. #Iranelection #Iran2013Updated at 1.59pm BST 1.48pm BST In his comments on Velayati's speech, Aref once again criticises the government for its huge censorship campaign, speaking out against internet filtering and the government's crackdown on illegal satellite dishes on rooftops.Aref is also talking about Iran's maestro singer Shajarian, criticising the IRIB for not broadcasting his songs.Some tweets on Velayati's speech:Hadad refused to criticize Velayati who is a conservative as well as himself. #IranelectionJalili: Our cultural discussion is too narrow. we have much more to be proud of. #Iranelection #Iran2013#Rouhani: We should not be dismissive about the global culture.#IranelectionUpdated at 1.50pm BST 1.43pm BST "We can't be indifferent to the world's cultural developments," Rouhani says, commenting on Velayati's speech.Gharazi is asking Rouhani if western "cultural invasion" has affected Iranian culture.Rouhani: we focus on forgivable violations on the street at the expense of real corruptionUpdated at 1.45pm BST 1.38pm BST In his official campaign video broadcast earlier in the week on the IRIB, Velayati shed tears. You can watch it here:#Iran presidential candidate Ali Akbar Velayati cries in his official campaign video #Iranelection http://t.co/kzDxH6zxOcUpdated at 2.02pm BST 1.37pm BST Aref's time to respond is now up. In the second part of his speech, Aref criticised the state-run TV broadcasting this debate for its censorship policies, saying the extent of censorship has led to many people instead following satellite channels through illegal satellite dishes.#Aref: We prevent a movie, for some minor thing, from being screened, and our youth go watch foreign films instead #Iran #Iran2013Ali Akbar Velayati, the former foreign minister, is next on the podium.Updated at 1.59pm BST 1.34pm BST The Young Journalists' Club, which is affiliated to the state's Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB) network, is also live-tweeting the debate in English:#Jalili to #Aref: Culture is not a right only,but an opportunity. should keep it pure we cant let anything mixed w/. #iranelection #Iran2013Updated at 1.36pm BST 1.30pm BST "Our art is our best ambassador in the world," says Rouhani, commenting on Aref's speech.Rouhani also praises Mohammad-Reza Shajarian, Iran's most prominent traditional singer, who has voiced opposition to the government and sided with the opposition Green movement.Updated at 1.40pm BST 1.26pm BST Gholam-Ali Haddad-Adel is defending the state's control over cultural and artistic products, asking Hassan Rouhani what he thinks the government's responsibility is regarding cultural issues.Here is another tweet on same issue:Rouhani: instead of controling the corruption,we r engaged in unimportant issues which can b resolved by cultural plan not police.Updated at 1.28pm BST 1.24pm BST Iran's semi-official Mehr news agency is also live-tweeting the debate. Here are a couple of tweets from them:#Aref again criticizes current govt. for closing House of Cinema. #Iranelection#Aref Artistic activities are not a privilege that a govt can abolish. #IranelectionUpdated at 1.27pm BST 1.23pm BST Aref is critcising the government for closing down newspapers, censoring books and sometime refusing to give permission for the release of certain films. Another tweet from Al Jazeera English on Aref's speech:#Aref: We can't treat our artists and cultural experts as government employees...preventing books and movies from coming out is wrong #IranUpdated at 1.23pm BST 1.19pm BST Mohammad-Reza Aref is the third speaker. Like the other two candidates, he has four minutes to speak about his cultural policies.At the beginning of his speech, Aref congratulates Iran's football team for beating Qatar on Tuesday and expresses condolences for the death of Ayatollah Taheri, a prominent opposition cleric and former Friday prayer leader of Isfahan who died at the weekend.Updated at 2.00pm BST 1.17pm BST Rouhani is now responding to questions and criticism and once again speaking against official censorship, especially the vetting process required before the publication of books.#Rouhani: Are our cultural/religious beliefs to be protected only by a guy working in an office, or can people do that themselves #IranUpdated at 1.19pm BST 1.15pm BST  1.13pm BST Velayati says Rouhani has not provided any solutions to the country's cultural problems and has only outlined them.Haddad-Adel says he is not defending censorship but asks Rouhani if his government would give permission to a book that insulted the country's religious values.Here is a tweet on the debate:RT @iShahrzad Haddad to Rouhani: except those who are in your party, there is no other moral person? is culture in mosques controled by gov?Updated at 1.39pm BST 1.09pm BST Former vice-president Mohammad-Reza Aref is now commenting on Rouhani's four-minute speech, saying the government wants to act as "the protector" of culture and therefore arbitrarily cracks down on various areas such as press freedom.Updated at 1.10pm BST 1.01pm BST Hassan Rouhani, the pro-reform candidate, is the second speaker. He has four minutes to outline his cultural policies."Our revolution [in 1979] was a cultural revolution and after 35 years today we have not achieved [our cultural goals]," he says.This is what Rouhani's campaign has just tweeted:End result of #insecurity in #cultural field is lack of new ideas and no way to turn art into cultural product presentable to #society..Updated at 2.00pm BST 12.56pm BST "It seems that our candidates are spending more time in Tehran than provincial cities," responds Rezaee to criticism from other candidates that he is speaking about economy rather than focusing on the debate's topic, culture.Updated at 1.04pm BST 12.54pm BST Mohammad-Bagher Ghalibaf is speaking now. He says he had the impression from Rezaee's short speech that the economy is more of a priority for him than cultural issues.Ghalibaf is implying that for him cultural issues will be more of a priority. Rezaee now has three minutes to answer the questions.Updated at 1.06pm BST 12.52pm BST Rouhani is now criticising government censorship regarding culture, saying "censorship kills creativity".Rouhani's official campaign is also live-tweeting the debate. Here's a tweet from them:Format of #debate changed after outrage by #Rouhani, #Aref & #Rezaei on live TV last time -- multiple choice questions etc eliminatedUpdated at 1.03pm BST 12.48pm BST Haddad-Adel criticises Rezaee, saying he has spoken about the economy rather than culture. He says: "Our financial problems are only limited to the previous year; we didn't have cultural problems previous to that?"In Haddad-Adel's view Iran's financial hardship also stems from its cultural issues.Updated at 12.52pm BST 12.46pm BST Here is a tweet from Tehran Bureau about Rezaee's statement on culture: Rezaie says Islamic Republic in danger, art and culture sphere should be left to them. 12.42pm BST Instead of focusing on cultural affairs, Rezaee is citing the Prophet Mohammad, saying poverty will lead to heresy.He adds that poverty in the country has affected the country's cultural activities.Time is up for Rezaee; now the candidates have to ask him questions about what he has just said.Updated at 12.43pm BST 12.37pm BST Today's debate has now begun.It is being broadcast by channel one of the state's Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB) network.The focus will be on cultural issues. Seating for the candidates was chosen after a draw. Following the chaos of Friday's debate, the IRIB has announced it has changed its format and deleted the sections asking multiple-choice questions or showing the candidates pictures.Mohsen Rezaee is the first candidate to outline his cultural policies. He has four minutes ...Updated at 2.00pm BST 12.03pm BST Here are mini-profiles of the eight candidates taking part in today's TV debate:Rouhani, 65, is the only cleric among the eight candidates, but is seen as a pro-reform moderate figure expected to win the support of the country’s reformers. He is a former chief Iranian nuclear negotiator who served as the secretary of Iran’s supreme national security council for 16 years. Under the former president Mohammad Khatami’s presidency, Rouhani was responsible for negotiating with the west over Tehran’s nuclear dossier. Under Rouhani, Iran halted its enrichment of uranium and showed more cooperation with the inspectors of the International Atomic Energy Organisation. He is keen to transform Iran’s damaged relations with the west. Rouhani is seen as a close ally of Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, the relative reformer who was disqualified from standing in the June vote. Rouhani has signalled he will work to secure the release from house arrest of opposition leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi.Rezaee, 59, was chief commander of Iran’s powerful revolutionary guards for 16 years. He is currently the secretary of Iran’s expediency council, which mediates between the parliament and the Guardian Council. Rezaee has run for president before, including in 2009, when he lost to Ahmadinejad. He is sympathetic to the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, but is running as an independent candidate in the June presidential vote. Despite his conservatism, he has shown relatively more tolerance towards the freedom of expression. In recent years, Rezaee has been associated with a number of news websites that are conservative but have shown more objectivity, relatively speaking.Jalili, 48, is the secretary of the supreme national security council and the head of Iran’s nuclear negotiating team. With Iran’s nuclear dossier in the spotlight, Jalili has become the public face of Iran’s nuclear programme, meeting with high-level western diplomats in international venues trying to find a solution to the deadlock between Tehran and the west. Under Jalili’s supervision, Iran’s nuclear programme has come under unprecedented levels of scrutiny. Jalili is a close ally of Khamenei and is seen by many as the supreme leader's favourite candidate. Jalili also ran Khamenei’s office from 2001 for a period of four years. Jalili, who has a PhD in political science from Tehran’s Imam Sadeq University, was not a familiar face in Iranian politics until he took over the country’s sensitive nuclear talks. Jalili’s thesis for his doctorate degree was titled “the foreign policy of Prophet [Mohammad]”. He is believed to the most anti-western candidate among the eight standing in June election.Ghalibaf, 52, is a former air force commander for the powerful revolutionary guards and an ex-head of the Iranian police force. He lost to Ahmadinejad in the 2005 presidential election but succeeded him as Tehran’s mayor soon after Ahmadinejad took over the presidency. Ghalibaf has since positioned himself as a moderate politician in practice, but he is strongly allied with supreme leader Khamenei. Ghalibaf is a so-called conservative “principlist”. In his speeches in recent weeks, Ghalibaf has tried to win the support of both reformists and hardline conservatives, attempting to present himself as a politician who can work with both.Haddad-Adel, 68, is a former speaker of the Majlis, the Iranian parliament, and currently an MP for Tehran. He is a close ally of supreme leader Khamenei, and is his daughter married Khamenei’s son, Mojtaba Khamenei. Haddad-Adel is a conservative “principlist” who formed a coalition with Tehran’s mayor Ghalibaf and Khamenei’s top adviser, Ali Akbar Velayati. According to the coalition’s plan only one was supposed to stand at the end but none of the three have withdrawn from the race. Haddad-Adel has always reflected views of Khamenei and is seen as an anti-western figure, having written a famous book criticising western culture entitled Culture of Nudity and Nudity of Culture.Aref, 62, was vice-president of Iran under the reformist president Mohammad Khatami for four years. A former chancellor of Tehran University, Aref is seen as a moderate reformist who has not voiced strong opposition to the state’s crackdown against the opposition in recent years and has therefore been tolerated as a presidential candidate by the establishment. Many reformist figures don’t consider Aref a true reformist while others say that either he or Rouhani should bow out of the race to give one reformist candidate a better chance. Aref has positioned himself as a pro-reform candidate willing to transform the image of Iran in the world and improve relations with the west. During a recent TV debate, Aref criticised the state-run television for its live debate format – resulting in a surge in his popularity.Velayati, 68, was foreign minister of Iran for more than 16 years and is currently a top advisor to supreme leader Khamenei. A paediatrician who also studied in Johns Hopkins University, he is seen a conservative figure who sympathises with the views expressed by Khamenei and his allies in the revolutionary guards. Velayati said recently that he would seek to solve the Syrian crisis with help from the west should he takes office. Despite this, he reflects Khamenei’s views on Syria and refers to “the Arab spring” as an Islamic awakening similar to Iran’s revolutionary events in 1979.Gharazi, 72, is a former oil minister running as an independent candidate seeking to improve Iran’s financial crisis by bringing inflation under control. Until recently, Gharazi was an unfamiliar face for many of Iran’s young generation; he has not held any key political position for many years. His candidacy was not expected to be accepted by the Guardian Council as many saw him as not competent enough to run, but he was allowed to stand to the surprise of many. He is a supporter of supreme leader Khamenei but is expressing relatively moderate views in politics.Updated at 1.44pm BST 12.01pm BST We have put together an interactive graphic on the eight candidates to be Iran's next president. Click here to see where they fit on the political spectrum. 11.50am BST With ten days to go before election day, Iran's state-run television is today holding the second live debate between the eight candidates who have been permitted to stand for president in the 14 June vote.The first debate was held on Friday, and the eight men discussed the economy amid some chaos and dissatisfaction with the format of the programme – which some candidates said was demeaning to them and to the voters.The debate consisted of three parts, with the moderator asking the candidates multiple-choice questions at one point.In the final part, the candidates were shown pictures on a screen and were asked to say the first thing that came into their minds.Mohammad-Reza Aref, the former vice-president under the reformist president Mohammad Khatami, was the first candidate to object to the debate's format: "In honour of the dear people of my country I will sit here, but I will answer none of your test questions," he said.Mohsen Rezaee, a former commander of the elite revolutionary guards, echoed Aref's frustration.“I am a patient person and I can tolerate a lot," he said. "With these repetitive, discontinuous, short, one-to-three minute answers, the people are being harmed and the eight people up here are being insulted."Hasan Rouhani, the only cleric among the eight candidates, described the style as “insulting”.Today's debate will start at 4pm Tehran time (12.30pm BST) and we will have live coverage of the whole event here.• Follow our full coverage of the Iranian presidential election 2013• Iranian presidential elections 2013: the essential guideUpdated at 12.18pm BST