Iranian agents arrested Kian Tajbakhsh, an American citizen, in front of his wife and small daughter at their home in Tehran at 9pm on 9 July, allegedly for "cooperating" with Hossein Rassam, the head of the security and political division of the British embassy in Tehran, to foment the post-election turmoil. While Rassam was ultimately released, Kian is still being detained in an unknown location.The first time I met Kian was on the campus of Central European University in Budapest. He was assigned to supervise a research project I was conducting on the Iraqi media. I questioned why a scholar with a background in urban planning had been assigned to my project, but I soon discovered how he could manoeuvre with ease through various cultures, academic disciplines and epochs of history. Even though I was a professor by that time, I felt like a young apprentice in the presence of brilliant master. Later in the evening, our group of scholars had dinner on a boat on the Danube river. With the lights of Buda facing us, Kian confided in me: "There was some controversy about giving you this fellowship. Some people thought you were a spy." Since the British government had plagiarised an article I had written in 2003 and used that material to justify a war against my native Iraq, I faced numerous accusations of being a spy.Ironically, that article was part of my easterly trajectory. It was the first article I published with the hope of getting an academic position in Istanbul. As an Iraqi-American, moving to the Baghdad of my parents seemed out of the question after 2003, so Istanbul seemed to be the next best alternative. Kian continued: "I did my research, and found that nothing you wrote in that article, or anything you said, supported the war against Iraq. You were an unfortunate victim of circumstances you had no control over." He said that to me at a time when I was facing a litany of charges of being a spy in Istanbul. He trusted me at a time when few academics in Turkey were willing to do the same.The article I wrote to help me move eastwards ultimately undermined my life in Istanbul. In Turkey I was accused of willingly handing over my article to Tony Blair's government to intentionally start a war against Iraq. Like Kian, I have faced the stigma of being labelled as a "western agent". My response to those accusations was to relocate to Madrid – the only city in Europe where I could unravel the Islamic Andalusian influences that pervade Spanish culture. I could still imagine I was in the east while living in Spain. While Kian had the luxury of retreating westwards, he remained committed to his Iran.Kian wanted to return to his native Iran in order to contribute to its intellectual development. Like me, Kian is a globalised nomad who engaged in reverse migration, moving from the west to the east.My parents left Iraq in the late 1960s to move to the US around the same time Kian's family also made the move from Iran westwards. Our parents belonged to the "brain drain" generation in which the west benefited from the migration of the best and the brightest from the east. Both Kian and I could have enjoyed comfortable lives as academics in the west, but instead we both decided to return to our roots. While our failure to adjust to the American dream may sound clichéd, our desire to move eastwards was far from the banal interest in discovering our roots. We hoped to benefit the education systems in our new homes. Last December, I met Kian's family during a conference in New Delhi. After meeting his 15-month-old daughter, I found a wind-up toy bull in my bag that she could play with. Later that night, I was watching Kian's baby during dinner, and she crawled up to the second floor of the restaurant. Once she realised her parents weren't there, she began to cry. I held her in my arms, trying to calm her. It breaks my heart to think of that baby girl now crying in the same way, wondering where her father is. I saw Kian again in June 2009 when he visited my school, IE University in Madrid, to give a talk on Iran. That night, I took him to the Plaza Mayor for a paella dinner, where he noticed a tourist from India eating by herself. He felt so bad for her that he invited her to join us, and spent the evening discussing his experiences in India, demonstrating again how he could move from one world to another with ease. Afterwards, I took him to a flamenco show. He was enthralled by the music, swaying his shoulders to the rhythm, while at the same time asking me about the Middle Eastern influences on flamenco. The scholar in him never stopped. After the performance, I asked him if he would vote for Mir Hossein Mousavi in the upcoming Iranian elections. He said: "I am not voting. I am boycotting the elections." It surprised me, then, to learn that Kian had joined the list of scholars, human rights lawyers and activists imprisoned since Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's re-election when he wasn't a supporter of any of the candidates. As we walked through the empty Plaza Santa Ana after the flamenco show, he told me that his baby still had the bull I had given her. She would often take it in her hands and then tap her father, saying "baba" to get his attention and insist that he watch as she wound it up and then let the little bull jump around the floor. Talking about that toy bull was the last thing he said to me before bidding me farewell. His trip to Madrid was his last journey abroad, part of his perpetual international nomadic itinerary, before his arrest. During the 1980s, the Iranian Revolution not only had ramifications for Iranians, but served to inspire Shia and Sunni Muslims alike. Upon hearing about Kian's second arrest, I recalled an anecdote my father told me about his father, an ayatollah himself. During a visit to Iran in the 1950s, my grandfather cried upon seeing what in his opinion were scantily clad women in the streets. (They were probably showing their arms in those days.) My father's first reaction in 1979 to Khomeini's ascent to power was that he was delighted to see a cleric, like his own father, ruling a country.I was raised in an Iraqi household that was supportive of the Iranian Revolution. I even grew up to teach Iranian history. Yet, while I spent most of my academic career writing about Saddam Hussein and the victims of his repression, including my own relatives, I never imagined that one day I would be writing about the Iranian government arresting my friends.