The Mahmoud Ahmadinejad show arrived at the UN for the sixth time, and much like its previous episodes, it did not disappoint. His speech contained its usual anti-Israel and anti-US diatribe but, surprisingly, this year he also had some interesting and salient points.One of them was the fact that he lambasted the US for threatening his country with nuclear weapons. He has a point. It boggles the mind as to why Obama recently stated that based upon the new US nuclear doctrine, the US would not use nuclear weapons against any country which does not possess them, with the exception of Iran.This was a huge setback for Obama's outreach strategy to Iran. It was also a huge gift for the ultra-conservatives there. After Obama's declaration, many of them could now say that their country is under a nuclear threat, and the best way to prevent this from happening is through the acquisition of nuclear weapons. That way, the US would be deterred from launching a nuclear attack against their country.Obama should be dissuading Iranians from backing the regime's nuclear drive, not encouraging them. What the US president should have done was to include Iran in the list of other countries, and not single it out as the only one that may be attacked, despite the fact that it does not have nuclear weapons, yet. Or if Obama really wanted to scare the Iranian leadership, he could have said that in the case of Iran, the US will adopt a policy of ambiguity.This US misstep could not have come at a worse time. Increasing numbers of Iranians now see their country's nuclear drive as a Khamenei-Ahmadinejad project, rather than a nationalistic one. If a survey were held in Iran, it's quite likely that majority of Iranians would say yes to a nuclear Iran, both in terms of energy and weapons. However, when it comes to the question "do you want Iran to become nuclear under this regime?", the answer is likely to be very different. It would be a fair and accurate estimation to say that many people, maybe even the majority, would say no – the reasons here being related to the regime's tarnished image at home and loss of legitimacy. Also, increasing numbers of people in Iran are worried that if this regime becomes nuclear, it would use its power not for the betterment of their lives but for the opposite. It would use its new status to confront the west, thus making Iran more isolated, both economically and politically.Now that Obama has handed Ahmadinejad a victory in a battle which he was badly losing, he should refocus his strategies. When it comes to addressing Iran, Obama should continue with his outreach to the people of Iran. If he wants to hurt the regime with words, Obama stands no chance against the champion, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. He should let him do that. Nobody does a better job.In fact, one should wonder whether negotiations with such a regime are relevant any more. Of course we all should try to settle our differences through dialogue, and the US and the west should try to find a peaceful solution for Iran's nuclear programme and human rights. Whether or not this regime would want to deliver such a solution is another matter.The demonstrators in Iran may have been brutally put down through arrests, killings, torture and rape. However the Green movement in Iran is not passing blip, as the Iranian government and Flynt Leverret would like us to believe. The wide cracks created in Iranian elections after the 2009 presidential still remain, and there is no sign of their reparation. If anything, they are getting bigger, and the regime is becoming more desperate to divert the public's attention away from them, by blaming "foreign elements" for everything that goes wrong in the country.The recent case of the missing statues in Tehran is one example which shows this. Over the last three weeks, 10 statues which were housed in public areas have been stolen by thieves. These include the statutes of historic figures such as Sattar Khan, who was a heroic figure in Iran's constitutional revolution, as well as Ibn Sina (Avicenna) who was a famous Persian physician, poet and mathematician. According to the mayor of Tehran, Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf, these statues – one of which weighed half a ton – were most probably stolen by a gang equipped with a JCB.No sooner had this been announced than officials in Iran's heritage organisation pointed the finger of blame at the UK. Citing Britain's "history in pillaging Iranian artefacts", these recent thefts have now been blamed on "the secret hand of England".It's difficult to imagine the SAS arriving with JCBs to cut huge statutes in the middle of Tehran. Not only would they face security obstacles, they would find Tehran's traffic a nightmare. It is equally difficult to see these statutes being spirited away to Sotheby's or the British Museum by British buyers, since financially they are unlikely to be worth the journey.However such accusations, alongside blaming of the 9/11 attacks on the US are part and parcel of a regime which is not interested in reaching a deal with the west because, if it does, that could be the end of it.