7.40am: The young woman whose death was captured on mobile phone now has her own page on Wikipedia. Her full name is Neda Agha-Soltan, whose age is given as 26-27. The entry in Wikipedia says:An unnamed Twitter poster claimed that on June 20, 2009, Neda, along with her father, were participating in a protest march on Karegar Avenue in the city of Tehran when she is said to have been shot by members of the Iranian Basij volunteer militia. Undated amateur videos of Neda's apparent death were uploaded to Facebook and YouTube, and spread across the internet virally. The videos were accompanied by a message from an anonymous individual who claimed to have been present when the video was recorded: "At 19:05 June 20th Place: Karegar Ave., at the corner crossing Khosravi St. and Salehi st. A young woman who was standing aside with her father watching the protests was shot by a basij member hiding on the rooftop of a civilian house. He had clear shot at the girl and could not miss her. However, he aimed straight her heart. I am a doctor, so I rushed to try to save her. But the impact of the gunshot was so fierce that the bullet had blasted inside the victim's chest, and she died in less than 2 minutes. The protests were going on about 1 kilometers away in the main street and some of the protesting crowd were running from tear gass used among them, towards Salehi St. The film is shot by my friend who was standing beside me. Please let the world know."The existence of the graphic images has provoked a mixed reaction. Among those who emailed the Guardian, there was of course unease but also a wish that they be seen by as wide an audience as possible to convey what is going in Iran and to highlight the dangers the demonstrators face. One thing is certain, Neda is set to become a symbol of Iran's current agony.You can follow the events of previous days here:21 June: Iran in turmoil20 June: protesters defy Khamenei19 June: Khamenei's hardline speech18 June: mass mourning17 June: crackdown continues16 June: day of unrest15 June: aftermath of disputed results12 June: election dayAs there are so many restrictions on journalists in Iran it is difficult to get information, so if you are in Iran and have news, please email me at mark.tran@guardian.co.uk or post updates or interesting links in the comments section below.And if you have taken any pictures of the latest events in Iran, or know anyone who has, please send them to pictures@guardian.co.uk. Please provide as much information as you can about your pictures including what they show, and when and where they were taken. Thanks.8.16am: The Guardian's foreign affairs specialist Simon Tisdall says Iran's opposition now faces a terrible dilemma on what to do next and the main danger now is that Iran seeking to blame the west for the crisis.8.38am: Supporters of Mir Hossein Mousavi have urged people to carry black candles with green ribbons later today to show solidarity with victims of the protests. They say motorists should turn on their headlights for two hours from 5 pm local time (1230 GMT) to "show their solidarity with families of martyrs killed in recent events".8.46am: There are reports on Twitter that mosques in Tehran will not be allowed to hold a mourning ceremony for Neda. We can't verify this. #Neda is a trending topic on Twitter.8.58am: Mousavi may be running out of options in the face of Khamenei's uncompromising stance as spelt out at the weekend, but he remains defiant. Despite the message that protests should stop, he told supporters on his website: "The country belongs to you ... protesting lies and fraud is your right." Former reformist president Mohammad Khatami is backing Mousavi, saying that "protest in a civil manner and avoiding disturbances in the definite right of the people and all must respect that".Iranian police said that 457 people were arrested on Saturday, when big protests took place. Official figures say 17 people have died in the week of unrest, but many believe the figure is higher. Press TV reports that 13 people were killed on Saturday.9.09am: Mousavi cannot count on the support of Hugo Chavez, the populist Venezuelan leader. In his weekly radio and TV address, Chavez said the world must respect the "triumph" of Ahmadinejad, as reported by the state-funded Press TV."Ahmadinejad's triumph was a triumph all the way. They are trying to stain Ahmadinejad's triumph and through that weaken the government and the Islamic revolution. I know they will not succeed," Chavez said.9.17am: A Facebook group called Angel of Iran has been set up to mourn the death of Neda Agha-Soltan. It already has more than 2,000 members. The New York Daily News has gone big on this story, with the headline: Neda, young girl brutally killed in Iran, becoming symbol of rebellion.• This blog post was amended on 2 June 2011. The original referred to the death of Neda Soltani during a demonstration in Iran. That is the name of a different individual. This has been corrected.9.34am: Even Iran's guardian council has admitted that the number of votes in 50 cities exceeded the number of people eligible to vote, Press TV reports, which lends substance to claims by Mousavi that the vote was rigged.The council's spokesman, Abbas-Ali Kadkhodaei, who was speaking on the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB) Channel 2 yesterday, said: "Statistics provided by the candidates, who claim more than 100% of those eligible have cast their ballot in 80-170 cities are not accurate - the incident has happened in only 50 cities."Note the last few words - only 50 cities.9.42am: One emailer comments on the admission of dodgy voting numbers by the guardian council: "I thought it significant as first sign of irregularities stated officially by regime, figures of 3 million mentioned compared to 100,000 mentioned by eg supreme leader for 'fraud' ans first sign of possible climb downs / admissions by guardian council / regime. Also the iranian foreign minister had talked about there being no fraud but now with this official statement it looks a little strange."10.01am: The American-Iranian niacINsight website is accusing state-run TV of doctoring footage of the demonstrations outside Iran showing protesters shouting "Death to the Islamic Republic" instead of standing in solidarity with people in Iran.10.08am: Robert Tait, the Guardian's former Tehran correspondent, wonders whether pro-Mousavi supporters are running out of ideas. He says the idea of switching on headlights at evening rush hour has been criticised as meaningless by some correspondents to the Farsi-language blog Balatarin.10.16am:More footage of recent protests in Tehran over the disputed results.10.21am:This footage shows an injured man receiving help during the protests.10.28am: There are reports that Italy wants Iran to reply to its invitation to attend this week's G8 summit or it will be considered rejected. The summit begins on Thursday in Trieste. Rome says Tehran could contribute to discussions on stabilising Afghanistan and Pakistan.The Italian foreign minister, Franco Frattini, apparently told Iran it must respond by the of today.10.41am: Bloggingheads TV has another informed discussion about the internal politics of the regime.10.47am: Robert Tait confirms that a scheduled memorial service for Neda Soltan (spellings of her name vary) at Niloofar mosque in central Tehran's Abbas Abad district has been banned by the authorities - in case her death turns into a potent symbol of opposition. He says that reports suggest that her body was only handed over to her family by the authorities on condition that she was buried immediately and that all other mosques in Tehran have also been forbidden from staging services in her memory.11.05am: Media Guardian has more on the expulsion from Iran of the BBC's Jon Leyne. The BBC has this story on Leyne.Neda's death makes remarks made by the BBC's John Simpson on Friday's Newsnight programme seem even more crass now than when he uttered them. Predicting that only the "hard cases" would take to the streets on Saturday, he said: "I suspect, without wanting to be sexist about it, that very the charming blondes in their black outfits won't be there."(This is Matthew Weaver taking over from Mark Tran. I you have any updates please email matthew.weaver@guardian.co.uk)11.20am: This is sure to infuriate the opposition movement: the Iranian police have denied that its officers open fire on protesters, according to state-funded Press TV. The authorities have also tried to blame the shooting on "unknown vandals".11.30am: Relatives of former president Hashemi Rafsanjani, a rival of Ahmadinejad, have been released from detention, state television said according to Reuters.There are also reports that Khamenei will again lead Friday prayers this week.11.40am: Are some senior clerics seeking a new supreme leader? The Arab TV channel Al Arabiya, reckons they are. It claims that a group headed by Rafsanjani is considering an alternative collective leadership.11.50am: Now that the guardian council has admitted that 100% turnout was witnessed in "only" 50 cities, it should be noted that the interior ministry - in charge of administering the election - appears to see nothing remiss in such figures, writes Robert Tait.Kamran Daneshjou, the head of the ministry's election commission has attributed the reported 141% participation in the town of Taft to the good weather in Yazd province, where the town is situated. Daneshjou's explanation was given on an interview on state TV, according to Ayende News, a centrist website. What is interesting is that the authorities no longer seem to be trying hide the fact that there were "irregularities". 12pm: There will be a rally to mourn Neda at 4pm (12.30BST) today in Hafte Tir Square, according to numerous updates on Twitter.The square was the scene of some of the protests last week. Ominously the Revolutionary Guard today threatened to crush any further protest, according to AP.A statement posted on the Guard's website warned protesters to "be prepared for a resolution and revolutionary confrontation with the Guards, Basij and other security forces and disciplinary forces."12.30pm: More on the martyrdom of Neda. A blogpost referring to her as "my sister" (probably in metaphorical sense) is being widely circulated.It says: my sister died from not having life… my sister died as injustice has no end… my sister died since she loved life too much… and my sister died since she lovingly cared for people…A tribute site called Neda's Voice has also been set up.12.45pm: Protesters are holding a candlelight vigil in Hafte Tir Square in Tehran in memory of Neda and the others who were killed, according to a usually reliable user on Twitter.The new media guru Jeff Jarvis has an interesting post on the use of tweets from Iran. "I've also been arguing that for journalists, saying what you don't know is becoming as important as saying what you know," he says. In that spirit, it should be pointed out, that we don't know what's currently happening in Hafte Tir Square right now. If you have reliable information please post a comment or send an email.1.05pm: A group of Dutch students and academics is setting up a project to encourage organisations to allow their computer servers to be used as proxy servers for people in Iran to get round Iranian restrictions. "Since it is summer a lot of businesses and institutions like universities have their servers running at well beneath their normal capacity. This means that they have ample bandwidth," emails David Suurland, one of the organisers of I Proxy Iran.He adds: "It costs next to nothing to do and requires little effort but is of tremendous importance for the Iranians capability to organize themselves without the fear of detection."We have our ways of distributing the resulting anonymous proxy addresses to the people involved."1.35pm: General Ali Fazli, recently appointed as commander of Seiyed al-shohada of the Revolutionary Guards in Tehran province, has been arrested for refusing to carry Khamenei's order to use force against demonstrators, according to an unconfirmed report on the Balatarin, spotted by Robert Tait.Earlier reports suggested that Fazli, who lost an eye during Iran's war with Iraq, had been sacked for his non-compliance. He is said to have been taken to an unknown location after his "arrest". Could this be a first sign of a split among the upper echelons in the security forces?1.45pm: Reuters has confirmed that 1,000 people have gathered for an opposition rally in central Tehran in defiance of a ban on the protest and threats from the Revolutionary Guard.1.50pm: A list of the "Revolution Martyrs" is being put together in a spreadsheet, compiled by the group Revolution in Iran.1.55pm: Two helicopters are hovering above Hafte Tir Square and there is a heavy security presence on the street, according to an eyewitness. The police and basij militia are stopping people on the street and asking where they are going, the witness said.2.05pm: Mousavi should now arrested for calling for banned rallies to go ahead, according to a senior politician cited by Reuters. "Mousavi's calling for illegal protests and issuing provocative statements have been a source of recent unrests in Iran ... Such criminal acts should be confronted firmly," said Ali Shahrokhi, head of parliament's judiciary committee, semi-official Fars news agency reported."The ground is paved to legally chase Mousavi."2.40pm: Police attack hundreds of protesters with tear gas, fire in the air to disperse Tehran rally, a flash on AP says.2.45pm: I've just spoken to Hamed, the YouTube user who posted the now iconic film of Neda's death on to the network. Hamed is an asylum seeker in Holland, he says the film was taken by a friend in Tehran whose identity he has promised not to reveal.Hamed says he has been sent thousands of emails and message since posting the video on Saturday night.There were reports that Neda was shot by someone on a motorbike, Hamed's friend said she was shot from rooftop sniper. There were no motorbikes around.3.10pm: Eyewitnesses say riot police are attacking hundreds of protesters with tear gas, and firing live bullets in the air to disperse a rally in central Tehran, according to AP.Hundreds of anti-riot police quickly put an end to the demonstration in Hafte Tir Square, it said.Andrew Sullivan's Daily Dish shows a video of protesters being dispersed by teargas. The video was apparently filmed today.3.40pm: The Foreign Office has reviewed its advice about travelling to Iran. It now warns against all but essential travel.It adds:Large scale demonstrations following the Iranian Presidential elections on 12 June 2009 continue. There have been violent clashes at and after some demonstrations with some deaths. Further violence is possible. Some forms of international and internal communications have been disrupted, e.g. SMS, mobile telephone coverage and internet. You should avoid demonstrations and large public gatherings. 3.50pm: An acquaintance of her family said Neda worked part-time at a travel agency in Iran and that the government barred the family from holding a public funeral today, according to AP.It comments: The bloody imagery [of Neda's death] alone could have an important impact on public opinion in Iran, where the idea of martyrdom resonates deeply among a populace steeped in the stories and imagery of Shia Islam, a faith founded on the idea of self-sacrifice in the cause of justice.Gawker compares the footage to another iconic film.Just like the image of a man standing in front of a tank brigade became the lasting image of the Tiananmen Square protests in China, the video of Neda, her eyes growing ever more vacant by the second as her spirit leaves her body and climaxing with blood pouring from her orifices, is destined to become the image that few of us who saw/see it will ever forget. (That's it from me today - my college Daniel Nasaw is about to take over. Thanks again for your comments and tip-offs).4.01pm: Daniel Nasaw in Washington here. If you have news from Iran please email me at daniel.nasaw@guardian.co.uk or twitter me at danielnasaw. Thanks!4.03pm: State-run press TV reports that Majlis (parliament) speaker Ali Larijani has called for a reassessment of Iran's ties to Britain, following Ayatollah Khamenei's attack at Friday prayers on Britain as "the most evil" of foreign powers.Britain has had an ambassador in Tehran since the 1990s. The US has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since 1979.4.14pm: As Neda Soltan becomes the focal point of the protest movement, the Washington Post today notes the role that massive demonstrations of mourning played in the 1979 revolution.During the revolution that overthrew the shah of Iran in 1979, ushering in an Islamic republic, a cycle of protests, violent repression and more demonstrations to mourn the victims helped sustain and fortify the opposition.4.30pm: The British embassy in Tehran is evacuating the families of staff members.4.50pm: A warning of a "decisive" confrontation from the Revolutionary Guard, via the state-backed Press TV news: "We warn the main elements behind the riots and their deceived supporters to … halt their acts of sabotage and end their riots or be prepared for a decisive and revolutionary confrontation with the Guards, Basij and other security and disciplinary forces"5.00pm: A reliable blogger reports that plainclothes security officers have attacked the main office of Kalameh (the Word) Newspaper in Tehran.5.21pm: The doctor who tried to save Neda's life on that Tehran street was a frontline battlefield physician in the Iran-Iraq war, according to a blog by the Brazilian novelist Paulo Coelho, his friend.5.30pm: A Twitterer points to this site, BultanNews, and says it is targeting protesters, presumably for attack by vigilantes. Can anyone tell me what this is about? daniel.nasaw@guardian.co.ukUPDATE: Readers tell me BultanNews asks viewers to provide names and other information about the men shown in the photographs, who it says are terrorists and troublemakers.Thanks, Razavi and Saeed, for the translations.5.40pm: BBC Persia reports that 300-400 armed security personnel have taken up positions in Haft-e Tir Square right now, alongside about 1,000 demonstrators. Witnesses have reported use of batons and tear gas. Via the National Iranian American Council blog. 5.54pm: Curious, unconfirmed rumours are coming out of Qom, to where the former president and Khamenei rival Hashemi Rafsanjani was said to have travelled in recent days to rally support for the protest movement.A reader writes that a report on Peiknet.com states that 40 out of 86 members of the guardian council have signed a letter demanding annulment of the election, and that Rafsanjani has a copy of the letter. Caveat: This is unconfirmed. I do not know this news source and I cannot vouch for it. Persian speaking readers: Is the summary translation roughly accurate? Anything else in the article worth noting? Anyone know anything about the news agency?UPDATE: The letter refers to 40 members of the council of experts, not the guardian council.6.16pm: Opposition candidate Mehdi Karroubi has issued what one reliable Twitterer calls a "stern warning" to the ruling guardian council of clerics, urging them to annul the June 12 election instead of wasting time. Find the letter, in Persian, on his party's website.7.13pm: I'm hearing from several reliable sources that opposition candidates Mehdi Karroubi and Mir Hossein Mousavi will hold a rally Thursday, 25 June to mourn and commemorate the victims of post-election violence.7.14pm: Meanwhile, the official Press TV is gloating that regime security forces have "restored calm" in Tehran after protests last week.7.23pm: AP has a write-up of the Haft-e Tir protest -- and the police response with teargas and live fire -- today.Witnesses said helicopters hovered overhead as about 200 protesters gathered at Haft-e-Tir Square. But hundreds of anti-riot police quickly put an end to the demonstration and prevented any gathering, even small groups, at the scene.At the subway station at Haft-e-Tir, the witnesses said police did not allow anyone to stand still, asking them to keep on walking and separating people who were walked together.7.36pm: Karroubi issues another statement, asking authorities immediately to release anyone detained in political actions, provide medical care for those injured, cease censoring the news media and, perhaps most importantly, return the bodies of those killed in the violence and allow their families to hold memorial services.7.52pm: This website purports to have video and photos of today's protest actions in Tehran and Isfahan.7.56pm: A new website commemorates Neda. Seventy people have signed the guest book so far.8.07pm: Here's a contrarian take on the Neda-as-martyr phenomenon from an American woman who doesn't let her lack of understanding of Iranian and Shia culture stand in the way of her opinion. Take it away, Dana Stevens:Assuming this graphic clip really does document a young woman's death at the hands of paramilitary snipers—something we lack the reporting to confirm—what gives us the right to watch it and forward to and fro as proof of our solidarity with the forces of democracy and reform in Iran (something that, as you point out, Mousavi is far from representing)? I wouldn't want my own death, or that of someone I loved, to be instrumentalized in that way. (We don't, for example, treat the deaths of U.S. soliders abroad as YouTube-able moments.) 8.19pm: A top Iranian interior ministry official said today that the government would release the box-by-box vote totals, the official Press TV reported. The article, which quotes deputy head of the ministry's election headquarters Ali-Asghar Sharifi-Rad, does not say when they will be made available.8.35pm: White House press secretary Robert Gibbs just said President Barack Obama is "moved" by the television images of Iranian demonstrators.According to AP, Gibbs said: "I think he has been moved what we've seen on television. I think particularly so by images of women in Iran who have stood up for their right to demonstrate, to speak out and to be heard."8.46pm: Guardian Diplomatic Editor Julian Borger looks at Mojtaba Khamenei, son of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. He writes: Mojtaba is an austere figure, ­generally seen as more hardline than his father and has become a gatekeeper for access to the beit-e-rahbari, the supreme leader's home, and the supreme leader himself.According to some Iran analysts, Khamenei, 70, is manoeuvring to position his son as his successor.A reader earlier pointed me to this undated picture , which purports to show Khamenei's sons. Mojtaba is second from left, the picture reads.8.49pm: On Comment is free America, Stephen Kinzer writes on the appearance of images of Muhammed Mossadeq, the Iranian prime minister overthrown in an American-aided coup in 1953, on placards in recent demonstrations. He says Mossadeq's icon should remind the world that Iranians want to do this on their own, without foreign intervention.9.14pm: Generally reliable twitter sources are repeating a call for a national strike across Iran Tuesday. ُThe sources say Mousavi has called for this, but I have not been able to confirm that. If anyone has seen an official announcement from either Mousavi or Karroubi, please email it to me.9.38pm: From English-language Iranian news and commentary site TehranBureau.com comes a frightening first-person account of today's Haft-e Tir demonstration:The writer -- clearly not a native English speaker, and I say this in admiration of his or her courage -- notes:over the few hours it was getting busier with protesters, but i think they needed someone like mousavi or another figure so as to gather around him. it was v v difficult to gather.۹.57pm:ًReuters reports that the Danish government has summoned Iran's ambassador to protest again post-election violence.10.00pm: Mir Hossein Mousavi's Facebook page formally announces a demonstration Thursday to commemorate those killed in post-election violence. The site asks that supporters around the world hold "solidarity" events.10.11pm: The Los Angeles Times looks at Neda Agha-Soltan's life and death.10.24pm: That's it for tonight folks. Thank you all for reading and for your tips. 