7.30am: Khamenei is preparing to make his first public appearance since endorsing Ahmadinejad's election. He is due to lead Friday prayers at Tehran University, where his words will be closely scrutinised. It is unclear what Khameini will say, if anything, about Mousavi and the demonstrations. At least one candidate who ran against Ahmadinejad, reformist Mahdi Karroubi, has said he will attend the service.It was not known if Mousavi or Ahmadinejad would be there, although the president normally attends Friday prayers when Khamenei leads them.There are reports that people are being bussed in to Tehran to show support for the regime. A protester has emailed to say that whatever Khamemei says the protests will continue. He wrote: Saturday will be the biggest march to date probably, despite whatever announcement is made at Friday prayers.I think something which those living outside Iran need to realize is that people here are not protesting because of a disapproval of the election outcome per say. Almost every individual has had a bad experience at some point with a Basij , a member of the security forces or a government official.Whether it be a teenage party which they were attending being raided, harassed on the streets because of their clothes, visited by corrupt officials at work, or mistreated in a government office.People are simply fed up, this is about far more than just the elections.As there are so many restrictions on journalists in Iran it is difficult to get information, so if you are in Iran and have news, please email me at matthew.weaver@guardian.co.uk or post updates or interesting links in the comments section below.And if you have taken any pictures of the latest events in Iran, or know anyone who has, please send them to pictures@guardian.co.uk. Please provide as much information as you can about your pictures including what they show, and when and where they were taken. Thanks.8am: Here's a new video claiming to show yesterday's rally. It started as a silent protest to mark the death of protesters killed in unrest earlier this week, but it became rowdy later judging by this footage.8.10am: Khamenei has told Mousavi to stand beside him at Friday prayers, according to the Times.The demand was made at a meeting this week with representatives of all three candidates who claim that the poll was rigged, and it puts Mr Mousavi on the spot.We'll soon find out what happens, prayers are due to start within the next hour.In the meantime here's some video footage of Mousavi's brief appearance at yesterday's rally. There are more pictures of the rally on Mousavi's website.8.30am: Some Mousavi supporters are calling for a boycott of Friday prayers, on Twitter. "Mousavi & Karoubi ask supporters NOT to attend Friday prayers," reads one tweet.8.40am: Google may not have bowed to pressure to change its logo to support the protests, but it has rushed through Persian, or Farsi to its translation service.The New York Times reports: "The company said it hoped the service, which it rushed because of the turmoil in Iran, would be used by people inside and outside of that country to communicate and stay abreast of events."Facebook has also launched a Farsi translation service, according to my colleague Jemima Kiss.Earlier this week Twitter delayed an upgrade to its network because of the vital role it is playing in the unrest, after a request from the US state department.9am: Here's an account sent by email from a protester who was beaten up earlier this week:It was 4pm at Vanak Square in Tehran, and people were protesting against the election results. The riot police were standing in front of us. Suddenly the police started to run towards us, with their black helmets and batons they were so scary. Some people escaped and some others ran towards them and threw stones.As we were running down Vali Asr Avenue, a young man fell on the ground. I saw that, as he was there a soldier reached him and started beating him in the back with the baton. He shouted and cried for help. I ran towards the soldier and punched him in the face. The young man managed to escape. As I tried to escape two other soldiers were behind me. They cornered me. I didn't have any way of escaping. They started beating me like hell, and the one that I'd punched also came in. The three of them hit me at least 50 times. One of them grabbed me and tried to push me on the ground. The punched one tried to beat me in the face and I had to protect it with my left hand. As people saw this, they threw stones at them. Fortunately a big one hit one of them in back, and I managed to push him and run like hell.I didn't even dare to go to hospital because they might easily catch you there. I've been taking painkillers just to able to sleep.9.15am: Al-Jazeera is showing live pictures of Khamenei at the start of Friday prayers. It quotes him calling for peace."I advise you to follow Allah and follow the pious way," he says according to the translation. "Apply the fear of God," he adds.He goes on to cite verses from the Qu'ran about enemies surrounding Mecca. "Psychologically Muslims need a quiet and tranquil heart," al-Jazeera's translator quotes Khamenei as saying."When we gain stress and worries it will be difficult to find our way. When we are quiet it is easier to find solutions. This is the blessing of Allah. Believers need to find calm and strength."He goes on to talk of the benefit of supplication. "Since the beginning of the revolution 30 years have passed. Events have happened that could eliminate the system and the regime," Khamenei said."Try to forget about politics and remember spirituality. This is the way to gain freedom. From the beginning the revolution was based on the strength of your faith."We have to go back to spirituality. It will lead the revolution to success in this materialistic world. It will make a strong pillar of the Islamic system and protect it from the troubles outside."Most of our youth are spiritual even if you don't see that in their faces. "Oh God give us a calm and peaceful heart."About the issue of elections, the main issue of the country. There are three issues. One will be for the political leaders, our president, activists, western counties and leaders of the media. The elections of the 12 June was proof of participation of the people. It was a show of their love for their regime. We can't find other countries with such a level of democracy. "We have not had such participation (85%) since the revolution. The young generation especially showed their worry and their political obligations. There are differences between the people, some prefer different candidates. This is natural. This election was a big celebration of the revolution. That many people showing love and loyalty. This election was a religious democratic event. It showed dictatorial countries that this is a religious democratic country. "The election showed that people with belief, hopes and joys are living in this country. Our enemies are using it. If the young did not feel free they would not have participated in the election. This trust is the biggest asset of the Islamic republic. "There were claims of fraud before the election. Don't listen to those allegations."The competition for the election was very clear. Enemies and dirty Zionists tried to show the election as a contest between the regime and against it. That is not true, all four candidates support the regime." [He lists the government positions of the opposition candidates]. All of the candidates are part of this system and regime. Zionists and the bad British radio said it was a challenge to the regime."The issue is inside the system. The dispute is not against the revolution. The dispute was among candidates and there was a positive and negative effect. People were able to judge, they felt part of the system. All views were available to the people."The result was clear. They selected candidates they wanted. These disputes and conversations among candidates went to the streets and houses of the people. This gives strength to the system. This should not be misunderstood. The people should be ready to answer critics."Rumours spread that were not true, and gave a bad image to the previous government. Calling the president a liar is that good? This is against the truth. The 30 years of the revolution was turning black."Khamenei talks about the rumours about Hashemi Rafsanjani. He praises Rafsanjani as "close" to the revolution. "The youth should know that... He was at the service of the revolution. I do have some difference with him, but people should not imagine something else between him and the president."We don't claim there is no corruption in our regime. But this is one of the most healthy systems in the world. Zionists claims of corruption are not right. "My dear people, June 12 was a historic event. Our enemies want to cast doubt on it and portray it as defeat for the regime. The presidential campaign has finished. All of the four candidates are among the Islamic system. The people have trust in the revolution and the republic. The Islamic republic is not cheating against others. There is no cheating inside the election system - it is well controlled. There may been mistakes but 11 million [votes] is not possible."The guardian council has said that if people have doubts they should prove them. I will not follow false allegations. In all elections some are winners and some are losers. Correct legal procedures should be followed to ensure trust in the process."The candidates should be careful about what they say and do" [Mousavi doesn't seem to be there]. "Some diplomats from the west are showing their real face and that they are enemies. The worst are the British."The street is the place of living and trading. Why are you taking to the streets? We have had the election. Street demonstrations are a target for terrorist plots. Who would be responsible if something happened?10.30am: Khamenei appears to threaten the protesters. "Rioting after the election is not a good way. It questions the election. If they continue [the consequences] will be their responsibility.""If they continue they will be receiving other consequences, behind the scenes. I'm asking my friends and brothers to follow the laws. Let God give us blessing to follow those ways." The western media were "shocked" by the level of participation in the election, he claimed. He also contrasts Barack Obama's comments about the election with his letter offering better relations with Iran.10.45am: Robert Tait comments on those in the audience. From what we can see watching the speech here, the Times report appears to be wrong. There is no sign of Mousavi or Karroubi but all Ahmadinejad's cabinet ministers and additional hangers-on are there. Those in the audience are clearly government employees and plain-clothed volunteer militia types.Others present are Ale Larijani, the speaker of the parliament, Mahmoud Shahroudi, the judiciary speaker, and the mayor of Tehran, Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf. 10.50am: After further criticism of the west Khamenei winds up his speech with a prayer, which ends "God bless you all."Will his defiant defence of the regime and the election work? Another big opposition rally is planned for tomorrow. What did you make of the speech? I didn't spot any concession to opposition movement, did you? And where was Mousavi?11am: The veteran Iran-watcher Robert Fisk described the speech as "threatening" to the protesters. "How on earth does Mousavi react to this?" Fisk tells al-Jazeera.The Guardian's Middle East editor, Ian Black, describes "the battle of wills" between the supreme leader and Rafsanjani who was name-checked in speech.11.25am: "You could sense the smell of blood" in the speech, B emails from Tehran.At first, we thought he was going to make concessions, when he called for toleration. But this was just hypocrisy. It was the most scary speech we have ever heard.I don't know if it will stop the demonstrations. I just know that I might be in big trouble writing to you, but I'll keep on doing it. There is nothing to lose.11.45am: The novelist Linda Grant has emailed to share a prophetic comment made to her in Iran 13 years ago. In 1996 I went to Iran for Guardian Weekend. A doctoral student at the University of Tehran who was working with the team that was bringing the internet to Iran, told me that the internet would be the undoing of the regime.In 1979 I went to a meeting in Vancouver and heard thrilling accounts from Iranian socialist feminists about how they donned the chador to organise the revolution and depose the Shah. One cynic asked if they would be able to take the chador off again and was quickly shushed. I wonder where those Iranian feminists are today.11.55am: Kianoush Imani, an Iranian in London, says the the speech won't stop the protests. Iranians are not what they seem in the media. The majority are young, educated and aware they want real freedom. But they know they cannot get freedom as the regime is too strong, so many do not have a choice but to keep fighting. This movement is bigger than anything before and cannot be silenced easily. But it all depends on Mousavi. If he backs down the protesters will lose their leader and it will all end in bloodshed. Let's hope it will not fall apart. Mousavi is no saint but I have been listening to his speeches before the elections and he seem to offer exactly what Iranians are looking for.Ali, another Iranian in London adds: "It is difficult to say how long people can keep up on the street riots. But what we are going to have for sure is civil unrest."12.20pm: The Guardian's former Tehran correspondent, Robert Tait, gives his thoughts on the supreme leader's speech.Khamenei's attitude to the street demonstrations and the opposition candidates was "extraordinarily hardline and uncompromising", Tait says. "It has raised the ante and sharpened the dividing lines." 12.40pm: State-controlled Press TV said: "The leader said the time is over for rivalry, stressing that all should unite and line up behind the president-elect."Here's our news report on the speech.And Simon Tisdall discusses what the opposition leaders might do now."The most likely scenario is an amicable settlement," he reckons. 12.55pm: A fuller English translation of Khamenei's speech is available here. It is being circulated on Twitter like everything else.A new Guardian video shows the crowd's reverence for Khamenei's sermon.1.45pm: Gordon Brown appears to have taken offence at the anti-British remarks in Khamenei's speech, according to Sky News. Various translations said the supreme leader described Britain's as "evil" or "treacherous" and attacked "bad radio" from Britain.The Iranian ambassador to London has been summoned and the prime minister said Iran needs to demonstrate that the results of the election were fair. A contact in Iran has emailed to say that the results are being released by ballot box. So far this has been done in only four regions.2.15pm: The BBC's Tehran correspondent Jon Leyne reckons the speech was as hardline as it could have been, and that Khamenei was basically threatening to "set the dogs" on the protesters.The New York Times talks of "shadowy Iranian vigilantes" vowing to taking bolder action against the protesters. The Huffington Post mentions unconfirmed reports of a plan to march on Rafsanjani's house in protest at his apparent support for the opposition.2.25pm: In an exclusive interview with the Guardian, Gordon Brown said foreign policy can never be the same again because of the internet. "This week's events in Iran are a reminder of the way that people are using new technology to come together in new ways to make their views known."Foreign policy can no longer be the province of just a few elites".Brown has also condemned Iran's crackdown of the protest, at a European summit in Brussels."I believe that it is right for us to speak out for rights, to speak out against repression, to speak out in condemnation of violence, to speak out for a free media that is prevented from doing its job, and we will continue to do it," he said."It is for Iran now to show the world that the elections are fair. It is also the wish of the world that the repression and the brutality that we have seen in these last few days is not something that is going to be repeated."2.30pm: The opposition protest planned for tomorrow in Tehran has been banned, the authorities have just announced, according to the ISNA news agency.Mousavi's supporters on Twitter are still calling for protesters to take to the streets at 4pm (12.30BST) tomorrow.2.45pm: Amnesty has condemned Khamenei's speech for legitimising police brutality.Hassiba Hadj Sahraoui, its Middle East deputy director, said:We are extremely disturbed at statements made by Ayatollah Khamenei which seem to give the green light to security forces to violently handle protesters exercising their right to demonstrate and express their views.If large numbers of people take to the street in protests in the next couple of days, we fear that they will face arbitrary arrest and excessive use of force, as has happened in recent days, particularly as permission for a demonstration to be held in Tehran on Saturday 20 June has been denied.'For a head of state to put the onus of security on peaceful demonstrators and not on the security forces is a gross dereliction of duty and a licence for abuse.2.55pm: "It was a five-star performance in the politics of denial. And it's tempting to conclude: Khamenei just doesn't get it," writes Simon Tisdall in analysis of the speech.3.05pm: "The situation in Iran is now critical - the nation is heartbroken - suppression is imminent," tweets one widely followed Iranian Twitter user and Mousavi supporter.3.30pm: State-controlled Press TV has more on the banning of tomorrow's opposition rally. "I hope that this rally will not be held as no legal permission has been granted for this rally," said Morteza Tamadon, the governor general of Tehran.3.35pm: Mohammed Reza Jalaeipour, 26, an Oxford University student who was a spokesman for Mousavi during the election, was arrested as he tried to leave Iran on Wednesday. His wife Fatameh Shams, also a student at Oxford University, has been talking to my colleague Haroon Siddique, who writes:She says she feared for his safety and that of other activists. "The problem is we don't know where they are and how they've been treated," she said. Shams is in the UK now trying to raise awareness of her husband's plight and to encourage people to petition the Iranian embassy on his behalf.3.55pm: The Iranian footballers who wore green wristbands have been suspended according to a Twitter rumour spotted by the Huffington Post. Please let us know if you can confirm or deny this.Jamileh, a 25-year-old woman from Iran, describes her experience of taking part in demonstrations and reports on the arrest of her brother.She tells Guardian Weekly: "In the early hours of the morning, I visited the local police station. They say that my brother will not be freed until the investigation is over. Until then, I remain worried and fearful for his life."4.10pm: The BBC World Service, branded "bad radio" by the supreme leader is hitting back. It is attempting to combat continued broadcast interference from within Iran by increasing the number of satellites it uses to transmit its Persian television news service and extending the channel's hours, Media Guardian reports.4.10pm: Robert Tait spotted an interesting line in Khamenei's speech missed by the translations I've seen. Tait says Khamenei cited Britain's expenses scandal as an example of western corruption.He writes: In playing the British card, Khamenei was appealing to traditional resentment of interference in Iran's affairs by Britain at the peak of its imperial power, while also tarring the demonstrators by association with a foreign power.(That's it from me. Once again my Washington colleague Daniel Nasaw will be taking over. Thanks for your comments and please keep them coming.)4.36pm: Daniel Nasaw in Washington here, taking over the Guardian's liveblog. Thanks Matt. Readers: If you are in Iran and have news or tips, please email me at daniel.nasaw@guardian.co.uk. I'm also on twitter at danielnasaw.4.50pm: From Pennsylvania, US, Mehdi Noorbaksh, son-in-law of Iran Freedom Movement leader Ebrahim Yazdi, says that tomorrow begins a new phase of the current unrest. Now that Khamenei has publicly and forcefully warned protesters to halt their actions, if the people – and Mousavi and Karroubi – defy the Supreme Leader and turn out in the streets, they will be directly rejecting Khamenei and challenging his legitimacy and that of the conservative clerical institutions.He says Khamenei's speech also forces Karroubi's and Mousavi's hands.If they do not stand up against his speech, all of them will be rejected by the Iranian people. This is their last chance. They mobilised millions, they raised expctations, and now if they can't live up to expectations and they disappoint their supporters that is the end of themNoorbaksh says his wife, Yazdi's daughter, spoke with Yazdi briefly by telephone. The opposition icon is back in the hospital where he is being treated for complications from cancer.4.51pm: Reuters reports that Mousavi has not called on his supporters to stage protests, but notes the candidate's supporters have pledged to gather in Tehran Saturday afternoon.4.57pm: The post directly below has caused some controversy. Twitterers and emailers tell me Reuters is mistaken, and that Mousavi, Karroubi and Khatami will be at a demonstration at Tehran's Enghelab square tomorrow.5.10pm: Reformist candidate Mehdi Karroubi has sent an open letter to the Guardian Council asking them to annull the election. A reader sends this summary (which I have edited for clarity):Karroubi says that the people created this council after the revolution to prevent the government from hijacking elections, as the Shah used to. Now is the moment for the Council to preserve Iranian people's rights. Karroubi says: "I am certain that you remember during our uprising during the Shah's regime, we were branded as agents of foreign powers and tarred as being supported by BBC."5.19pm: Here are photos from yesterday's protest at the UN office in Tehran.5.22pm: Huffington Post has an interview with a photojournalist in Tehran, who says the demonstration is on for 4pm Saturday.An interesting point about Mousavi, the accidental face of the protest movement:Q: In your opinion is Mousavi really the only hope? He was never really a reformer before -- so how is it that he became the hope for people to such a degree?A: I don't think he is the only hope and the best option but I do think that's what these people want and need right now. They can't aim for a huge change and started marching against the Islamic republic of Iran, but they can get to the point they like with these changes and these small changes. Plus I think right now the issue is more how they've been treated and lied to and.. So they want there right back more than anything and in this process Moussavi has suddenly become the face and the leader. They voted for him and now they want their vote to be realized. I also think he is a bit different now, not that his way of thinking or ideas has totally changed and his super open minded person but he has changed, and I strongly believe his wife is the power behind all that. 5.27pm: Twitterers are calling again for the Iranian people to shout "Allah-o-Akbar" from their rooftops at 10 pm tonight. That is one hour from now.5.31pm: I'm told the cries from the rooftops are to begin now and continue through midnight.5.33pm: All indications are the protests are on for tomorrow and that Khatami, Mousavi and Karroubi will be there along with supporters among the clerics.I'm told the Iranian Hezbollah said today it would not act against the protesters, and those who do (Basij militia, Revolutionary Guard, police) are "evil" and are not working on behalf of the will of God.I'm also told the word is that the Revolutionary Guard is itself split over how to react tomorrow, and that protesters believe the group will not crack down tomorrow. A reader tells me some are saying they were established for the people and will not fight against them. She says some dissenting IRG troops have been jailed.However, the reader tells me:People are concerned though that tomorrow will have more violence but the protesters are planning on staying together in large groups so that they can use their numbers as protection in the event the government sends out forces.5.42pm: The BBC is increasing the number of satellites broadcasting its Persian television service into Iran, Afghanistan and Tajikistan in an effort to combat broadcast interference from within Iran.5.49pm: On Comment is free America, Joshua Kucera has a timely piece reminding journalists and news followers to be wary of twitter rumours.One small problem with the piece: Kucera incorrectly states that twitter does not allow Farsi-language tweets.5.56pm: On Comment is free, Henry Newman writes that the history of political unrest in Iran shows the current movement cannot succeed without the support of the bazaar merchants. He also maps out how leading clerics could turn the tide against Khamenei.In Shia Islam believers have the choice to select the cleric (marja) they wish to follow. As a result there is a strong pressure for religious figures to attract flocks of believers. Without believers, clerics lack access to power (political and intellectual) and finances (through religious taxes and donations). Historically this religious "survival of the fittest" encouraged some clerics to align their judgments with the prevailing collective sentiment. As protesters continue to shake the country we should expect ever more fatwas in their support.6.07pm: The US house of representatives just voted 405-1 to condemn the regime's crackdown on protesters and the government's interference with cell phone networks and the internet.AP notes:The resolution was initiated by Republicans as a veiled criticism of President Barack Obama, who has been reluctant to criticize Tehran's handling of disputed elections that left hard-liner President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in power.The resolution reads in full:Expressing support for all Iranian citizens who embrace the values of freedom, human rights, civil liberties, and rule of law, and for other purposes. Resolved, That the House of Representatives-- (1) expresses its support for all Iranian citizens who embrace the values of freedom, human rights, civil liberties, and rule of law; (2) condemns the ongoing violence against demonstrators by the Government of Iran and pro-government militias, as well as the ongoing government suppression of independent electronic communication through interference with the Internet and cellphones; and (3) affirms the universality of individual rights and the importance of democratic and fair elections.6.18pm: Here is a rather disturbing video of protesters being shot, apparently by Basiji militiamen. The National Iranian American Council says it appears to have been taken at Defense Base 117 on Safa Alley in Tehran's District II.The video is several days old. It is unclear if any of the victims were seriously injured or killed.6.23pm: The US-based Balatarin blog is flooded with messages from readers who are outraged at Khamenei's warning that opposition leaders will be held responsible for further unrest and bloodshed, Guardian correspondent Robert Tait emails.One comment:In that case, the person responsible for all those killed during the revolution in 1978 and 1979 was not the shah but Khomeini.Another wrote:Mr Khamenei, the direct responsbility for any damage to people's lives or property from now on lies with you.6.27pm: According to CNN, the White House responds to Khamenei's speech with a reiteration of Obama's cautious line on the unrest.CNN reports that in a background briefing, top Obama administration officials said, "the US does not want to be a foil for anyone. This is a debate among Iranians, in Iran. It is easy to stake out a strong tough position, but this is not about the United States." The last statement sounds like a reaction to congressional conservatives like Representative Mike Pence and Senator John McCain who have called on the president more forcefully to denounce the regime and express support for the protest movement.When I get more on this I will post it.6.34pm: Guardian correspondent Robert Tait says that students at the fine arts faculty of Tehran university – where scores of students were injured and some reported killed after raids by security forces earlier this week – have announced that will stage an indefinite sit-in starting Saturday.This sounds like a crucial development.6.38pm: The wife of an Iranian Oxford student and Mousavi campaign worker says she fears for his safety after he was detained Wednesday at the airport on his way out of Iran, Haroon Siddique reports.6.46pm: On Comment is free, St Andrews University Iran analyst Ali Ansari writes that Khamenei has calculated that a show of strength will better bolster his authority than conciliation.The regime has laboured for years to portray the Shah as a bloodthirsty tyrant who shot at peaceful demonstrators, yet at the same time it is also generally accepted that the Shah lost his throne because he blinked and failed to use decisive force early enough. Lesson: use decisive force, be strong.Finally of course there is the worldview. In this respect Khamenei shares much with the Shah in that he seems to believe that responsibility lies with foreigners, especially the British. This particular mantra, repeated by hardliners, is perhaps the most revealing aspect of the whole speech, and much like the Shah before him, shows how out of touch he is with the reality on the ground. It is in truth a difficult judgement call to make, but he will no doubt have been reassured by his closest advisors that a "whiff of grapeshot" should do the trick. All we know for certain is that the stakes have all of a sudden got higher.6.53pm: Regarding my 5.33pm post, a reader reminds me that I should emphasise this is an unconfirmed rumour.He writes:I know many who have been disheartened by Khamenei's speech and scared to go out tomorrow -- news like that might embolden them, but it might also put their lives in danger... Any help in gaging the accuracy of what was posted would be tremendously useful.I'm afraid I am not in a position to gauge the accuracy of the report. So please take it with a grain of salt.6.58pm: A videogame blog reports that in Iran web browser game Travian has shut down a forum and chat programme within the game.7.03pm: On Petitionspot.com, more than 4,000 people have asked Google to put satellite images of Iranian protests in Google Earth.The petition reads:We need Google to upload new images of Tehran and other cities so we can follow the movement of protesters. Right now Iran is trying to pass off this movement as a small insignificant protest, we need the proof that it's a nationwide movement!Their goal is 100,000 signers.7.46pm: We have a new poll on our US news blog, Deadline USA.We're asking readers what they think President Barack Obama's next move should be, regarding the unrest in Iran.7.52pm: Reader Ali has an interesting take on Khamenei's speech and his apparently conciliatory words to former Iranian President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani.At the very least it's an effort to drive a wedge between him and Mousavi/Karroubi.Rafsanjani... may be tempted to abandon his erstwhile allies. It is telling he hasn't really come out in force with the "reformists" since the election – all we have are rumours that he's in Qom, possibly assembling the assembly of experts. Perhaps he's been waiting for Khamenei to make his move. That passage was clearly intended by Khamenei to change Rafsanjani's calculus.That said, his actions pre-election have nonetheless shown his hand against Khamenei and it will be difficult for the conservatives to welcome him back into their fold.In my mind, he has three options:1) Confront Khamenei via these rumours we've been hearing about the assembly2) Accept face saving measures, but likely be put under house arrest, (and cut off from power within Iran)3) Accept outright defeat and leave the countrySome background: Rafsanjani was elected president in 1989 and reelected in 1993. He lost the 2005 president election to Ahmadinejad, and he has emerged as a patron of Mousavi in this election. His son and daughter yesterday were banned from leaving Iran over their alleged role in inciting disturbances.8.08pm: A CNN reporter's mispronunciation of the Iranian supreme leader's surname is making my ears hurt. He's saying "Ayatollah Haw-men-ay-EE", with the stress on the final syllable.Note to American and British journos covering the situation in Iran: You'll gain a lot more credibility if you learn to say the names correctly. The best I can approximate the correct pronunciation in English letters is "KHAW-men-i". Got to get the voiceless velar fricative right.8.23pm: This video purports to be of security forces invading people's homes in Isfahan. I cannot make a head or a tail of this. Someone with better Farsi who can understand the girl's cries please email me a translation if you can. daniel.nasaw@guardian.co.uk8.30pm: I want to tamp down the rumour going around in Iran that Obama plans to speak at the Cylinder of Cyrus at the United Nations: I'm fairly sure this is not going to happen. It is certainly not on the president's schedule for this evening.My colleague, the Guardian's Washington bureau chief Ewen Macaskill has just returned from the daily White House press briefing. He said spokesman Robert Gibbs was pressed for half an hour to back the protest movement in Iran, but held the line. He said, following what Obama has said, that if the US issues a statement backing the Mousavi supporters the government will be playing into the regime's hand and bolstering Khamenei's public position that the demonstrations are the work of foreign meddlers."We're not going to be used as a political football," Gibbs said.8.40pm: An interesting article from Robert Fisk on the Independent website, from yesterday, assesses the letter going around that purports to prove that Mousavi actually won the election and acknowledging that Khamenei arranged to have the result fixed.9.39pm: Some readers sent me translations of the video I posted at 8.23pm:The man and woman speaking are seemingly family from this neighborhood. They are witnessing (and saying this on the video in disbelief) the attack of the basijis on people's homes, they are invading people's homes and shooting at them, chasing them up to their own roofs and shooting them down. The woman speaking is trying to reach her mother but the phone calls don't go through. She is taking the video and crying at the injustice, saying "How can I take this video and just watch people getting killed inside their own homes." The man yells at the basijs or police "Shame on you heartless people, don't shoot at people," and the woman cries out, "I hope you all die" and the man runs off for help, presumably, and asks her to keep filming. But then she cries "don't leave me alone here" and he seems to stay because then offers to take over filming.From what I can make of the video, in the first minute they're talking about various members of their family and where they are. Apparently they're trying to call their mother but they can't get through. After that, she claims that there's been shooting and records someone on the rooftops, who I assume to be a Basiji. She starts crying when the Basijis begin breaking the windows of what appears to be a random person's house, and she's saying that "they're breaking into people's homes", and "they're ravaging people's homes". They seem to be saying that the rest of their family has gone to gym, and they're obviously in distress for the safety of their family.9.49pm: Reader Morteza sends this transcription of the Isfahan video. I've got all I need, readers, thanks.1st guy: Where are they going? The girl: Why are they coming this way? I did not see them!The guy: They came from the other way , they can not come this way.1st guy: Were is every one?The girl: Mom and every one else are at at the club1st guy: It is ok! The girl: What are they doing? 2nd guy: Why did they go to the club? Erfan said it, they are stupid! Girl :Yesterday was like this too, they had to go today.2nd guy: How stupid! Why did he (Erfan) say that, we are human too in this house!The girl: Mom went to get them. Erfan is stupid2nd guy: Why did she go in a situation like this!1st guy: Mom made a mistake to leave like this.The girl: I called her she is not answering2nd guy: These idiots why did they go to the clubThe girl: It was quiet.2nd guy: It was quiet ?The guy: It is night now don't they know How are they coming? oh..oh they are coming from the roof. Oh they coming from the roof The girl: they are shooting. They are breaking into housesThe guy: Continue filmingThe girl: They are shooting1st guy: (screaming) Do not break in into people's home!They girl: Saied do not say anything, he is going to throw rocks at you, he is throwing rocks at people below.Girl crying: They breaking inGuy: Continue filmingGirl crying out: I hope you die! They are breaking into people's homes. Oh my God, they are destrying people's home!2nd Guy: stupid/idiots why did they go to the club!