While the rest of Iran celebrates the Persian new year, our friend Roxana Saberi, an American-Iranian journalist, is being held in Evin prison in north Tehran. She has been detained since late January and has been allowed only the briefest telephone conversations with her family and minimal access to printed materials. Reasons for her arrest and detention are frustratingly unclear: there have been vague and unsubstantiated references to buying wine and working without a press card but no formal charges have been made against her. After two months in limbo, her parents, Reza and Akiko Saberi, at home in Fargo, North Dakota, where Roxana grew up, are worried about her mental state.Saberi's case has found support at the highest level: secretary of state Hillary Clinton speaking to Nato in Brussels was firm: "We believe there is only one outcome to this matter, and that is for her to be released as soon as possible to return home to her family in North Dakota." The state department, working through its Interests Section at the Swiss embassy in Iran, has said it is in all-hands-on-deck mode. Other countries, including Japan (Saberi's mother is Japanese), are involved on her behalf.Support has come from other quarters: a host of news editors from organisations including NPR, Fox and the BBC (Saberi has worked as a journalist for all three) urged her immediate release and Lindsey Hilsum, international editor of Channel 4 News, who knows Saberi, wrote a concerned article about her imprisonment. Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and the Committee to Protect Journalists are actively working on the case. There were positive signs from Iran: two weeks ago Hassan Haddad, Tehran's deputy prosecutor, and senior Iranian foreign ministry officials promised that Saberi would be released "within a few days". Time ticked past but nothing happened; this false hope was particularly painful for anxious family and friends. Since then, requests for her release on bail have been denied. Prospects of her immediate return home seem slim as Iranian ministries and offices are now closed for a two-week holiday and we are worried that Saberi's case may slip from the spotlight.We first met Saberi as students living in Iran, a country whose people welcomed us and for which all three of us have great respect and affection: we were classmates in a Persian language class at the Dehkhoda Institute, University of Tehran; and Saberi and Coco Ferguson went on to study for a master's at the School of International Relations in Tehran. Saberi is a warm and kind friend whose gentle nature belies her tough determination to work under difficult circumstances. We hope that this toughness is enough to get her through this nightmare.The last few days have seen the most promising signs for three decades of a healing of US–Iran relations: President Barack Obama's extraordinary new year video message and Hillary Clinton's invitation to Iran to sit at the table to discuss Afghanistan's future have opened fresh avenues. In response, Iranian supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who has the ultimate authority to release Saberi, did not slam the door shut, but instead responded that constructive actions would be met in kind. In that spirit one easy and generous step for Iran would be to send Saberi home to America.We ask that Iran respect its own rule of law as well as the international treaties to which it is a party (such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights). She must be afforded safe physical and mental treatment, her human rights must be upheld and she must immediately be released, or otherwise formally charged. Please, do what you can to publicise the issue of her detention and to appeal for her speedy release: write respectfully to the Iranian embassy in London; ask your MP to raise her case in Parliament; follow her cause online here.