In a city that has borne the effects of sanctions and international isolation for over a decade, the indefinite conclusion of Iran’s nuclear negotiations with the 5+1 group yielded mixed reactions in Tehran: Businessmen made cautiously optimistic predictions about the market, establishment-wary activists warned of opaque economic currents, and the city’s taxi drivers, overworked and underpaid, made the same cynical predictions they made when the 5+1 talks began over one year ago.In an all-girls’ third-grade civics class which gives young pupils snippets of insight into the workings of Iranian political structure, a pupil asked the teacher about the role of foreign affairs minister Javad Zarif. When the other children chimed in with questions about the nuclear talks, the teacher gave a simple answer: “Mr Zarif will save us.”A similarly hopeful tone appeared on the front pages of major reformist newspapers, whose editors largely echoed President Hassan Rouhani’s televised 24 November statement that although the negotiating sides failed to reach a final agreement, conditions are “completely different from three months and six months ago. The logic has come closer together and many gaps have been filled.”Etemad daily emphasized Rouhani’s statement that “people’s lives would take a turn for the better” after a successful nuclear deal.The nation’s conservative dailies, voicing their long-held belief that Rouhani’s government was being too soft in its negotiations with the west, printed more critical headlines. “Kad khoda [the village chief] was not trustworthy; the sanctions have been extended,” read the front-page editorial of Kayhan, whose editor-in-chief Hossein Shariatmadari is a close associate of the supreme leader. “Nothing!” read the front page of Vatan-e-Emrooz, a newspaper associated with former president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, in a one-word analysis of the results yielded by Iran’s nuclear negotiators after one year of talks.While most dailies prominently displayed images from Vienna, many editors also gave front-page space to the upcoming meeting of OPEC on 27 November, widely expected to lead to a drop in global oil prices and placing further strain on Iran’s chief source of revenue.“Rouhani is presenting today’s decision as a victory to present optimism in the future of the market,” said a former news editor. “In reality, if European and American investors aren’t allowed to step into Iran, it cannot be very hopeful for our economic recovery.”In this context, the $700 million Iran still expects to repatriate as part of existing sanctions relief accords is “not the biggest achievement,” he said. According to “Majid”, a Tehran-based entrepreneur, “the real issue is how the $150 billion still blocked [in foreign accounts] will get spent or accessed. Once that is done, the regime is definitely set to be the next big empire in the east.”While Iranians continue to hope for new economic opportunities, many are concerned any final agreement will only benefit the ruling elite. Despite its pre-election promises, the Rouhani government has been slow to implement the sociocultural relaxations demanded by reform-minded Iranians. Illegal imports have been a profitable source of revenue for many within the current ruling structure, and many observers sense that a gradual unravelling of the sanctions regime benefits power brokers anxious to maintain control of the the economy as well as the political situation. “The nezaam is too smart to allow for something perestroika-style to happen here,” said Amir Hossein, 32, a local political activist. Observers also voiced fears that any economic opening would escalate a non-transparent privatization process that would ultimately empower the Revolutionary Guards (IRGC), which hold stakes in the country’s main industrial sectors. “It is critical to understand the 12 years of sanctions, their impact and what everybody is after. I am not sure anyone is being public about what their goals are,” said Majid. “The economic hardships in Iran are too hard to ignore and the reality is that a military elite in Iran is getting ready to take control.” 