The US Congress yesterday approved tough new unilateral sanctions aimed at squeezing Iran's energy and banking sectors, which could also hurt companies from other countries doing business with Tehran.The House of Representatives passed the bill 408-8 and sent it to President Barack Obama for signing into law. The Senate had approved it 99-0 earlier in the day.Congress wants to pressurise Tehran into curbing its nuclear programme, which Washington suspects is aimed at making a bomb.Democrat and Republican politicians have been pushing for months to tighten US sanctions on Iran. At the request of the Obama administration they held off until the United Nations security council and the European Union agreed on multilateral sanctions. But the politicians then declared that tougher measures were needed."The UN sanctions, though a good first step, are quite tepid. And they are tepid because there are other members of the Security Council who want to keep doing that business with Iran … The United States … has to pass these unilateral sanctions," the Democratic senator Barbara Mikulski said.The bill penalises companies supplying Iran with petrol as well as international banking institutions involved with Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard, its nuclear programme or what Washington calls its support for terrorist activity.Foreign banks doing business with key Iranian banks or the Revolutionary Guards would be "shut out of the US financial system", said the bill's author, foreign affairs committee chairman Howard Berman, who is a Democrat.Global suppliers of petrol to Iran could also face bans on access to the US banking system, property transactions and foreign exchange in the US. Iran depends on petrol imports because it has insufficient refining capacity."Because of this legislation, we will be posing a choice to companies around the world. Do you want to do business with Iran, or do you want to do business with the United States?" Republican senator John McCain said during a Senate debate.US companies are already prohibited from doing business with Iran. Foreign companies with big investments in Iran's energy sector can be sanctioned under current US law. But many US politicians say this has not been enforced.Some companies worldwide, such as Italy's oil and gas company Eni and French energy giant Total, have been backing away from business with Tehran amid the US drive to isolate Iran.Other companies are still in business with Iran or considering it. Russia's Gazprom says it is interested in developing the Azar oil field, and industry sources say China has been selling petrol to Iran.The Obama administration failed to get US politicians to make blanket exemptions for countries that are co-operating with multilateral efforts to isolate Iran.The legislation only allows the president to waive the new sanctions on companies from "co-operating" countries on a case-by-case basis, for 12 months.But even this waiver was too lenient for some Republicans in the House of Representatives, who worried Obama would use it."The many companies from China and elsewhere, rapidly building Iran's energy facilities today, will be surely exempted from these sanctions," said representative Ed Royce. He said he would nonetheless vote for the bill.Russia and China, which have strong economic ties with Tehran and have at times resisted sanctions, supported recent UN sanctions. But they fought US efforts to approve tougher measures targeting Iran's energy sector.