The news that Iran may have experimented with a relatively sophisticated two-point detonation design for a nuclear warhead is the latest important fragment to emerge from the IAEA's "Possible military dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme" document.Parts of the document have been leaked before to the Associated Press and the Institute for Science and International Security (ISIS), but this latest twist suggests the Iranian scientists could have been much further along the road to weaponisation than previously thought.The document has been colloquially described as the "secret annexe". My understanding is that it was never meant to be an annexe but is rather an open computer file into which the IAEA's inspectors put all the material they gathered on alleged weaponisation. It includes a hodge-podge of documentation that is single sourced and multiple sourced, reliable and questionable, solid and dodgy, and was not intended for publication. However, some in the IAEA's safeguards department thought the agency should provide an update on its sterile pursuit of answers from the Iranians in the form of an annexe to its latest report on Iran. The political side of the agency argued that would be inflammatory as there was nothing really new and conclusive to say. The struggle between the two sides is dogging the IAEA, and is an unhappy legacy of Mohamed ElBaradei's time at the helm.The research into synchronised high explosive detonations - including multipoint and two-point - is one of the most alarming elements of what the IAEA calls the "outstanding issues" or the "alleged studies" into weaponisation. If Iranian scientists made significant progress with two-point detonation, it would represent a leap towards eventually being able to stick a warhead on a missile.The great advantage of two-point detonation is that it involves the use of ovoid, rugby (or gridiron) football-shaped explosive shell, or fissile pit, with a smaller diameter than the spherical multipoint implosion device used in Fat Man, in Nagasaki. That means a smaller diameter for the same yield. It could be consistent, for example, with the 'baby bottle' or 'triconic' nose-cones on Shahab-3 missiles.The apparent leap forward in warhead technology that these documents imply, point towards outside help and it will refocus attention on the issue of "foreign expertise" in weaponisation that the agency raised in its reporting in September last year. I am reliably informed that the foreign expert under scrutiny was a Russian weapons specialist, whose presence in the country will raise questions once more of the nature of the relationship between the two countries.As far as dates are concerned, most but not all of the material in the dossier relates back to the period before 2004. It does not necessarily conflict with the US National Intelligence Estimate two years ago, that found it likely that Iran suspended weaponisation work in 2003. But timing is less important to the IAEA inspectors than piecing together a complete picture of the history of Iran's nuclear programme. If it happened at all, they want to know about it. They also want to know what the people and institutions involved in explosives testing and other alleged studies are doing now, but they are not being told.