During the two months since Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's election grab, Iran's human rights situation has worsened, with mass arrests and detentions as well as brutal repression of peaceful demonstrations by various state forces. On the international level, Iran has further jeopardised its relationship with key western states – notably Britain and France – through allegations of "interference" and arrests of local embassy staff as well as their citizenry.Although mass public protests appear to have died down, a wide cross-section of Iranian society is deeply dissatisfied with the political situation and schisms divide the heart of Iran's political-religious ruling elite.Over the last two months, the Iranian state has antagonised and abused thousands of its citizens. Back in July, Tehran's prosecutor-general, Qorban-Ali Dorri Najafabadi, acknowledged the arrest of more than 2,500 in the capital alone. The International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran lists some 240 prominent detainees currently held and notes that many of these were arrested by "unidentified agents and taken to undisclosed locations. They are mostly held in incommunicado detention and have no access to legal counsel."These actions are in clear violation of the basic rights guaranteed both by Iran's domestic legal codes and by the international treaties to which Iran is a signatory. Others arrested well before the current imbroglio, such as Silva Harotonian and Hossein Derakhshan, are still detained.Many of those detained in prison have allegedly suffered appalling treatment, with multiple reports of beatings, torture and sexual abuse. Last Sunday in a provocative move, Mehdi Karroubi, the opposition figurehead and a defeated candidate from the June presidential elections, published an open letter detailing the rape and sexual abuse of both male and female prisoners and explicitly comparing such actions to the abuses perpetrated by the late shah's Savak forces. Karroubi has now issued a further statement alleging that detained protesters have been tortured and beaten to death. Amnesty International has warned of an "alarming spike in executions" since the disputed election on 12 June. Amnesty counts at least 196 executions in 2009 before 12 June and a staggering 115 in a period of less than two months, with 24 executions on 5 August alone, the day of Ahmedinejad's inauguration.These executions are all the more ghastly given the blatant injustice of the legal process and trials to which Iranian defendants are subjected. Detained protesters and opposition figures face flagrantly biased trials, often in the revolutionary courts. On 1 August there was a "mass trial" of more than 100 opposition figures which former president Mohammad Khatami condemned as a "show", denouncing the violation of Iran's constitutional norms.There have also been attempts by the state to further extend its hegemony through the legal system and to limit structurally the possibilities of lawyers opposing legal violations. Back on 17 June the judiciary revised the regulations governing membership of the Iranian Bar Association. Although the decision seems to have since been suspended for six months, the reform was designed to severely compromise the (already threatened) independence of the bar association. "This so-called reform would allow the government to handpick the lawyers who are allowed to practise … What we see here is a naked effort to intimidate Iranian defence lawyers at a time when the government is detaining hundreds of people without charge," wrote Joe Stork of Human Rights Watch. The introduction of the reforms was accompanied by a wave of arrests of human rights lawyers including Muhammad Ali Dadkhah (still currently detained), a member of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre, whose current president is the Nobel peace laureate Shirin Ebadi.Iranian journalists are in a perilous position, with the Committee for the Protection of Journalists calling Iran the "world's leading jailer of journalists" and reporting the forced closure on 5 August of the Association of Iranian Journalists. There is clearly an intention to intimidate journalists and a source in Tehran reported a deliberate strategy among state security forces of targeting reporters during protests. Foreign journalists have also been targeted and were banned from attending opposition rallies. In a highly unusual move, Iason Athanasiadis, a foreign journalist who holds Greek and British citizenship and has written for the Guardian, was arrested and detained for 19 days in solitary confinement.The situation in Iran presents serious challenges to the entire international community – not just the western world – particularly as fears over Iran's nuclear programme grow ever greater. Britain's decision to send its ambassador to attend Ahmedinejad's inauguration seems to reflect a pragmatic decision to play "good cop" to America's bad and to keep open lines of communication with Ahmedinejad's administration. Engagement, with carrots as well as sticks, remains by far the best option given the inefficacy of further sanctions and the disastrous potential of military strikes.The international community must continue to highlight the abuses of the Iranian state and the widespread violations of the basic rights of Iranian citizens. The British public and political elite should petition Iran to respect both international and Iranian legal norms. Muslim groups must also condemn the abuses conducted by a state claiming to be Islamic: it is depressing indeed that the Muslim Council of Britain is yet to issue a statement on this topic.Political space in Iran remains surprisingly open despite recent attempts to intimidate and limit the press and public, as well as to intervene in electoral politics. Vociferous public debate continues, and a range of political opinions are still expressed. The opposition is powerful, with enormous popular support, and it now includes not just many senior clerics but a selection of the founding fathers of the 1979 revolution. Change within the system may still be possible but it will take time.