International efforts led by the US, and now the EU, to impose sanctions against Iran so soon after the Turkey-Iran-Brazil deal is seen by some analysts as a missed opportunity to engage Iran. Others see it as a sign that the US cannot take "yes" from Iran, meaning that it is unwilling to accept Iranian compromises.However, if we look at Iran's behaviour, it is in fact the Iranian leadership that has missed an opportunity to engage the United States. Since coming to office, Barack Obama has tried to reach out to Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, through his private message, sent in May 2009, calling for "co-operation in regional and bilateral relations" between the US and Iran.This is in addition to the deal Obama offered the Iranian government last October, under which Iran was to have shipped close to 75% of its low-enriched uranium (LEU) for conversion to nuclear fuel. In order to reach that deal, Obama was willing to ignore three UN resolutions that call for Iran to suspend uranium enrichment. Not only did Khamenei reject his offer, he ordered Iranian scientist to upgrade the level of enrichment to 20%. This advanced Iran's ability to reach levels of enrichment that can also be used to make a bomb.The recent sanctions do not mean Obama is rejecting negotiations. His administration stated on countless occasions that it is willing to engage Iran, standing up to powerful Republican voices in Congress. This is one of the reasons why Obama is supported by five permanent members of the UN security council. They see him as reversing eight years of "Axis of Evil" rhetoric and are willing to back him for it.All that Obama and his security council backers are asking is that Iran transfer enough LEU abroad so it cannot make a bomb while it is negotiating with the west. Had the Turkish-Brazilian deal managed to achieve this, it is extremely likely that it would have been acceptable, especially to Obama. With mid-term elections coming up, and the economic crisis in the US continuing, Turkey and Brazil would have removed a headache for the US president. The same could have been said for other members of the UNSC, especially China and Russia, who want the Iranian issue to be resolved as soon as possible so they can continue the lucrative sale of their products and services to Iran.The fact remains that the Turkish-Brazilian deal did not attain this objective. On the contrary, the amount of LEU that would remain in Iran during the talks would have been sufficient for Iran to make a bomb while the talks were continuing. This was unacceptable.Furthermore, Washington – along with other members of the security council – would love to hear a "yes" from Iran that they can accept. That would be a "yes" in response to the question: "Is Iran willing to fully co-operate with the IAEA and come clean about its nuclear programme?"In fact, a positive answer would serve Iranian national interests more than any one else's. However, that answer has not been forthcoming, to the point where the IAEA continues to state that it is not convinced that Iran's nuclear programme is for civilian purposes only. This will strengthen the belief Khamenei only has his own interests at heart, and not those of the Iranian people.Until such times, security council members and other members of the international community, including the EU, have every right not to trust Iran. After all, why would a country that claims to want to use its nuclear programme only for civilian purposes experiment with an advanced nuclear warhead design?Iran has still not provided a satisfactory answer to the discovery of such plans by the IAEA. And why would it start building a secret enrichment facility near the city of Qom? Iranian officials gave their own explanations, but the IAEA found them insufficient. This is why its former head, Mohamed ElBaradei stated clearly that in that case "Iran was on the wrong side the law".The leaders of the Islamic Republic, especially its supreme leader, are masters of re-labelling. They hold elections in Iran and try to sell them to the international community as free and genuine. They try to avoid sanctions by declaring they are showing willing to compromise with the Turkish-Brazilian deal.If we look closely, however, we see that in reality this is an attempt to camouflage their work on a bomb while they enjoy the international community's protection. They failed to fool the people of Iran. And, as we can see by the overwhelming support shown for Obama, they are also failing to fool the international community.