The ruling establishment in Iran is facing the most testing period of its existence. A fraction of its former size, it has been beset by one crisis after another in the last 33 years. So far the leadership has displayed an uncanny instinct for survival despite serious foreign and domestic challenges.Always aggressive and uncompromising in its diplomacy, only once has the regime ever backed down: in 1988 when faced with serious reverses in the Iran-Iraq war, the late Ayatollah Khomeini agreed to a ceasefire – an act he likened to "consuming a jug of poison". But now the late Ayatollah's heirs could be in for a repeat of his humiliating experience.Having prevaricated for more than a decade over the nuclear issue, there is little room left for diplomatic tactics. International isolation and biting sanctions have brought the Iranian economy to the verge of a meltdown and, alongside the potential fallout of a military confrontation with Israel, mean the regime must in its encounter with the "P5+1" (the UN security council and Germany) this week decide if it wants a diplomatic settlement or to pursue the path of a conflict it knows it cannot risk. Because Tehran's decisions are always guided by a cost-benefit approach – especially when it comes to its own ultimate survival – many still expect a possible diplomatic solution to this potentially explosive crisis.Nonetheless, the acquisition of nuclear weapons will remain an integral part of the Islamic regime's strategy. Why else would it have put itself and the Iranian nation through so much hardship and isolation in the past 10 years. Its foreign policy also hinges on its ability to stand up to the west and provide an umbrella for its surrogates – a goal that requires becoming a member of the nuclear club.No choice made by the regime will be "cost-free". Faced with having to submit to intrusive inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency, or the humiliation of having its nuclear facilities attacked, a "rational actor" would opt for the less costly short-term option of a diplomatic settlement. The Iranian leadership is eager not to follow Saddam Hussein's example, knowing that if the Iraqi dictator had left Kuwait 24 hours prior to the start of hostilities in 1991, he might never have lost his stranglehold on the Iraqi people.But dictatorships always display a tendency for overplaying their hand, and the Khomenei-Ahmadinejad tandem is no exception. There is always a possibility that rationality will not prevail and that diplomatic talks will not achieve their aim. A freak accident in the delicate situation between Iranian forces and the US and other naval forces in the Persian Gulf could also trigger an unexpected encounter that could get out of hand. This is exacerbated by the fact that Iran's Arab neighbours are as concerned about a nuclear Iran as Israel.A tactical compromise therefore will only be putting off the inevitable as the regime cannot afford to simply jettison its nuclear ambitions. Time is not on its side and, despite a resurgence of Islamic movements as a result of the Arab spring, it knows that political Islam in Iran has been dead for a long time. Thus to avoid the risk of public unrest in the event of a military strike, its aim for now would be to try and stabilise a volatile situation with a view to resurrecting its nuclear ambitions as soon as the coast is clear.