Iran's ever watchful authorities have long kept close ties on the internet but now they have surpassed themselves by ordering the closure of five websites in a single day. The sites have been deemed guilty of "disturbing public opinion" in the run-up to next month's parliamentary elections. While news sites have been closed before, this is the first time so many have been targeted at the same time.Four of the sites have so far not been identified but, strikingly, the one that has been named Nosazi (Reconstruction) is noted for its hardline sentiments and is believed to be closely allied to President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Most of those closed in the past have been critical of Ahmadinejad.Nosazi's crime was to launch a vitriolic attack on Hassan Khomeini, a mid-ranking cleric and grandson of the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, spiritual leader of the 1979 Islamic revolution. It accused Khomeini, a moderate figure, of supporting the 1997-2005 reformist government of Mohammad Khatami, from which, it said, he had received a £40,000 BMW as a gift. The attack triggered a wave of indignation, with Mehdi Karroubi, a former parliamentary speaker, Ahmadinejad critic and one-time confidant of the late Ayatollah, condemning it as "shamelessness". Khomeini's office issued a statement on Monday denying that he had ever owned a BMW, or any other expensive car, and threatened legal action.The attacks came after another Khomeini grandson, Ali Esharaghi, who has been identified as pro-reformist, was disqualified from standing in next month's elections. He has since been reinstated after an outcry.Nosazi today appeared unrepentant, publishing a verse by the legendary Iranian poet, Hafez, to lament its closure. In a short news item, the site said it had received a closure notice from the Texas-based company providing its internet space before the decision had been officially announced by the culture and Islamic guidance ministry. Friday Update 6pmNosazi's ire had originally been raised by an interview given by Khomeini to the magazine Shahrvand-e Emrouz, to mark the 29th anniversary of the revolution, in which he criticised the disqualification of around 2,200 parliamentary candidates by a state-controlled electoral watchdog and outlined his grandfather's opposition to the revolutionary guards becoming involved in politics. The interview was published two days after the guards' current chief commander, Mohammad Ali Jafari, broke with convention by openly declaring support for conservative candidates in the election .