At its core, the joint comprehensive plan of action (JCPOA) is a straightforward bargain: Iran’s acceptance of strict limits on its nuclear programme in return for escape from the forest of sanctions that has grown up around its economy over the last decade. In addition, Iran would have to accept extensive monitoring and cooperate with an inquiry looking into evidence of past work on nuclear warhead design. These are the main points of the agreement: Iran’s current capacity of 19,000 gas centrifuges would be reduced by more than two-thirds to 6,104, out of which just over 5,000 would actually be enriching uranium. All of them would be first-generation centrifuges based on technology going back to the 1950s. Furthermore, for the first 15 years of the deal Iran would not enrich beyond the level of 3.67% purity, low-enriched uranium (LEU) of the kind used in nuclear power stations. This cavern under a mountain near the city of Qom first came to light in 2009. Under the agreement, it would be used only for non-military research. Two-thirds of its centrifuges would be removed and the remainder would not be allowed to enrich uranium. No fissile material would be allowed at the site. These restrictions would apply for 15 years.Iran’s stockpile of LEU would be reduced from its current level of about 7,500kg to 300kg, a reduction of 96%. The reduction would be achieved either by shipping the uranium abroad or by diluting it. There would be limits on the R&D work Iran could do on advanced centrifuges, so that it could not suddenly upgrade its enrichment capacity after the first 10 years of the agreement and bring its breakout time down from one year to a few weeks almost overnight. Iran would be able to test experimental new centrifuges on a small scale according to a gradual plan. Iran would remove the reactor core and fill it with concrete. The reactor would be redesigned so that it produces much less plutonium, if any, and all its spent fuel would be shipped out of the country. Iran would refrain from building a reprocessing plant – or even doing research on reprocessing – indefinitely, and would not build any new heavy water plants for 15 years. Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) would have full access to all Iran’s declared nuclear sites as at present, but with much more advanced technology than they are using now. Inspectors would be able to visit non-declared sites where they think nuclear work might be going on. A commission made up of a range of IAEA members would be set up to judge whether the inspectors’ access requests are justified, and would take its decision by majority vote.  Iran has agreed a “road map” with the IAEA officials by which it would provide access to facilities and people suspected of involvement in past experimental work on warhead design, managed by a centralised and covert unit, mostly before 2004. The IAEA would have to certify Iranian cooperation with the inquiry before Iran benefits from sanctions relief.  As Iran takes the agreed steps listed above to reduce the capacity and proliferation risk of its nuclear infrastructure, the US and EU would provide guarantees that financial and economic sanctions will be suspended or cancelled. The EU would stop its oil embargo and end its banking sanctions, and Iran would be allowed to participate in the Swift electronic banking system that is the lifeblood of international finance. Barack Obama would issue presidential waivers suspending the operation of US trade and financial sanctions.  The JCPOA will be incorporated into a new security council resolution intended to replace and supersede six earlier sanctions resolutions imposed on Iran over its nuclear programme. The resolution will be passed before the end of the month but the agreement will not take effect for 90 days, allowing for the domestic political review to be completed. An arms embargo on Iran would remain in place for five years, and a ban on the transfer of missile technology would stay for eight years. 