It's one third of the "axis of evil" and its name is more likely to conjure up thoughts of mad mullahs, chadors and nuclear weaponry than contemporary performance. But as the Iran: New Voices season at the Barbican has shown over the last two weeks, this country of more than 70 million people which nestles between Iraq and Afghanistan is a far more subtle and protean entity than the tabloid headlines would ever want you to believe.The season presented three productions: Daedalus and Icarus by the Mungu theatre company, Quartet: A Journey North from the Mehr theatre company and The Power of a Cliche by Haleh Anvari. Accompanying these was a programme of Iranian cinema and a series of lectures and discussions which explored not just the shows themselves, but also the history and current state of Iranian performance.It shouldn't be surprising that Iranian culture is far more complex and accessible than the propaganda suggests. Yet this dissonance between popular perception and reality turned out to be a recurring concern for many of the season's participants. Amir Reza Koohestani, the author of Quartet: A Journey North, made this point when he said that many of the audiences he has come across in this country were fascinated by him simply because "they have never seen a real, live Iranian".What was especially striking about all three shows was quite how much they had in common, stylistically, with much of the theatre that is produced in the west. Daedalus and Icarus was a reworked, highly physicalised version of the old Greek myth about flying too close to the sun. With its absurd comedy, it owed as much to Waiting for Godot as any indigenous form of Iranian performance. Quartet: A Journey North – a semi-verbatim piece about two Iranian murderers – took some of its inspiration from the traditional Shia ritual drama Taziyeh, but its use of video and the contrast between live and recorded performance explored similar territory to some of Katie Mitchell's recent work. It turns out that these artistic parallels and overlaps are nothing new. William Beeman, a professor of anthropology at the University of Minnesota, pointed out in one discussion that there are surprising similarities between the traditional Iranian blackface clown and the harlequin character from commedia dell'arte. What is perplexing, though, is that no one knows how this similarity arose – or which character came first. Inevitably, the political situation in Iran was an omnipresent backdrop to the Barbican season. Initially it seemed that many of the festival's participants were unwilling to discuss the issue explicitly. Homayun Ghanizadeh, the writer and director of Daedalus and Icarus, refused to be drawn on whether his tale of an oppressive father's bullying of his son could be read as a metaphor for the relationship between the Iranian state and its people. He preferred to speak vaguely about how it depicted an intergenerational conflict that was common across the "oriental world".It was not until the last day of the festival that these political questions really took centre stage. Haleh Anvari's English-language piece The Power of a Cliche mixed lecture and autobiographical monologue to examine the meaning of the chador – the black, full-length veil that Iranian women are obliged to wear. As the title suggests, Anvari's aim was to address some of the stereotypes that surround Iran. She argued that this single item of clothing has become the "preferred icon" of both the western media, which wants to depict Iranian women as hopelessly oppressed, and the patriarchal authorities in Iran who seek to infantilise their female population. Her forthright presentation showed that she was neither infant nor victim. Perhaps it should not be surprising that Anvari's piece was the most explicitly political. As she admitted herself, it has never been performed in Iran – unlike the other two shows. If she did want to perform it there, she would have to alter much of the content so as not to offend the authorities who, she argued, see the chador as being part of their own "brand". If the Barbican's season demonstrates anything, it is that not only is this kind of cross-cultural conversation vital in overcoming common prejudices, but also that this dialogue is actually already thriving, even though you might not notice it at first glance.