When countries demonise their opponents as thoroughly as the United States and Iran have demonised each other over the years there are penalties to be paid when the time comes to make a change. Leaders may decide that circumstances have altered, that yesterday's enemy is, if not today's friend, at least somebody with whom it is worth doing business. But around their necks hangs the albatross of adverse public opinion and the prejudice of party rank and file.So it is with the Iran nuclear deal. Both President Obama and President Hassan Rouhani face sceptics not content with mere criticism of the bargain, but seemingly ready to sabotage it. Rouhani had to cope this week with what seemed very much like threats from the commander of the Revolutionary Guard, but at least so far faces no hostile action from the country's legislature. President Obama does, with Republicans and his own Democrats in the House of Representatives and the Senate in mutinous mood. In both houses there were moves to prepare new sanctions on Iran to come into effect if the interim deal does not lead to the fuller agreement hoped for after six months of further negotiations. Although ostensibly designed to strengthen Washington in those talks, such legislation would almost certainly kill the deal at a stroke.It now seems as if the White House has persuaded some key players in both houses to hold off on these plans. But to do so it has had to send secretary of state John Kerry to argue before them that he is just as mistrustful of the Iranians as they are. America also this week punished companies that have in the past traded with Iran in defiance of US sanctions, presumably to convince critics that the US government is still playing tough.Predictable muttering followed from Tehran. But these are not sanctions, and Iran will not allow them to unravel the deal. That could still happen, however, if Congress meddles again in diplomacy. The context is that a large proportion of American lawmakers and citizens think Iran will cheat, and that it still wants to acquire nuclear weapons. In particular, Americans worry that Iran would hand them to terrorists. Ignorance is in play here, as it seems hugely unlikely that a Shia state would give such power to Sunni extremists.John Kerry has tried to show that negotiating with Iran is not about naively trusting Tehran but about exploring its intentions and shaping its choices. Different though their respective political situations are, Rouhani is saying the same thing in Iran. It would be tragic if this chance were to be thrown away because of short-sighted posturing in either country.