If the draft nuclear deal between Iran and the west is confirmed it will be a major victory for Ayatollah Khamenei and his conservative allies.First, the deal will significantly reduce the chances of sanctions and war against his country. This will be welcomed in Tehran, especially after the recent unrest. Many conservatives were concerned that the west could use the current atmosphere of disunity as an opportunity to strike at the regime, through military or economic means. Their fears will be allayed, giving Khamenei the opportunity to attend to internal matters.This could mean an increase in the levels of violence used against demonstrators. It would be logical for Iran's supreme leader to believe that the west is unlikely to risk a nuclear deal for the sake of interfering in his country's internal affairs. This means that he could now even go after Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karoubi.The agreement is the final confirmation that Iran's nuclear programme is now squarely in the hands of the conservatives, and that the reformists are out of the picture. In 2003, the reformists managed to persuade Khamenei to agree to a temporary suspension of uranium enrichment. Conservatives saw red and they accused former president Mohammad Khatami and Iran's nuclear negotiator Hassan Rowhani of treason.Now, after two meetings with the Americans, the very same conservatives are backing a deal in which the majority of Iran's low-enriched uranium (LEU) will be handed over to the west. This is the very same LEU that has cost Iran its position in the international community, three UN resolutions, sanctions and, if western reports are to be believed, the lives of some of its nuclear scientists. All gone. And the conservatives are unapologetic.This proposed agreement is likely to allow Khamenei to better prepare for future is, should he later decide that co-operation with the west is against his interests. This is especially true in the economic arena. Under his command, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has embarked on a reform programme that will gradually phase out subsidies.These measures will be unpopular. Had international sanctions been imposed during or immediately after this change, it could have caused further instability for his regime. The proposed agreement will provide him with an important respite, he will be able to implement the measures without the fear of sanctions. And if in the situation between his government and the west deteriorates again in the future, the subsidies reduction plan will already be in place, thus making it more challenging for the west to hurt his regime through economic means.Furthermore, the current deal does not seem to call for increased inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). This means that if Iran has other secret sites where it is carrying out illegal clandestine operations, it will now be able to continue to do so with less concern about being caught. In fact, Iran could now expand the civilian part of its nuclear programme, especially the uranium enrichment process, to a point at which it could be easier in the future to turn it to military purposes. Recently Abdolfazl Zohrevand, an adviser to the Iranian Supreme National Security Council secretary Saeed Jalili, told an Iranian news agency that "Iran has the ability to enrich uranium up to 20% and may want to achieve 63% enrichment". Iran's talk of increasing its enrichment levels to 63% provides reason for concern.According to Dr Ephraim Asculai, a nuclear expert at the Institute for National Security Studies (INSS): "Although not certain, this level of enrichment (63%) is probably the penultimate enrichment stage before reaching the fully military grade of around 90%". In fact, reaching this stage of enrichment could be the "good news" that a senior nuclear official recently promised the people of Iran. Even if Iran does not reach this stage, at minimum it now has a suitable environment to invest heavily in its enrichment programme until the next round of negotiations.Although this agreement marks a major achievement for the conservatives, Khamenei still has his work cut out for him. Future failure to co-operate with the international community could sour the sweet taste of this victory, in a relatively short space of time.