Ed Miliband, the leader of the UK opposition, has given his strongest endorsement to date of British military action in Iraq, but suggested he would not back the US action in Syria without a United Nations resolution.His words pave the way for a recall of parliament on Friday to allow MPs to vote on the issue.David Cameron, the prime minister, is meeting his Iraqi counterpart in New York on Wednesday to be handed a formal request to join the broad coalition conducting air strikes against Islamic State (also known as Isis or Isil), a move that would legitimise military action by the RAF.But Miliband, the Labour leader, made clear that he did not support UK involvement in Syria without first seeking a resolution in the UN security council. He also questioned whether there were sufficient troops on the ground capable of defeating Isis in Syria.Miliband said he had not received any formal notification to recall parliament, but it is clear he regards the request from Iraq to participate in air strikes as legitimising the action. By contrast, no request has been made by President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, who heads a government that Miliband said was not democratic.The Labour leader refused to speculate on what Britain should do if a UN security council resolution on air stirkes in Syria were vetoed by Russia.Asked if he would support a request for military action in Iraq, Miliband said: “I think it needs to be taken very seriously, yes. I’m open to that, my judgment about it would be can we make a contribution, can we make it effective and successful, and is it legitimate and legal.”He added: “Iraq is a democratic state. It is a government that we would want to support. IS [Isis] is a threat not just to stability of the region, but a humanitarian threat and potentially a threat to the UK in the sense that it harbours terrorism.“The situation in Syria is somewhat different in the sense obviously it is not a democratic state. It has the Assad regime. We supported yesterday’s American action. I think the legitimacy of action being taken in Syria would be better to have a UN security council resolution.”He then suggested there may not yet be the right military forces on the ground to defeat Isis in Syria.He said: “This campaign against IS will only work not just with the right diplomatic and political, but with the right action on the ground. Air strikes alone will not defeat IS. In Iraq the you have got the Iraqi army and the Kurds that we are helping. One of the questions we need to establish is how in Syria are we going to defeat IS simply with air strikes.“I don’t think we can turn away from the threat of Isil. When we see the plight of Alan Henning, I think it is something we should be deeply concerned about. They are a murderous organisation. I’ve been saying consistently we need to build a coalition, not just a military coalition, but a political and diplomatic coalition.”The shadow cabinet was meeting in emergency session in Manchester to discuss whether to support air strikes in Iraq. The recall will not go ahead unless and until Labour makes clear it will support air strikes in Iraq.Shadow cabinet sources said the meeting was likely to focus on whether to support air strikes in Syria at this stage given the doubts about its legality, and the absence of a viable ground force inside Syria that can combat IS, but does not lead to a strengthening of President Assad.