Iraq is going through a critical moment in its history; decisions that are made today will have severe long-term implications for generations. Some important decisions may be irreversible and we must be careful what we wish for.What Iraq needs now is politicians who can ease tensions to solve the crisis but without calling for partition of the country simply because relations between two political parties have deteriorated. As UN special envoy Martin Kobler put it, Iraq's leaders must "act swiftly, responsibly and in unity."In an article last Thursday, Ranj Alaaldin argued that Iraq's current problems can be traced back to the centralisation of power in Baghdad, and suggested that the country must turn towards federalism in order to overcome these issues.This is the worst possible solution for Iraq now. To implement federalism in this highly charged atmosphere sends the wrong message to the people of Iraq and to the world. Federalism as a solution misdiagnoses the crisis. The real problem is not centralised government but politicians who have failed the people.Iraq must wait until a rational debate on federalism can focus on good governance as opposed to defending sectarian identities. Otherwise, if calls for partition drown out those calling for calm and patience, there will be another bloodbath reminiscent of the civil war in 2006-08.It would be impossible to implement widescale federalism now without engaging in violent conflict. Theory is one thing, but the reality on the ground tells a different story. Iraq has never in its history been neatly geographically divided along ethno-sectarian lines. If the wheels of division were to come into motion, Sunni, Shia and Kurdish forces would scramble to seize control of mixed and disputed territories.Iraqis are not born savages who are incapable of living together peacefully. Foreign-backed terrorists have long been exploiting domestic quarrels to incite sectarian violence. Iraq must not fall into their trap.Federalism may have worked wonders for the Kurds, but their success cannot be taken as a blueprint for the rest of the country. The Kurds are an exception because they have had de facto autonomous rule since 1991. That was a consequence of the brutality of the Ba'ath regime. Today, Iraqi villages are not being gassed, mass graves are not being filled with hundreds of thousands of corpses, and entire towns and cities are not being cleansed by the central government.The Kurdish example, however, also illustrates that mere autonomy is not enough to resolve conflict. In the mid-90s, the Kurds fought each other over resources in a bloody civil war that left thousands dead as rival political factions jockeyed for power.Today, the Kurdish region does fare better economically and in terms of security, but politically the Kurds are mired by the same problems that affect the rest of Iraq: corruption, nepotism, lack of transparency and accountability. These are the real issues holding Iraq back and they need to be addressed more urgently than the debate over federalism.It is equally important to highlight the nature of sectarianism in Iraq. We must be able to distinguish between pent-up hatreds that date back centuries and shrewd political manipulation.Professor Eric Davis, a political scientist whose research includes the relationship between state power and historical memory in modern Iraq, argues that the ethno-confessional model used to frame politics leads to a vicious cycle that shapes the realities on the ground and adds to the misunderstanding. He argues that the one-dimensional analysis fits the thinking of many policymakers who need to digest information quickly. A self-reinforcing cycle is created whereby analysts feed the elite, whose decisions only encourage further reductionist and simplistic approaches.We are in a real danger of talking Iraq to death. Perception is dangerous in a country where even the most well-intentioned calls for keeping a check on Baghdad can be translated as ripping apart the country. This isn't healthy for anyone except maybe those posed to gain immediately by their newfound power.When discussing Iraq, we must look beyond the short-term gains of some and look collectively at how the country can move forward by addressing the real problems.