Highly critical comments by a senior army officer asked to conduct a study of the circumstances surrounding the invasion of Iraq have been suppressed on the orders of the country's top defence officials, the Guardian has learned.The study, by Lt Gen Chris Brown, was commissioned in the light of mounting evidence of the failure to prepare properly for the invasion and its consequences.Former senior military officers and defence officials have already described their anger and frustration about the failures in damning testimony to the Chilcot inquiry into the 2003 Iraq invasion. One of the inquiry's key objectives is to spell out the lessons that should be learned from what is widely regarded in Whitehall as an ill-conceived operation of dubious legality and, in foreign policy terms, a disaster comparable to the 1956 Suez crisis.Against this background, the Ministry of Defence agreed to conduct its own study. However, Brown's criticisms were so harsh that they have been suppressed following the intervention of Air Chief Marshal Sir Jock Stirrup, chief of the defence staff, and other officials, who considered them too embarrassing even for internal consumption at the MoD.Defence chiefs also appear to be worried that once Brown's study was passed to Sir John Chilcot to help him with his inquiry, they would lose control of the contents.An MoD spokesman told the Guardian: "Lt Gen Chris Brown has led a small team in the production of an internal, classified MoD paper examining the Iraq campaign for the purpose of learning lessons for the future. As part of the routine staffing of such an important piece of work, a variety of military officials and civil servants have provided input during the paper's development."In a comment making it clear it expects to be given the study, the Chilcot inquiry said: "The inquiry is aware of the MoD's internal study of lessons learned in Iraq. We do not comment on specific documents we hold but, as we said before, the inquiry is confident that it will be given access to all relevant government documents."Whitehall officials made plain tonight that these statements disguise deep sensitivity about the revelation that there is an internal MoD dispute over the study.Colonel Richard Kemp, a former commander of British forces in Afghanistan and commentator on military matters, said: "Defence is far too important, a matter of life and death, to get too sensitive about potential embarrassment."Brown was the last senior British military representative in Baghdad in 2009. He was subsequently appointed to the post of "Iraq study team leader". He was previously involved in planning Nato operations in Kosovo and was commander of British troops in Northern Ireland.Lt Gen Frederick Viggers, his predecessor in Baghdad at the time of the 2003 invasion, told the Chilcot inquiry in December: "We've got huge experience in this country – we're not using it and we're putting amateurs into really, really important positions and people are getting killed as a result of some of these decisions."He said the invasion of Iraq suffered from a lack of direction from the outset. Individuals at the highest levels of the government did not seem to have a clear idea of the operation's direction. He added: "I am not talking about the soldiers and commanders and civilians … who did a great job … it's the intellectual horsepower that drives these things [that] needs better co-ordination."Major General Tim Cross, the only UK military official appointed to help plan the invasion aftermath, delivered a severe indictment of Whitehall's failures. "There were serious concerns about legality and over money," he told the Chilcot inquiry. He described the preparations for the invasion as "woefully thin".The Chilcot inquiry has yet to say which documents Whitehall submitted to it. Departments insist decisions to disclose which documents are up to them. The inquiry is expected to resume public hearings at the end of June or early July.