Two battles in Falluja in 2004 were among the most brutal the US military faced during the Iraq war. All told, 100 Americans were killed, and 1,000 more were wounded in the city before US forces pulled out of Iraq in 2011. Just in 2004, thousands of Iraqis were killed in the city, which is about 25 miles from Baghdad.And now, a decade later, battles between Iraqi forces and rebel groups have the city once again in insurgent control. For some US military veterans, it's a hard pill to swallow. We asked three veterans – who last wrote for us on the 10-year anniversary of the war – to talk about the latest developments in the city. When were you in Iraq and what was your job there?I stepped boots on ground in Iraq on 2 January 2005 and we left on 20 December 2005, so nearly all of 2005. My unit was a field artillery unit, but we were cross-trained as Military Police before deploying over. Our job while there was to travel out into the city to Iraqi Police (IP) stations and train the IPs how to some day take over for us (route security, prisoner detainment, polling site security, etc).Were you ever in Falluja? How do you remember it?My unit's AO was Baghdad and Sadr City. While I never did enter Falluja, I was well aware of the resistance our forces were receiving there, and I was aware that Falluja was one of the keystones to the Iraq conflict.How do you see the significance of the fall of Falluja?Falluja was a well-known battleground. While some may think it was just another city on the map, my thoughts are that it was a moral victory for America when we took it, and a further moral victory every time we defended it while we held it. Knowing that, it doesn't surprise me that an opposing forces leader would choose that city as one of the keys to reasserting themselves in the country when we left. Put it this way: if America fell and some other country took over NY or Chicago or LA, you can be sure that as soon as those forces left I would take my troops and immediately see about getting those cities back first.Do you think long-term peace in Iraq is possible without a US presence?I believe the Iraqi people have to "man up" and learn to fend for themselves. We cannot be permanently stationed in Iraq for many reasons and if democracy ever has a chance in that nation then they are going to need to earn it. That being said, America can certainly lend a hand in order to make sure that the seed we planted has a true chance to sprout and begin to grow.Do you keep up on developments in Iraq since your tour ended? How?Most certainly. I happen to feel that we were 100% correct in being over there. I spent day in and day out looking into the eyes of Iraqi civilian women, children and men. I could see the glint of hope that we gave them that maybe some day they wouldn't have to dodge roadside bombs or automatic gunfire when they went to buy eggs at the market or went to attend their son's or daughter's funeral. I most certainly follow events in Iraq, even more so than events in Afghanistan where I still have buddies battling today. I have a sort of sense of ownership over what happens in Iraq.Iraq could be a beautiful country, tourism would flourish if they could ever get a handle on things. The history, and the mentality of Iraq's people are things that everyone should have a chance to witness and enjoy some day. My sincere hope is that all of our efforts, and more importantly all of our service members' sacrifices, wasn't in vain.I'd love to go back some day.When were you in Iraq and what was your job there?I was in Iraq in 2008-2009. I was stationed at Camp Bucca, which is near Umm Qasr, on the southern border of Iraq. The mission there was providing security for the detainees my army brethren had captured, generally for emplacing roadside bombs but also for being potential intelligence targets and that sort of thing.How do you see the significance of the fall of Falluja?Falluja was a tragedy, a microcosm of the Iraq war itself. The rose-coloured good intentions of the west collided with the harsh reality of the Middle East, and innocent people died because of it. I've met Iraqis online who at first respond to me with deep-seated hatred in their hearts, and while I know I wasn't responsible for what happened there, I could have been. I just didn't get those missions.Do you think long-term peace in Iraq is possible without a US presence?Absolutely; the Iraqis are a sensible and decent people. Surely they can come to an understanding. If they can't, better that their neighbours, people closer to them in culture than the west, work together to keep them behaving in a civilised manner. I think continued US presence can only make things worse. Perhaps US influence, in terms of culture, could bring about a better end result, but I for one would be hesitant to even attempt that much interference without considerable evidence that such a risk is warranted.Do you keep up on developments in Iraq since your tour ended? How?I don't, really. I have my Iraqi friends online who keep me up to speed, but they all live in Britain now, and probably won't be going back. I reflect on my time there, but I know that we only did a modicum of good and I have no desire to see how much damage we really did. I have my own problems adapting to life as a civilian now.When were you in Iraq and what was your job there?2008/2009. Colonel, planning officer HQ Multi-National Forces – Iraq (MNFI)How do you see the significance of the fall of Falluja?I wouldn’t categorise it as a "fall". I would say that is no longer under the government’s control. It’s significant in that it is a large urban centre but I would suggest that the Iraq government’s control over the broader area has been progressively reduced over the last few years. The US no longer has a military presence in Iraq and it is very unlikely for that fact to be changed in the near term. The US military cannot save Iraq. The Iraqi government is responsible for security in Iraq. It is the policies of the Iraq government that have in part created the current situation. The Kurdish and Sunni elements of the Iraq population have been increasingly marginalised by the Maliki government and this is one of the consequences. Full sovereignty or a degree of autonomy for the Sunni and Kurdish elements is probably the only way that a lasting peace can be achieved. The problems today are a consequence of the Sykes-Picot agreement. Do you think long-term peace in Iraq is possible without a US presence?Yes. But the wider question is whether peace is possible without the partition/federalisation of Iraq as a unitary state. It is a shame to see the security situation deteriorating in Iraq but after 10 years of people saying "get out" it is churlish to now say you shouldn’t have left.