It is good news indeed to hear that at last the illegal invasion of Iraq is "officially over" and the US troops are coming back in time to be with their families for Christmas (Editorial, 15 December). There has been a terrible human cost for the thousands of people in Iraq and the US soldiers who have been killed, injured and left with post-traumatic stress syndrome. Some aren't coming back, however. And I have heard no mention of the British troops killed or injured during this folly of a war. I am remembering our dear friend's son, killed in Basra in 2006 – a week before he and his family (based in Germany) were due to come home after his third tour of duty in Iraq. The effects of this have been lasting to those close. There must be many stories of similar tragedies. I hope it was deemed to be worth it and Barack Obama is right. No doubt, though, Obama is in the thick of planning another deadly folly: the reported plans to bomb Iran. When will the politicians and military planners ever learn?Lindis PercyJoint co-ordinator, Campaign for the Accountability of American Bases• Let us indeed not be "triumphalists" as troops leave Iraq – and Afghanistan (Report, 16 December). In both these countries the last decade of invasions, insurgency and violence has created uncounted millions of widows and wives of the missing, whose futures and that of their children, now so problematic, should concern us all.These women's needs must be identified and addressed, and they must be recognised as key partners in peace-building in all its aspects. Neglecting this huge category of women will promote further injustices, and increase the poverty and inequality that can fuel future conflict. UN security council resolution 1325, on women, peace and security, has not been implemented in either country. If it was, the true picture of widowhood might emerge and compel attention. Although our troops will have left these stricken countries, our continuing aid programme should become more gender-sensitive to these neglected issues and widows helped to have their voices heard.Margaret OwenDirector, Widows For Peace Through Democracy• George Galloway's claim (Comment, 16 December) that "the example of the Iraqi resistance [triggered] seismic changes in the Arabian landscape from Marrakech to Bahrain" is fanciful and offensive in equal measure. It is surely much more credible to argue that the images of millions of Iraqis who defied the suicide bombers to take part with enthusiasm in three votes since the liberation of my country played a major role in inspiring the yearning for democracy that is still being played out in Arab and Middle East countries.Bayan Sami Abdul RahmanRepresentative to the UK, Kurdistan regional government• In his predictable neocon bluster, John Bolton (Comment, 16 December) spends a significant proportion of his piece arguing that the US presence in Iraq has been a necessary counter to the influence of a hardline, anti-west Iran. It is ironic that the person promoting and developing Iran's increasingly strongly anti-west policies in recent years, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, became mayor of Tehran, and then president, because of the invasion of Iraq (he was until 20 March 2003 very much a political outsider). John Bolton appears to be telling us that we need a US presence in Iraq to ward off the evil caused by the US presence in Iraq Robert PlumbSmethwick, West Midlands• It's said that Americans don't get irony. Perhaps, but it could at least explain the utterly astonishing claim by John Bolton about Iran's "meddling" in Iraq, the day after the US ended its nine-year occupation of the country.Richard CarterLondon• Can anyone explain what we have achieved after 10 years in Afghanistan when a young woman, the victim of a rape, is jailed and then, when freed, feels she should consider marrying her assailant for the family honour (Report, 15 December)? Has our intervention justified the huge loss of life and expense?Dr Peter Haydn-SmithLewes, Sussex