Whatever your views about the Iraq war itself, there is no arguing that yesterday's session could at last be the making of the Iraq inquiry. Not before time, either. Alastair Campbell's performance in front of the Chilcot committee was never less than interesting and was at times formidable, though rarely in a comfort-inducing way. Mr Campbell's presence, though, seemed to have steeled the much-derided committee to raise its game. Their questioning, though still not hostile enough for some, was often more probing than in the past. It illuminated major concerns among the committee members about issues from Whitehall process to high politics which their report itself must now not shirk. Mr Campbell often rose to the occasion too, giving a reminder of what the Labour government has both lost and gained since he left. Together, over five hours of exchanges, questioners and witness managed to elevate the much-criticised inquiry from generally underwhelming to nearly unmissable. If nothing else, the stage has been set for Tony Blair's appearance in a few weeks' time.Granted, Mr Campbell's evidence added relatively little to the known facts about British policymaking and statecraft in the war against Saddam Hussein. But the exchanges with Mr Campbell show that the inquiry has got its teeth into some big issues. There was powerful questioning about Mr Blair's tendency to offer one message of unflinching military solidarity for an American audience but another message of indefatigable diplomacy and wider Middle Eastern concerns for a British one – an impression which was deepened by the former prime minister's lamentable recent interview. On several occasions the questioning also returned to the prime minister's always insupportable claim that the intelligence showed the WMD threat from Saddam was "beyond doubt". And the committee is blatantly uneasy about issues of process, not least the marginalisation of the cabinet secretary (who gives evidence to the inquiry today) and the extent to which Mr Campbell was allowed to become an over-mighty official (though not in the absurd caricature of the sitcoms) in the making of policy and conduct of business.For his part, Mr Campbell appeared to see his main tasks as defending Mr Blair, protecting his own skin and laying into the media – with a few well-aimed swipes at Sir Christopher Meyer's evidence for good measure. He did all three yesterday to some effect and with considerable passion. Mr Blair, as depicted by Mr Campbell, emerged yet again as a highly contradictory – or perhaps maddeningly dishonest – figure, simultaneously making a "genuine, genuine" effort to resolve the Iraq crisis peacefully as war loomed while writing private notes to George Bush promising that Britain "will be there" and was "absolutely with you". But Mr Campbell, so often like his boss, sees only the sterling efforts and the fine intentions while turning away from the catastrophic and destructive consequences. Mr Campbell may speak from the heart when describing his pride and sense of privilege to have played a part in events, but he does not face up to the dire and lasting consequences of those events for the Labour party, for Britain's standing and for too many Iraqis.Yesterday was great media theatre. But was it politically important? We still do not know if the Iraq inquiry speaks mainly to the politics of the past or of the present. Gordon Brown, whose role in the Iraq events Mr Campbell was careful to mention, will pray it is the former. At the close, Mr Campbell seemed to make a plea that modern media-driven politics should not prevent British governments from making big and difficult decisions. There is something in that. But it is not the major lesson for Britain from the Iraq war. That lesson is that no British government should deceive itself so deeply that it creates and clings to a foreign policy failure that subverts the very causes it espouses.