In his article advocating continued Nato bombing of Libya (We must hold firm on Libya, 23 June), David Owen mentions Russia, China, Syria, Iran, Bahrain, Kosovo, Serbia, Egypt, Tunisia and Algeria. He does not mention Iraq. Perhaps he forgot.On 4 February 2003, Mr Owen wrote an article for the Guardian entitled "Wage war in Iraq for the sake of peace in the Middle East". The opening line reads: "It is deeply troubling that there is not greater public support for George Bush and Tony Blair's readiness to enforce the existing UN resolutions which cover the dismantling of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq."Different venue, same old tune. The shadow of the Iraq war is long, and that catastrophe cannot be a final answer as to whether genuine liberal intervention can be morally justified, or indeed at times required. But for someone who so publicly advocated an obviously unjust war just eight years ago to feel no need to engage with its consequences, while advocating military intervention in the same region, in an article that actually parrots many of the same arguments he used in 2003 (the positive effect on other countries in the region), is shameless.Qasim SalimiLondon• David Owen claims negotiating with Gaddafi now would send other dictatorships the message that they can get away with it. The nonsensical message this sends is "Stop that, kings of Bahrain and Saudi, or we'll continue supporting you, but bomb Libya some more".Nato's bombing campaign is targeting the family homes of members of Gaddafi's government, killing civilians who have nowhere safer to go and no safe way to get there in a civil war when Nato even accidentally bombs rebel vehicles. The result so far is Gaddafi's least political son dead and dozens of children killed.Gaddafi has offered elections supervised by international observers in return for a ceasefire. It's understandable that many rebels oppose any deal that doesn't ensure the Gaddafis go, but Gaddafi still has many supporters in Libya. If war continues there will be months or years of Nato strikes and Gaddafi's rockets killing civilians, possibly followed by an Iraq-style guerrilla war by whoever lost. Accepting elections at least gives a chance of a transition to democracy without many more deaths.Duncan McFarlaneCarluke, South Lanarkshire