The latest charges brought against Tariq Aziz, the deputy prime minister of Iraq under Saddam Hussein, have reignited debate about the legality of the Iraq war.The specific charge that he now faces is of ordering the summary execution of a group of rice merchants. However, the campaign group Indict is also calling for him to be charged with war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and the crime of aggression.This final charge, which centres on his role in launching the invasions of Iran and Kuwait, brings inevitable comparisons with the US-led invasion of Iraq five years ago. Indeed, it is difficult to see how a legal distinction between Iraq's invasion of Iranin 1980 and some of the justifications that supporters of the invasion of Iraq now rely upon.Waging a war of aggression is a crime under customary international law. The Nuremberg tribunals called it "the supreme international crime, differing only from other war crimes in that it contains within itself the accumulated evil of the whole."So why, asks John Quiggin at Crooked Timber, if the US invasion of Iraq was indeed illegal, have Bush and Blair not been charged with this offence?The basic problem is to find a court, or adjudicative body, that could take the case.The United Nations Charter provides that the security council shall determine the existence of an act of aggression and respond accordingly to "restore international peace and security". This is how the security council labelled Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 and why it authorised action by the coalition forces. UN resolutions also required Iraq to dismantle its weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and the US and UK were to claim that its failure to do so provided sufficient legal justification for their invasion.The problem with this argument, as the British attorney-general pointed out in a confidential memo, was that since it was the security council that imposed these conditions "it is for the council to assess whether any such breach of those obligations has occurred". The UN weapons inspectors had not found conclusive evidence that Iraq still had WMD and so this cannot be relied upon as the legal basis for war.Blair has since stressed the brutal nature of Saddam Hussein's regime to justify his actions but Iraq could have used the same arguments about Iran under Ayatollah Khomeini. At the time of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, Tariq Aziz justified it as an act of liberation, although most of the rest of the world saw it as a grab for that country's oil. If there is a prime facie case against him, then why not against Bush and Blair?This not to argue that the latter two are necessarily guilty. No doubt they could mount a strong legal defence of their actions, based on what they claim was in the intelligence reports they received and Iraq's obstruction of the work of the UN inspectors. They might even want to try to use the arguments of "pre-emptive self-defence" or "humanitarian intervention", although the attorney-general was rather dismissive of such arguments.However, it is simply not credible to say that they have no case to answer.The UN could now follow the lead of its former secretary-general Kofi Annan and declare the war to have been illegal. But since the US and UK are permanent veto-wielding members of the security council this will not happen.The UK is a party to the statute of the International Criminal Court, although the US and Iraq are not. The court has an independent prosecutor and its statute refers to the crime of aggression. However, it stipulates that the ICC may not exercise its jurisdiction over this until such time as the states parties agree to an exact definition of what it constitutes. The ICC's statute is due to be reviewed next year. The countries which are party to it should take advantage of the US's absence and seize the opportunity to correct this anomaly.A case could potentially be taken to the International Court of Justice, which ruled in 2005 that Uganda's invasion of the Democratic Republic of Congo was illegal. This is an inter-state court and so a government, which the court deemed to have sufficient standing, would need to take the case. The most obvious one would be the current government in Iraq that the Americans installed and which is, therefore, very unlikely to do so.Another alternative would be to try to take a case through a country's domestic courts on the basis that the crime is of aggression is recognised in customary law. As Philippe Sands has pointed out, this crime has not yet been incorporated into English law, but Blair and Bush could potentially be arrested one day while travelling abroad in a country that has done so.The latter scenario is not very likely although, as Augusto Pinochet found out, it is not an impossible scenario to imagine in the future. The better route would be to amend the ICC's statute, although this will not have retroactive effect.The principle that people who order crimes of the type that Tariq Aziz is accused of should be brought to account is undoubtedly right. The countless victims of the former Iraqi regime deserve to be properly remembered for the suffering that they endured. Fair trials before a credible even-handed tribunal could help to establish a proper historical record about what happened. But how can this take place when only one side is called to account?If the case against Saddam Hussein is anything to go by, what Aziz is likely to face will be a mockery of internationally accepted fair trial standards. Shoddy lynch-law courts, which dish out "victor's justice", based on double standards, will simply turn more monsters into martyrs.