It has taken countless parliamentary deadlocks, months of political squabbling and various controversies, but on Sunday Iraqis will finally be heading to the polls to cast their vote in yet another post-2003 Iraqi democratic process.Iraq's last parliamentary election in 2005 took place amid a Sunni boycott, violence and terrorist attacks. It was contested on the basis of, and then followed by, sectarianism, old rivalries and the uncertainties of the future. Not this time, though.I have spent the past week travelling all over Iraq. At the time of writing, I had made my way to Kirkuk, having spent the previous night in the holy city of Najaf in the south, and it had become clear at that point that most Iraqis will be voting on the basis of services, security and, notably, nationalism. Sectarianism should now be a thing of the past.For the best part of my trip, support for one man has been accordingly apparent, that being the prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, who will be leading his State of Law (SoL) coalition into the elections. I have spoken with Iraqis from all backgrounds who believe the premier has, over the past few years, injected life back into the Iraqi state.He has been an uncompromising centrist, has liquidated the militias who once gripped society and has overseen the development of a stronger Iraqi army and security force. Indeed, he won the 2009 provincial elections on the basis of his security credentials. And although the country has suffered a spate of bombings in recent months, threatening Maliki's security credentials, there are Iraqis who nevertheless believe he needs more time to finish what he started and will want to see him carry on towards implementing the various economic and social policies his government has lined up.The main competition Maliki faces, especially in the Shia south, comes from the Iraqi National Alliance (INA), a large coalition comprised of major groupings, including the powerful Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq (ISCI) and the Free Bloc of Muqtada al-Sadr. Collectively, the alliance only marginally lost to Maliki in last year's provincial elections (by less than 1%). The contest will, therefore, be very close.Maliki will be comforted by two key factors, though. First is that the INA is made up of unlikely bedfellows such as ISCI and the Sadrists, who have a history of violent confrontations and have no common ideology or vision. INA members amalgamated essentially because individually they would be unable to dislodge Maliki from power, and the coalition is expected to disintegrate and become severely weakened after the elections.Second, the INA is essentially a sectarian coalition. Iraqis are largely believed to have turned their backs on sectarianism and consider Maliki's Islamic Dawa party to be an organisation that, while its origins are rooted in Islam, does not practise or preach sectarian values in its politics and the governance of the country.The emergence of secularism and nationalism means that, alongside Maliki's, the name of Ayad Allawi and his Iraqi National Movement (INM) is mentioned regularly. Allawi is a Shia but a fierce secularist and former Ba'athist, who was premier back in 2004. He is well-known throughout the country and may compete with Maliki for the youth vote, as well as the secularist vote among the Shias. Allawi also has Sunni figures in his alliance who are expected to attract the votes in the Sunni heartlands, but he will face stiff competition from the other grouping, the Unity of Iraq Alliance (UIA), led by the current interior minister and Shia, Jawad Bolani, and Sunni leader of the prominent Anbar Awakening front, Ahmed Abu Risha.Two key contests, then, will be taking place on Sunday. The main contest is between Maliki's SoL and the INA, which will split the Shia vote, and the second is that between the INM and UIA, which will primarily look to establish themselves as attractive coalition partners after the elections. The Kurdistan Alliance, meanwhile, is expected to come out of the election as a kingmaker and could end up being the most sought-after coalition partner; so far as Baghdad politics go, the Kurds are largely unified, despite the emergence of new Kurdish opposition party, Change.What will make this election the most important and valuable Iraq and, indeed, the region has ever held is the changing political dynamics. Sectarian boundaries are being breached and, besides, there are intra-community tensions that could make room for varying alliances and compromises. No single bloc is expected to get a majority, meaning the outcome of the elections and the post-election coalition-building process will be critical in determining the future shape of politics in Iraq.