Nothing demonstrates the inability of the United States to finish what it started in the Middle East more than the continuing bloodshed in Iraq. America's combat role may have ended, but the civil war has not. This year is set to be the bloodiest since 2008, with an average of nearly 70 car bombings a month. Almost 1,000 people were killed in September alone.The latest Iraqis to be targeted are the Sahwa movement or the Awakening Council, a grouping of Sunni militias formed by the US forces to fight the insurgency. Much of the current tension is a direct result of what an influential group of US senators called the authoritarian and sectarian style of the Iraqi prime minister Nouri al-Maliki. He has all but torn up a political powersharing agreement the Americans negotiated with the Sunnis, and driven many of their number into the arms of al-Qaida. This in turn has led to the remobilisation of Shia militias.A ruthless purge of his political opponents conducted in the name of de-ba'athification has not stopped Mr Maliki helping another ba'athist party. He has allowed, or turned a blind eye to, Iran using Iraqi airspace to supply arms to Bashar al-Assad in Syria and Hezbollah in Lebanon. Mr Maliki's campaign against the Sunnis has a self-fulfilling logic to it. He and Mr Assad both see themselves as fighting jihadi extremists. Both are blind to the political demands of their citizens who eschew violence. All of which makes Mr Maliki's visit to Washington this week at the head of a large delegation a source of some difficulty for Barack Obama.Mr Obama is right to disengage from the calamitous Bush-era wars and to pursue a rapprochement with Iran. He is also right to have rejected the military option with Syria. Where his strategy makes less sense is to pretend that none of these policies have implications for America's belligerent allies in the Middle East. The Saudis are unhappy with Mr Obama on a number of fronts: that he abandoned Hosni Mubarak; that he co-operated with a Muslim Brotherhood president; and that he should now be talking to Iran. They also wanted him to bomb Syria. But none of this makes them right. The old order of Arab autocracy cannot continue regardless. Appeasing them with the sale of Apache helicopters or missile defence batteries will not help them solve the considerable internal pressure they face from basic democratic demands.America's influence in the region is shrinking, as much out of psychological as military exhaustion. So much has gone wrong in the last decade that it is difficult to construe of a policy that has half a chance of succeeding. Mr Obama has to recognise that his interests and those of his allies may diverge. Only then might some progress be made.