What is up for grabs?Elections are being held to replace 14 of the 18 provincial councils across Iraq. They have no direct bearing on the central government of prime minister Nuri al-Maliki, but are a litmus test of the authority of his government in the regions.How will the polls influence Iraq?Today's ballot is being widely seen as a bid by the regions to drain power from Baghdad and distribute it among themselves. Long neglected under Saddam's regime and largely ignored throughout the occupation, the governorates are demanding a say in reconstruction and the sharing of spoils from an oil-fuelled budget surplus.Who is standing?There are an estimated 14,431 candidates, 3,912 of whom are women. The candidates represent more than 400 parties and are contesting 444 seats – nearly 75% more than during the last provincial poll in January 2005.Will the old guard be affected?On one hand, the ballot is being seen as a tussle between the old guard exiles brought in by the US and Britain after the fall of Saddam, versus new-blood home grown nationalists. Some exiles, such as former prime minister, Ayad Allawi, are campaigning under time-worn banners. Allawi's Iraqi National Accord party is running, but its political stocks remain low.It is also a contest involving the Islamic lists of the incumbent prime minister, al-Maliki, versus a mooted rise in popularity of secular parties.Could the re-elections be marred by a resurgence of violence?The lead-up to the ballot has been relatively calm, although many candidates, male and female, have reported being threatened with death if they do not pull out. Many candidates have withdrawn, and several have been killed. The tribes and regions, which hold great authority in Iraqi society, have warned they will walk away from reconciliation processes that are tenuously holding security together, if their demands for a greater say in decision-making, and a larger slice of the central budget pie, are not met.Could the poll help quell sectarianism?It could go either way. Sectarian groups have lost traction throughout society and campaign platforms have been more nationalistic than sectarian. However Iraq's political process is still largely unbalanced and the sectarian militias could rise again if the outcome of the poll is not seen as just.Will the vote be transparent?Election monitors are trying to ensure ballots are cast fairly on election day. The bigger problem has been the lead-up. Iraq has no campaign financing laws; the rule of law is still far too weak to go after violators of arbitrary campaigning law, extortion has been rampant, and hidden hands of neighbouring countries have been seen far and wide.