Despite the recent prominence of Afghanistan in the presidential campaign, John McCain continues to only want to talk about Iraq. He mentions the supposed success of the troop surge seemingly at every opportunity – an attempt to exploit his early support of the surge as a perceived advantage over Obama, who opposed it. For example, when asked on the Today Show last month about his absence from committee hearings on Afghanistan, McCain countered that he has visited Iraq many times, and that he was right about the surge. Framing issues like Afghanistan and Pakistan in terms of Iraq has become a consistent theme for McCain. He recently said: "It is precisely the success of the surge in Iraq that shows us the way to succeed in Afghanistan." To address Pakistan's troubled FATA region, he proposed strengthening local tribes, modelled on "the strategy used successfully in Anbar and elsewhere in Iraq."The problem is that McCain's Iraq-centric rhetoric oversimplifies and misinterprets security challenges in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The notion of merely exporting the surge from Iraq to Afghanistan conflates two very different conflicts, and exaggerates the potential impact of adding troops to Afghanistan. Despite McCain's insistence, experts debate whether the surge was in fact the major contributor to a decrease in violence in Iraq. What's more, while Afghanistan is certainly under-resourced, it's not clear that the most important thing is more troops. What Afghanistan desperately needs is better coordination of all the various actors involved in the country, and a strong, accountable government that provides security, economic and educational opportunities and more.Similarly, while empowering tribes in FATA sounds good, FATA is a very different environment from Anbar. Success was possible in Anbar because the US military was able to exploit tensions between foreign jihadis and local Sunni tribal figures and insurgents. These tensions do not exist to the same degree in FATA. The militant-controlled region has been outside the Pakistani government's reach for decades, and the distinctions between militants and local people are blurred, unlike in Iraq. Foreign militants have had such a consistent presence in the region, going back to the anti-Soviet jihad, that they have intermarried with the local population. It has also been a longstanding Pakistani state policy to support militant groups to fight against India and its allies. More fundamentally, by placing Iraq as the top priority, McCain neglects the critical threat in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and even undercuts his own proposals for the region. He recently acknowledged requests by military leaders in Afghanistan for three additional brigades, saying that they "must get them". However, McCain refuses to support a timeline for withdrawal in Iraq, despite the fact that the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Michael Mullen, has said there aren't enough troops "to send into Afghanistan until I have a reduced requirement in Iraq."McCain also proposes doubling the size of the Afghan national army to 160,000 troops. However, only two of 105 Afghan army units (pdf) are currently judged "fully capable", due to a shortage of military trainers that the US department of defence attributes to "higher priority … deployments of US military personnel elsewhere, particularly Iraq." Nonetheless, McCain ignores the Iraq war's detrimental effects on Afghanistan, saying in April: "Afghanistan is not in trouble because of our diversion to Iraq." His own Iraq policies would make his Afghanistan policies infeasible, demonstrating the same lack of strategic coherence that has plagued the Bush administration's foreign policy decisions. Leaders from General David Petraeus to the Iraqi ambassador recognise the increasing prominence of Afghanistan and Pakistan as the central front in the struggle against global terrorism, a front which as been cited as the most likely source of the next terrorist attack on the US. Lest our memories be so short, the consequences of a resurgent Taliban and al-Qaida safe havens are no mystery. These are the very conditions that enabled the 9/11 attacks. America may love its war heroes, but in trying to prove that he "know[s] how to win wars", John McCain is putting the world's primary extremist threat on the backburner – a threat which we cannot afford to neglect any longer.