This month sees the 10th anniversary of the September dossier, which formed the backbone of the case for the Iraq war. Sir Menzies Campbell was one of the few prominent politicians at the time to argue against intervention, while Lord Falconer, who was in the cabinet, became a supporter. So how do they reflect on the events of 10 years ago? Oliver Laughland chairs.Menzies Campbell: The Liberal Democrat conference was taking place in Brighton but Charles Kennedy and I returned to the Commons because it had been recalled. We were sent a copy of the dossier and Charles handed it to me on the train. If you get something like that put in front of you, which appears authoritative, the likelihood is that you will accept it at face value. I almost certainly did. But I had always argued that regime change, which was clearly what the Amercians wanted, was illegal under article two of the UN charter. So we were [already] taking a very strong legal stance. What we said effectively was that we had seen this dossier but it didn't really change our position.Charles Falconer: I was then minister of state at the Home Office responsible for criminal justice. Re-reading the document, as I did last night, I think it pretty accurately reflects what people thought the position was at the time. Namely that Saddam Hussein wanted to have weapons of mass destruction [WMD] – he's had some and we knew from intelligence that he was prepared to use them.MC: At that time, Charlie, we didn't know the genesis of this document, did we? That it started off in the security services, but then Alastair Campbell weaved his magic on it. One consequence of that, as I'm sure you'll remember, was the London Evening Standard headline "45 minutes to Armageddon". Government did not act to squash that and it became stuck in people's minds. The thing about intelligence is it's rarely unequivocal, you get bits and pieces of it. It was clear to me from conversations I had with journalists, some of whom were on speaking terms with people directly engaged in the assessment of the intelligence, that they were sceptical about the quality of the intelligence.CF: I agree with you on the patchy nature of the intelligence. The document is essentially based on the assessments of the Joint Intelligence Committee John Scarlett was chairing. Scarlett made himself the effective guardian of that document. Intelligence forms one part of it, but you have to put that together with the circumstantial evidence. The dossier doesn't give an inaccurate account of what people believed. The Butler report [into the use of intelligence in the lead up to the 2003 Iraq war] supports this.Oliver Laughland: But subsequent reporting last year unearthed a memo from Scarlett to Tony Blair's foreign aide, which refers to the "benefit of obscuring the fact that in terms of WMD, Iraq is not that exceptional". Doesn't this suggest a deliberate misleading?CF: I honestly don't think so. The point that Scarlett is making in that memo is that there are other countries with maybe more developed WMD than Iraq, and we're doing nothing about them.MC: But when contemplating military action, you have to be pretty damn sure you've got it right. If you were going to depart from the policy that grew out of the first Gulf war of containment and deterrence, it seemed to me you had to have compelling evidence to justify a change of your policy which had worked.CF: Part of the issue about the use of force in Iraq is that, ultimately, we didn't have a consensus in the country to support it, and once force was used against the wishes of a huge section of civic society, all the things said before became a proxy for going to war with a divided nation. It's the price you pay for going to war without proper support.MC: That's fair enough, but it doesn't absolve the government of proper, sceptical analysis of that material. Did you ever have any doubts about legality?CF: That's a difficult question. The decision Peter Goldsmith [Attorney General at the time] reached was the right one. There's a sequence, now public, whereby Peter puts both sides of the case quite legitimately [in a document produced on 7 March 2003]. He then concludes [on 17 March 2003] there is a reasonable basis, then finally says he favours the view that [going to war] is legal.MC: I accept your interpretation of what he's saying on the 17th – I'm less persuaded by your interpretation of the original contents of the advice. There's an allegation that you and [senior Blair aide] Sally Morgan met Goldsmith on 10 March, and as a result of this free and frank exchange of views, you persuaded him to change his view.CF: That is untrue. He'd already made it clear his view was the one he subsequently expressed on 17 March. Irrespective of that, neither Sally nor I influenced Peter in relation to the conclusions he reached.MC: When it became clear someone like Robin Cook [then leader of the House of Commons] was so discomfited by all of this – did that not provoke a far greater degree of inquiry in the cabinet? My rather blunt view is that the cabinet was supine or submissive.CF: Those in cabinet were aware of the overall standing of the position, which is expressed in the dossier. They supported intervention in Iraq because they accepted the proposition that the world remained safer by the use of force. A junction was reached. If you backed down from the use of force, you reduced the chance of containing Saddam.OL: What has been the legacy of the run-up to war in terms of the relationship between politicians and the electorate?CF: It has had a hugely damaging effect on politics. I supported, and continue to support, the use of force. But in terms of people's trust in politicians, the impression is that the government misled the country in relation to the reasons for war and embarked on it when there wasn't a proper justification. A as history adjudges the intervention as being both wrong and based on false facts, people hold government, and to a wider extent parliament, in less high standing than before. They believe you can't trust what the government says about important issues; they think the Commons and the Lords are not very good at forcing governments to do the right thing. That absolutely undermines the basis of our democracy.MC: Not the whole purpose, but I would argue, the principle purpose of holding government to account [has been damaged]. There is a scrutiny taking place, not yet completed; Chilcot is still sitting. But that is – judging by the kind of questions that were being asked and some of the rumours emerging – unlikely in its conclusions to remedy that very perception Charlie has just described.OL: Will it be Blair's legacy?MC: Iraq is his legacy and his epitaph. He cannot escape from people's judgement of his character related to Iraq. Yet he won three consecutive general elections including a third in the course of which the Attorney General's [Goldsmith's] original advice emerged.CF: It is unquestionably the issue that most defines Blair in the British public's mind, whether that will remain the case, it's difficult to tell. It colours people's view because that's what's written about him a lot. I suspect the public have a broadly different view because, as you said, in the 2005 election I didn't get a sense Iraq was a big issue. But the picture people have throughout the world of Blair is bound up with Iraq.• This article was amended on 12 September 2012. An editing intervention resulted in Robin Cook being described as the foreign secretary in 2003. At that time he was leader of the House of Commons.