The British government has claimed there has not been a single reported civilian casualty from UK airstrikes in Iraq since bombing began 15 months ago. It attributes this to more sophisticated precision weaponry and orders to RAF crews not to fire if there is a risk of civilian casualties.By contrast, Russian planes have used fewer precision weapons and been less discriminatory in hitting civilian neighbourhoods since entering the conflict in Syria in September. Related: UK has joined a hard, bloody battle against Isis with no coherent plan  It is feasible that the UK might be hitting fewer civilians than Russia, but is its claim of zero civilian casualties credible?David Cameron told the Commons there had been “no reports of civilian casualties”, and the defence secretary, Michael Fallon, told the BBC: “Our estimate is that there hasn’t yet been a single civilian casualty because of the precision of their strikes.”The key words are “no reports” and “our estimate”. Given there are few, if any, independent observers in Islamic State-held areas, it is hard to verify whether or not there have been civilian casualties. The RAF is depending on evidence based on high-resolution cameras.If the target is on a frontline in the desert, with Isis in action, then the chances of mistaking an Isis fighter for a civilian is extremely low. But it is harder in urban areas. The monitoring group Airwars estimates that since August last year there have been between 332 and 498 civilian deaths in Iraq (and 364-498 in Syria) linked to the US-led coalition of which the UK is a part. Shashank Joshi, a senior research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute, said he was “moderately sceptical” about the claims made by Cameron and Fallon.  Related: How your MP voted on airstrikes in Syria “It would be astonishing if such a long campaign had seen zero civilian casualties,” Joshi said. Independent data suggests the US-led coalition’s overall record of civilian casualties is 6-8%, which Joshi said was “exceptionally low even by modern standards of war”. It is lower than even the 1999 Kosovo war, which was a relatively cautious campaign, with approximately 10% civilian casualties. There is confusion over the way the military uses terminology. “Precision means you can hit the object you wanted to hit and nothing else. Accuracy means that the object is indeed what you thought it was,” Joshi said.“You can have a very precise strike on a suspected truck carrying militants, but it would be inaccurate if it turned out to be carrying civilians. Missiles can be precise, but only intelligence and surveillance can bring accuracy. This distinction is being lost.”Chris Cole, who runs Drone Wars, challenged what he said was another misconception: that modern-day weapons are as precise as the military claims.In a blog post, Cole said: “While airstrikes using precision-guided [sometimes called ‘smart’] munitions are undoubtedly much more accurate than ‘dumb’ or unguided weapons, the idea that such weapons hit their target accurately every time unless there is a human-induced error is merely the stuff of Hollywood.”He added: “The narrative that such airstrikes do not cause civilian casualties helps to create public permission for the expansion of air campaigns.”