9.44am: Yesterday's Iraq inquiry hearing sounded, at times, like a book club meeting. When Sir Christopher Meyer was giving evidence there were plenty of references to his memoirs – DC Confidential – and the only cliche we did not hear was "available in all good bookshops".Today Sir Jeremy Greenstock will be giving evidence and the discussion may focus on a book that is not available in any bookshops at all. As Britain's ambassador to the UN from 1998 to 2003, Greenstock was at the centre of efforts to assemble an international coalition of support for the war. Like Meyer, he wrote a book about his experiences. But the government stopped him publishing it. According to a report in the Observer at the time, in the book he described the decision to go to war as "politically illegitimate". He's prepared a witness statement ahead of today's hearing and it will be available on the inquiry's website at 10am, when this morning's session starts.9.54am: Here's what Greenstock said about his book before he was banned from publishing it, according to another story the Observer wrote about it in 2005:In the UK retired public officials do not normally write books on events still current. I am breaking that convention because the lessons drawn from the saga in Iraq are too important to leave until later.That does rather whet the appetite, doesn't it?10.00am: They're starting now.10.01am: Sir John Chilcot starts. He says this session will be devoted to understanding developments at the UN up to March 2003. He mentions the written statement and says it should be on the inquiry's website now.10.03am: The witness statement is 16 pages long. I'll skim it as quickly as I can.10.04am: Greenstock says, in his oral evidence, that you have to go back to the first Gulf war to understand the background to 2003. Attitudes "go way back".10.09am: First interesting thing I've found in Greenstock's document. He told London he would resign if Britain went to war without a UN resolution.There were those of us, including myself, who believed that a resolution was essential if UK participation in any military action  was to be regarded as internationally legitimate and who would have been most uncomfortable with a UK decision to proceed if no new resolution was possible. I myself warned the Foreign Office in October that I might have to consider my position if that was the way things went.10.18am: Still going through the written text, which is here. Greenstock says that that there was no good reason for having to go to war in March 2003.Much of the resistance in the [UN] security council to our arguments  revolved  around  the  question  "What  is  the  hurry  when  the  inspectors  are  just getting  down  to business  again?".    I  go  into  this  further  in  my  next  answer  below, but  it  was difficult  to produce a convincing response.10.21am: In his written statement Greenstock says, quite clearly, that it would have been better to delay the war and that Tony Blair only managed to get the Americans to put back the invasion for two weeks.It  seemed  to  me  that  the  option  of  invading  Iraq  in,  say,  October  2003  deserved  much  greater  consideration. But  the  momentum  for  earlier  action in the United States was much too strong for us to counter. The prime minister's arguments for more time, as I observed from New  York,  appeared to  win  two  weeks or  so of  delay,  but no  more.But Greenstock also says that, even in the autumn, most members of the UN security council would have opposed an invasion without the discovery of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) in Iraq.Nevertheless,  with  hindsight,  my  judgement  is  that  a  majority  of members  of  the  security council  would  have  opposed  the use of force  against  Iraq  by  the  US  and  the  UK  on  almost  any  timing,  unless  the  inspectors  had  succeeded  in  exposing  Iraq's  deception  with  the discovery of an active chemical or biological weapon.10.30am: In his written statement Greenstock says that, although America backed British attempts to get a second UN resolution in early 2003 (giving explicit authorisation for war), Bush was more keen on this in private than he was in public.It was noticeable to the British team, nevertheless, that President Bush's words on this subject in public were rather less warm and specific than those he had used with the prime minister in private.10.34am: Greenstock also says in his written statement that American actions were "decidely unhelpful" in relation to his attempt to get a second resolution. (See my post at 10.30am.)The  UK's  attempt  to  reconstitute  a  consensus  had  only  a  slim  prospect  of  success,  made  slimmer  by  the  recognition  by  anyone  else  following  events  closely  that  the  United  States  was  not  proactively  supportive  of  the  UK's  efforts  and  seemed  to  be  preparing  for  conflict  whatever  the  UK  decided  to  do.    These  "noises  off"  were  decidedly  unhelpful  to  what  I  was  trying to do in New York.10.36am: To recap: these are the highlights from Greenstock's written statement.• He threatened to resign if Britain did not get a UN resolution relating to Iraq.• He cannot justify the decision to go to war in March instead of waiting until the autumn.• He thinks that the Americans were not serious about getting a second UN resolution and that what they were doing was "decidedly unhelpful" in relation to his efforts to get a second resolution.I have not being full attention to Greenstock's oral evidence while I've been looking at the document, but now I'm going to tune in properly.If anyone spots anything else that's of interest in the Greenstock written statement, please mention it in the comments below.10.48am: Sir Roderic Lyne asks about Blair's meeting with Bush at Crawford in April 2002. He mentions Meyer's evidence yesterday about David Manning, Blair's foreign policy adviser, issuing Meyer with new instructions relating to British policy towards Iraq ahead of that meeting. Was Greenstock consulted about that change of policy?No, says Greenstock.10.51am: Lady Prashar asks about resolution 1441.Greenstock says he worked on it with his American opposite number at the UN, John Negroponte.But the two had not got very far when they realised that figures in Washington were working on a different draft.He describes "elements of a resolution" that were rather different from the one he and Negroponte were drafting.It was "unclear" whether they were to recommend language proposing a "maximum degree of pressure on Iraq" or whether they wanted a resolution that would be subject to negotiation at the UN.Prashar asks if if was the US intention to "set the bar too high" for Iraq.That was never the UK's intention, Greenstock says. A resolution of that kind would have been unacceptable in the security council because it would have been a pretext for war, he suggests.There was "confusion" about US intentions, he suggests.10.57am: Lady Prashar asks about the section in Greenstock's written statement mentioning his threat to resign. (See my post at 10.09am.) She asks if a resolution was necessary politically or legally.Greenstock says he thought a new resolution - this is pre-1441, remember - was necessary politically and legally.Trying to resurrect the authority of military action implied in previous UN resolutions, 678 and 687, would have been problematic, he suggests. Greenstock says a resolution passed in November 1998, 1205, established that Iraq was in "material breach" of previous resolutions and that this justified the use of force in December 1998. This annoyed the Russians, because they did not realise that the text of 1205 established such a material breach.Greenstock says he felt the need to achieve the same sort of authorisation in 2002. He did not want a "potemkin" resolution that would not provide justification.11.04am: Greenstock says there are different views about international law. Even now, some people say that the invasion was legal and some say it was illegal. It is not possible to establish in international law who was right, he says.That's interesting. He is saying it is impossible to say categorically that the invasion was legal. I'll post the full quote when I get a chance.He says this is why political support is important. He regarded the war as "legal but of questionable legitimacy" in that it did not have the democratic backing of a number of member states.Greenstock is making a distinction between legality and legitimacy. The war passed one test, but not the other, he says. That's quite a useful analysis.11.08am: Greenstock says the US was determined to resist the demand for a resolution that would require a specific vote on military action. The French wanted a resolution that did make it explicit that there had to be a vote of this kind.At this point diplomacy got "clever". Greenstock says. But it was "too clever for its own good".Resolution 1441 said that, in the event of Iraqi non-compliance, there would have to be a further "stage" (to decide what the UN should do). But it did not say the UN had to take a further decision.The US and the UK interpreted the resolution "absolutely literally". But the French and others took it mean that the the UN security council would have to take another decision about whether or not to authorise war.Greenstock says this "ambiguity" was never cleared up.11.16am: Lady Prashar asks if Greenstock thought that a second resolution would be needed when he was negotiating 1441.Greenstock says there are two different types of resolution. This might explain why Bush said "resolutions" when he was speaking to the UN.There had been talk about having two resolutions: one imposing demands on Iraq, and another setting out the consequences for non-compliance.What happened was that those two proposed resolutions were rolled into one: 1441.Greenstock says the UK's position was that another resolution would not be necessary to justify war, so long as it could be shown that Saddam was not complying with 1441.But what did the others think, Prashar asks.Greenstock says that only the Mexicans said explicitly that the UN security council would have to take a decision to justify war after 1441.11.23am: Prashar asks: "What were the consequences of this ambiguity?"Greenstock says France, in particular, abandoned the agreement contained in 1441 and insisted on a specific decision of the security council (to authorise war), even though that had not been the French position when 1441 was negotiated.11.25am: Greenstock says the whole saga was about WMD. Anything that came out of the mouth of anyone in the Bush administration suggesting it was not about WMD was "unhelpful to the policy position of the UK" that action against Iraq should be justified on the grounds of WMD.11.26am: Prashar asks if anyone at the UN ever questioned the existence of Iraq's WMD.Greenstock says no one on the security council said that to him.There were questions about the "degree of evidence" about the existence of WMD. The Russians had "the clearest view of all that there might be doubt" about how many WMD Iraq had. But even Moscow could not say for sure that Saddam had no WMD.Greenstock says he had discussions with his Iraqi opposite number at the UN. He laid out the threat to Iraq. The Iraqi ambassador told him that Iraq had no WMD. The British government was not in a position to ascertain whether or not that was true.11.30am: Sir Martin Gilbert asks about a suggestion in Greenstock's written submission that Britain could have compromised more.Greenstock says the UK would not have compromised to the extent of agreeing a resolution that made it clear that there had to be a second resolution before the US and the UK could go to war.11.35am: Greenstock says he was "constantly inventing language" to try to resolve the differences, "because that's my job". He wrote one "operative paragraph" to solve a problem practically "on the back of an envelope".11.37am: Greenstock says the "noises off" in Washington included "this is a waste of time". London argued back, saying a resolution was necessary. He said if it was UK policy to go along with abandoning the UN route that he would have "personal difficulties" with that. He thought that would be a "stiffener" for London.Chilcot asks who he told in London.Greenstock says he told the permanent secretary at the Foreign Office, Michael Jay. He does not know who Jay told.11.39am: The inquiry has stopped for a 10-minute break. I'll now try to post the key quote from the hearing so far, about the war not having legitimacy. (See 11.04am.)11.42am: Here's the key quote on legitimacy:When you get to legitimacy, it is a very fair way of describing that if you have got broad opinion behind you, broad, reasonable opinion behind you, you are doing something that is defensible in a democratic environment.To some extent the United Nations is a democratic environment. It's a forum of equal states, equally signed up by treaty to the United Nations charter and each of those states have an opinion. If you do something internally that the majority of UN member states think is wrong or illegitimate or politically unjustifiable, then you are taking a risk, in my view.And increasingly, and I think one of the lessons you may want to look at as an inquiry, is on the importance of legitimacy in geo-political affairs nowdays.I regarded our invasion of Iraq, our participation in the military action in Iraq in March 2003, as legal but of questionable legitimacy in that it did not have the democratically observable backing of the great majority of member states, or even perhaps of the majority of people inside the UK. So there was a failure to establish legitimacy, although I think we successfully established legality, in the security council, in the United Nations, of both our actions in December 1998 and our actions in March 2003, to the degree, at least, that we were never challenged in the security council or in the international court of justice for those actions.11.51am: They're about to start again.11.52am: Chilcot asks what Britain was trying to achieve with 1441.Greenstock says it is important in the security council, tactically, not to lose the initiative. It is usually best to go for a "text of some kind". If you are proposing a draft resolution, you have the tactical initiative.Chilcot asks if proposing a draft resolution stops others tabling a resolution.Greenstock says that once a resolution "goes into blue" - ie once it gets printed ready for a vote - then no other draft resolution on the same subject can take precedence.11.57am: We're into technicalities now. Greenstock is talking about "the famous 'and' rather than 'or'" in the text of 1441, in a passage on obligations on the Iraqis. I must say, it's not that famous. I don't remember it.11.59am: Greenstock says France, Russia, Germany, Syria and China were the hardest countries on the security council to persuade to back 1441.And he comes out with a lovely piece of Iraq inquiry jargon - the U6. These were the "undecided" six countries on the security council torn between the pro-US faction and the anti-US faction.12.02pm: Chilcot says that going for a second resolution was a "difficult judgment" because, by going for a second resolution, the UK seemed to be acknowledging that there was some doubt as to whether the first resolution, 1441, provided authorisation for the war.Greenstock accepts this. But he was in favour of a second resolution.Chilcot asks if the Americans wanted a second resolution.Greenstock says he thinks they did. In early January there was a conversation between Condoleezza Rice and David Manning in which Rice said that a second resolution was "necessary for American interests". The American public were "not necessarily fully on board" for an attack on Iraq.But, at the end of January, when Blair visited the US to meet Bush, Bush said: "We ourselves don't particularly need a second resolution, but we recognise that you do."12.06pm: Chilcot asks about the two reports from Hans Blix, the UN weapons inspector. They were "different in tone", Chilcot says.Greenstock says Blix produced a report in January saying Iraq was not cooperating. The Americans got "quite excited" because they thought that might amount to a "material breach" that would authorise war. Blix was not happy about this. He produced a second report on February 14. He said the Iraqis were "beginning to cooperate". The Iraqis were dismantling an aspect of their missile programme.12.12pm: Chilcot asks how close Greenstock got to achieving a second resolution.Greenstock says he never felt close to having nine votes - the required number - "in the bag". At one stage Colin Powell and Jack Straw thought they had eight votes in the bag. But, whenever he was asked, Greenstock would tell London that he was only sure of four votes. Greenstock says he was "never confident of getting nine votes".12.14pm: Chilcot asks about the decision to abandon the search for a second resolution. Greenstock says three texts were being circulated. "We tried various formulations and weren't getting traction without further evidence [of non-compliance]."As the week beginning Monday 10 March moved on, "it became increasingly clear that a resolution would not be possible".12.18pm: Lady Prashar asks how keen ministers were to delay the invasion until the autumn. "Was the military tail wagging the diplomatic dog?"Greenstock replied: "Yes, of course."He says the US did not want to go to war in the summer. Greenstock says he thinks the military could have fought in the summer. "But you don't easily start military actions in the summer months because your soldiers are not conditioned to that."By March, Greenstock did not feel that he could argue that the inspectors had had enough time. He also felt that, if the inspectors were given more time, they might find "a smoking gun".He said at the time that finding a "smoking gun" was an essential part of the strategy.Prashar asks if military action could be been averted if the inspectors had been given more time.Greenstock replies: "Possibly." But he says he thinks it more likely that there would still have been war.But a delay would have given the invastion more legitimacy."We could have made a whole raft of uses of another six months in establishing that Iraq was not cooperating," Greenstock says.So, Prashar says, he wanted diplomacy to be given more chance."I'm a diplomat," Greenstock replies.12.26pm: Greenstock says the UK was focusing on WMD. But the US was focusing on "more than WMD."This gave the impression in the security council that while the "plucky little UK" was trying to make the case for action to deal with WMD, there was something else going on in Washington.Prashar asks about the US commitment to regime change.Greenstock says the UK policy was based on UN resolutions, which related to action justified on the grounds of the WMD threat. But the UK was "increasingly pulled on to American grounds for going to war".12.30pm: Sir Lawrence Freedman asks if Greenstock ever thought that a smoking gun had not been found because there was not one to be found.No, says Greenstock. He thought there was something there. He still thinks there is "something there", although he's not sure what.He says the inquiry has not focused enough on the "concealment" efforts made by the Iraqis. They set up a "concealment" committee. They buried some Russian aircraft in the sand, and these were only discovered when the sand blew away, revealing part of the tail. If the Iraqis could hide aircraft in the sand, hiding something smaller would be easier.Greenstock says he thought they had "something, somewhere".12.35pm: Greenstock says Hans Blix was not clear in his own mind as to whether Iraq did or did not have WMD.But the Americans were convinced that they did have WMD and that they were hiding it.12.37pm: Greenstock says Colin Powell's presentation to the UN in February about Iraq's WMD was impressive but not conclusive. Members of the security council thought he was "trying too hard".12.39pm: Greenstock says the French declaration that they would veto a second resolution "did rather undercut the ground we were on".12.40pm: Greenstock says the French and Russians in particular were determined to prevent the unilateral use of force by the US. This was more important to them than the need for the security council to deal with non-compliance by Iraq.12.42pm: Sir Martin Gilbert quotes from a speech Blair gave saying that progress had been made towards achieving a consensus during this period. What was he referring to?Greenstock says that at times it did feel as if progress was being made. But it was like "one of those irritating puzzles" with balls in a slot. Once you had one ball in a slot, you had to tip the puzzle and at that point it fell out.12.44pm: Greenstock says there was a view in the international community that the US was "hell bent on the use of force".The UK "went the last mile" to try to ensure that force was not used, he says.12.47pm: Sir Roderic Lyne says other witnesses have said that commercial interests affected the decisions of some countries to oppose the war.Greenstock says Russia and France wanted sanctions lifted so they could recoup some of the debt owed to them by Iraq, dating back to the Iran-Iraq war.12.48pm: Lyne says the UK made an "extraordinary effort" to get a second resolution. What were the consequences of this?Greenstock says the overall effect of UK diplomacy was "quite considerable".He says the UK was given "a good deal of credit" at the UN for "trying diplomacy right up to the last minute".By supporting the US, the UK ensured that the international community, and members of the security, remained "able to talk to each other". If the US had gone to war on their own, there would have been a huge rift. The fact that the US had not been on its own meant that it was easier for the UN to play a role in the post-war recovery in Iraq.12.54pm: Lyne asks if a policy of containment would have been sustainable in the long term.Greenstock says the containment of Iraq through UN measures "would progressively have continued to erode".The inspectors would probably have failed to find WMD if they had been given more time. But the international community may have come to different conclusions. "The politics would have been different."If the UN had just relied on containment, Saddam would have continued to try to build up his military capacity. That would have been "dangerous".Greenstock asks the inquiry to consider why Saddam continued to pretend to have WMD. There was not a single member of the security council, or the UN, speaking up for Iraq (apart from Iraq itself).12.57pm: Chilcot asks if Greenstock wants to say any more. He points out that Greenstock is giving evidence again, before Christmas, to discuss post-war Iraq. Greenstock worked as the UK's special representative in Iraq after the war.Greenstock says the UN is a reasonable place. If you put good arguments, you get a hearing. Iraq had defied the UN. The UK was trying to defend its legitimacy.1.00pm: Chilcot closes the session.I'll summarise the main findings in a moment.1.04pm: Greenstock thought the war was "of questionable legitimacy". That was the most powerful thing he said in his evidence this morning. You can read our story about it here and I've posted his quotes in full at 11.42am.The other revelations that struck me were:• Greenstock's threat to resign. He said that could not have stayed at the UN if Britain had not secured a resolution to justify the war.• His declaration that, although he believed the war to be legal, it is impossible to settle this issue with absolute certainty. (See my post at 11.04am.)• His comments on the US. Greenstock said in his written evidence, and again during the hearing, that "noises off" from Washington undermined the attempt to get a second UN resolution.• His belief that Iraq did possess some form of WMD and that there is still "something, somewhere" in the country.• His firm belief that it would have been better to go to war in the autumn. In this, Greenstock echoed what Meyer said yesterday. They both thought that if the weapons inspectors had been allowed much more time, the invasion would have had more legitimacy.Sadly, Greenstock's book did not get a mention. (See 9.44am.) Maybe, now that the inquiry is under way, the government will lift the ban. (Or would a Tory government let him publish? I must find out.) Of course he has already spoken out, but the inquiry are not very interested in asking specific questions about who said what at a particular meeting - they prefer broad-brush questions - and so, if Greenstock ever does get round to publishing, there should be plenty of juicy anecdotes left for him to reveal.That's it for today. On Monday afternoon we've got Sir David Manning giving evidence. He was foreign affairs adviser to Blair in the run-up to the war and, unlike Meyer, he may actually know what was really agreed between Blair and Bush at Crawford. It could be good.