1.19pm: This could be the most interesting hearing yet. All the witnesses who appeared last week were civil servants working for either the Foreign Office or the Ministry of Defence in the run-up to the Iraq war. Today's witness, Sir David Manning, will be the first person to appear who could plausibly be described as a member of the Tony Blair inner circle.Actually, "inner circle" may be a bit strong. Manning was also a career diplomat. He was ambassador to Israel before becoming Blair's foreign policy adviser in Downing Street in 2001 and in 2003 he became ambassador to Washington, replacing Sir Christopher Meyer. But in the run-up to the war he was firmly ensconced in the Blair camp, not the Foreign Office camp. If Iraq policy was being decided by "sofa government" within No 10, Manning is the first witness to appear at the inquiry who qualifies as a member.Manning is also interesting because he is the author of at least two leaked memos which are likely to be discussed this afternoon. The first was written in March 2002 and the full text is available on the Downing Street memo website. Manning wrote it after a dinner with Condoleezza Rice, George Bush's national security adviser at the time, and it shows that Blair was declaring his support for regime even before he met Bush at Crawford in April. This is the key quote:I said that you would not budge in your support for regime change but you had to manage a press, a Parliament and a public opinion that was very different than anything in the States. And you would not budge either in your insistence that, if we pursued regime change, it must be very carefully done and produce the right result.Manning also wrote a memo, described as the "Manning memo" on Wikipedia, describing the outcome of a meeting that took place between Blair and Bush in the White House on 31 January 2003. The memo shows that Bush was, by then, determined to invade regardless of what happened at the UN and that the two leaders discussed the idea of getting Iraq to shoot down an American spy plane painted in UN colours to create a pretext for war. Philippe Sands, the British law professor who revealed the existence of the memo, said it raised "some fundamental questions of legality, both in terms of domestic law and international law".The hearing starts at 2pm. I'll be live blogging from then.2.01pm: Sir David Manning has just started.2.01pm: Lady Prashar starts. She asks what the foreign affairs priorities were when Manning started advising Blair.Manning says that when he started events were dominated by the consequences of 9/11. But there were "other priorities" in the foreign policy and security area, including a possible confrontation between India and Pakistan, Israel and Palestine (an issue on the table when Blair met Bush at Crawford), North Korea (which was particularly important to the Americans), and the possibility of a new partnership with Russia (involving a possible new relationship between Nato and Russia). Iraq was "a constant theme". But it was not the top priority, particularly in the first half of 2002 (when the India/Pakistan issue was deemed more important).2.06pm: Prashar asks Manning when he realised that regime change in Iraq had become official policy.Manning says he is going to take us throught a timetable of key moments.First, 9/11. It is "an absolutely critical moment in this story". It has been described as a "Pearl Harbour moment" for the US. It caused the Bush administration to "redefine" the threats facing the country. Until then, issues like Iraq had been allowed to continue "pretty much as inherited". There had been "no sense of urgency" in relationship to Iraq. All that changed after 9/11. There was a sense that you had to go out and deal with threat. "This was a very profound emotional reaction, as well as a conscious decision."9/11 was also "quite personal for some of the key players". Bush went to the site of the Twin Towers after the event. Manning was there at the time too and he remembers the "horrific" site Bush would have seen. Donald Rumsfeld was in the Pentagon when it was evacuated. So the "top players" in the US adminstration "felt that they had been touched personally".As Christopher Meyer said last week, the anthrax scare also had a big impact.Manning says this is important "in understanding how American minds moved".In 2002 Americans started to talk about pre-emption. That was new.On 14 September 2001, Bush mentioned Iraq to Blair in a telephone call. He said he thought there might be some evidence of a link between Saddam and al-Qaida.Blair said the evidence would have to be "very compelling indeed" to justify an attack on Iraq. In a subsequent letter, he urged Bush to stay focused on Afghanistan.2.12pm: Manning is still answering the question posed by Prashar in my 2.06pm post. He's explaining when regime change became US policy.Manning says he went to Washington on 22 January 2002. He went with Sir Richard Dearlove, head of MI6. He recalls saying to Condoleezza Rice, Bush's national security adviser, that if there was a review of Iraq policy, it would have to incorporate UN weapons inspections.On 14 February, Rice confirmed to Manning that the US was looking at options. It was an effort to redefine policy.In March, Manning went to Washington to prepare for Blair's visit to Crawford. By this stage he was "very conscious" that Iraq would be on the agenda. They knew a policy review was on the way. He went to see Rice "to take soundings" and to reflect to them Blair's thoughts on Iraq. He did say to Rice that, if the US was thinking about reviewing its policy and it wanted allied support, it would need to address the allies' concerns. The coalition idea had worked in Afghanistan.Manning said to Rice at the meeting that, if the Americans were to construct a coalition, they would have to consider various options. First, the role of UN inspectors. How would they explain the threat Saddam posed? They would also need a plan to get rid of Saddam. And they would need "a convincing blueprint for what a post-Saddam Iraq would look like". He also said that progress in the Middle East was "not an optional extra". The next stage was Blair's meeting with Bush at Crawford.2.18pm: Manning, who has been talking without interruption for more than 10 minutes now, is onto Crawford. He says he wants to explain what happened.It was a visit that has become dominated by speculation about Iraq. But there were lots of other issues. On the talks on the Saturday morning Iraq was a relatively minor part of the agenda.Blair and Bush had dinner alone on the Friday night.On the Saturday, there were more formal talks: Blair, Bush and three advisers each.Bush started with a reference to the discussion with Blair over dinner. He said there was "no war plan for Iraq" but that he had asked Central Command in Florida to prepare options. Blair said he had been saying to Bush it was important to go back to the UN and to present that as "an opportunity for Saddam to cooperate".Blair had another chance to speak to Bush about Iraq. (Manning does now say when.) On that occasion, he also stressed the importance of having a multilateral approach.Blair concluded that Bush did want to build a coalition.The rest of Saturday morning was taken up talking about the Middle East, and Colin Powell's proposed trip to the region. The meeting included a conversation with Powell, who was in Washington at the time.2.23pm: Manning's monologue continues. (See earlier posts.) He says that in the weeks after Crawford it became clear that the Americans were approaching a decision.At the end of July, Manning went to see Rice to discuss Iraq.He had a pre-meeting with Richard Armitage, the deputy secretary of state. When they discussed Iraq, Manning said he did not know what the Americans were planning. But he said that, if there was to be regime change, there were a number of questions that needed to be answered: why now, what would happen if Saddam used WMD during a war, what would happen after the conflict, and what role would there be for the UN.Armitage agreed those questions needed to be answered. He said it would be best not to hurry.Manning says he saw Rice that evening. He told her Britain would only participate in any military operation against Iraq if the US went through the UN. They would have to address the Middle East peace process too. Manning had a note with him, from Blair to Bush, about Iraq. The note made it clear that Britain would only participate as part of a coalition involving the UN.The following morning Manning was expecting a session with Rice in her office. But, to his surprise, he was asked to go to see Bush instead. They had half an hour or 40 minutes in the Oval Office. Bush had studied Blair's note and he had been briefed by Rice about their conversation. He repeated that it was "impossible" for the UK to take part in action against Iraq unless it was through the UN. "That was our preference; but it was also the [political] reality."2.29pm: Prashar finally interrupts. She says that Peter Ricketts told the inquiry that the US was not very keen on inspections. Was that true?Yes, but it depended who you talked to, Manning says.Manning says there were three groups in the US adminstration.First, one group just wanted to get rid of Saddam. They included the neocons, but it was not just the neocons. They had a very low opinion of the UN and saw it as "unhelpful".A second group was more multilaterist. They included Colin Powell and the State Department. They wanted to work with others.These two groups spent a lot of time trying to influence the third group, the White House and the National Security Council.2.32pm: Prashar asks Manning when he concluded there was a significant likelihood of military action."Not til much later," Manning says.After his visit to the US and his conversation with Bush, Manning concluded that Bush's "mind was not made up". He went to see Blair and he told him he did not think "a return to the UN route was a lost cause".An agreement was reached that Blair would go to see Bush after the summer holidays were over. Blair did so. This was "a key moment" in the story.At the end of August, Rice phoned Manning to tell him to disregard what was being said in the US press about a decision having been taken. No decision had been taken, she said.Blair went to see Bush on 7 September. They had a brief meeting at Camp David.Manning says "to our surprise the vice president was also invited to take part". Manning thought Bush wanted to expose Dick Cheney to the arguments for going down the UN route. (Manning says they had not expected Cheney to be there; they expected Blair and Bush to talk, with Manning and Rice as notetakers.)At this meeting, Blair talked about the possibility of a second resolution. Britain's aim was disarmament. Regime change would be a bonus. For the Americans, it was "almost the opposite".Bush said that if Saddam accepted a new resolution, he would have succeeded in changing the nature of the regime. Bush said: "We would have cratered the guy."Manning says that, when Blair left the meeting, he thought there was a real chance of Bush agreeing to go to the UN. But they did not know he would do that. They knew there was a "real tussle" about this in the adminstration. Manning says the British did not know what was going to happen until Bush delivered his speech.In his speech to the UN, Bush mentioned getting UN "resolutions".2.40pm: Prashar asks when the British thought military action would be "essential".Manning says the British always thought that the threat of military action would encourage Saddam to respond. It was always going to be made plain to Saddam that he had an option.2.41pm: Prashar asks if the UK had its own policy. Or was it just reacting to US policy?Manning says: "Our policy was to disarm Saddam Hussein." There's a big distinction between this and regime change, he says.2.42pm: Sir John Chilcot asks what the result of going down the "UN route" was thought to be. Did that include containment?Manning says that after 9/11 there was no support for containment any more in the US.By the summer of 2002, the British had concluded that the containment policy was decaying. It was thought it would "progressively unravel". The view in London was that containment was no longer sustainable.There was also a belief that it was important to "boster the credibility of the UN itself as an institution". There was a fear that if the UN just adjusted its sanctions policy and this failed, the credibility of the UN itself would be seriously compromised.2.46pm: Chilcot asks whether regime change was inevitable.Manning says the Americans said that if Saddam accepted UN security council 1441, the situation on the ground would have changed so much that you could conclude that the regime had changed itself. Manning says some Americans thought the UN route was very unlikely to work. On the British side, "there was less scepticism and more hope". But there was also "realism" about Saddam. "I don't think the British government went into this thinking we were bound to fail."2.50pm: Chilcot asks about Crawford. Did Blair and Bush have a shared view that, however things ended up, they would still be together?Manning says Chilcot will have to ask Blair.He says Blair wanted to disarm Iraq. If that led to regime change, so much the better. But regime change was not the policy.Blair also thought that it was important that the US was not left to deal with these problems on its own.So he probably expected to be with the US at the end, Manning says.2.52pm: Prashar asks about military planning.Manning says Blair first asked for military options in June 2002. By this stage he knew the Americans were considering military options. In July 2002, a letter was sent to Number 10 from the defence secretary's office saying they had identified three possibilities: first, the in-place support package, involving British assets already in the region; second, the enhanced support package, the same as (1) with addition maritime and air support; and, third, the discreet UK package, involving sending about 20,000 troops.Those papers went to Blair in July. He said he did not want to accept any of these options. He did not want to give any signal that he wanted to think about any alternative to going down the UN route. Over the summer no decision was taken.In September, Manning says the MoD were asked if they wanted to send a team to a US planning meeting. Blair said the MoD was authorised to say "on an entirely contingent basis" that Britain might be willing to send the enhanced support package. Over time, it was agreed to move to package three, the "discreet package".2.58pm: Prashar asks how important the British contribution was to the Americans.Manning says he's not a military expert but he things "we should not exaggerate the importance" of the British military contribution.The Americans could have done the operation without the UK. But he thinks they were "grateful" to have a sizeaable UK contribution.Prashar asks if that means that the British contribution was unnecessary.Manning says the Americans thought it was desirable to have the British involved.3.00pm: Prashar asks if any conditions were attached to UK participation.Manning says Blair was clear all the way through on the need to go down the UN route. And he was clear that there had to be progress in the Middle East. Those were "conditions" in his mind, Manning says.Manning says planning for "the day after" was also important to Blair.Prashar asks if British participation was inevitable.Manning says he did not think so. When he went to the US in July, he made it very clear that Britain would only participate if the Americans involved the UN.Blair's view was that going through the UN was "absolutely essential".3.04pm: Prashar asks if going down the UN route affected British military planning.Manning says he thinks there probably was "some uneasiness in the MoD about the lateness of decisons". He stresses that he is not a military expert.Blair was told that if he wanted to deploy a large force, it would take six months to get it ready. Manning says his impression was that Blair was reluctant to take these decision until he had to. Some might have felt that he left it quite late.Prashar asks if military planning "constrained" the diplomatic room for manoeuvre.3.12pm: Chilcot asks if information was distributed properly in Whitehall.Manning says he thinks the information-sharing system worked well. He did not think there was a problem of communication.3.14pm: Prashar goes back to military planning. Why did the UK decide to participate on the scale that it did?Manning says that by the time the diplomatic track collapsed, Blair felt he had to take part because he had said Britain would. He wanted to be "as good as his word". He felt that it was right and that "if it was right, it was worth doing properly".Manning says Blair had used military force before, in Sierra Leone, in Kosovo and in Afghanistan.Manning mentions the speech Blair gave in Chicago in 1999 entitled "the doctrine of international community". (This is the speech that Sir Lawrence Freedman, a member of the inquiry, helped to write.)In the speech Blair mention Slobodan Milosevic and Saddam Hussein, Manning says.3.19pm: Prashar asks if Blair was receiving the best advice from the MoD.Manning says the original plan was for British troops to go into northern Iraq. That was the plan until the end of 2002.In early 2003, Rice phoned Manning to say the Turks were refusing to cooperate. At that stage the British were asked to adapt their planning. It was "quite a remarkable achievement" that they were so able to change so quickly.Manning says "as an armchair general" he had his misgivings about the campaign. He was worried about the capacity of British troops to fight in a WMD environment. He was concerned about the British having to change their plans. And he was worried what would happen in Baghdad. In the event, he was "wrong on every count", Manning says.He says he asked the military chiefs of staff to go over these points with Blair on 15 January 2003. The chiefs of staff proved to be right.3.24pm: Chilcot says he's going to take a break for 10 minutes.3.26pm: What have we learnt so far? The key point is that Manning has said that Blair told Bush in July 2002 that it would be "impossible" for Britain to support the Americans in military action against Iraq if the US refused to involve the UN. (See 2.23pm) We've always known that Blair said that he wanted to go down the UN route. But I'm not sure that we've heard this expressed as non-negotiatiable condition before.The other point that was particularly interesting was Manning's concession that Blair may have delayed the final decision to commit to military action until too late. (See 3.04pm).3.36pm: Here's the full quote about the Blair delaying making a military commitment.I think there probably was some uneasinness in the MoD about the lateness of the decisions. I think that was one reason why, although the prime minister took no decisions in July, he was pressed again in September. And it had particular implications, of course, if in the end the British government decided for option 3 [See post at 2.52pm] ... There was a sense in the MoD, probably, that we had to try and ensure that the policy that we were following diplomatically did not mean that we were excluding military options. My impression was that he was reluctant to take these decisions until he had to, that some might have said he went beyond the ideal of when he had to, he left it quite late. But I think he always felt that he wanted to give the sense that the diplomatic approach in the United Nations was paramount.3.41pm: They're back. Sir Lawrence Freedman asks if Crawford represented a "step change" in policy.Manning says he is not sure whether the speech Blair delivered on that visit represented the first time Blair had said "regime change" in public. Sir Christopher Meyer told the inquiry last week that he thought it was the first time Blair had said that in public.3.44pm: Freedman asks if the US asked Britain to be involved in the new policy. Or did Britain offer to be involved?Manning says it was not as clear as that. In the hectic weeks after 9/11 it was very uncertain what was going to happen. Blair's sense was that it was vital to bring together the broadest possible international coalition.3.48pm: Freedman asks about the "conditionality" set by Blair, covering the Middle East etc. Were these conditions? Or were they things Blair thought would be sensible?Manning says Blair felt they were both "sensible and essential".Manning says Blair also believed there had to be an effort to explain what was happening.Freedman says, in relation to the Middle East, it is difficult to see how any "condition" was being met.Manning concedes that this is true. He says that Blair was pressing for a Middle East conference that did not happen.Blair also wanted to publish information, so that the public could understand what was going on. It seems that Manning wants to talk about the September Iraq dossier. But Freedman keeps taking him back to the Middle East.Manning says Blair pushed for the publication of a road map to peace in the Middle East. In the summer of 2002, Bush said he wanted to see a two-state solution in the Middle East. The British pushed for the publication of a road map. It was "very hard pounding". The Americans eventually published one in 2003. But it was "the triumph of hope over experience" because it did not lead to peace.3.53pm: Manning is now on post-war planning.He says the British thought the US state department would be in charge. But it was the Pentagon that took responsibility.Freedman asks if the British realised there was a problem before March 2003.Manning says it was a subject of concern. The British insisted on a role for the UN in post-war Iraq. Manning himself thought there was a risk of "very considerable dislocation" after the war.Manning says some in America thought that post-war Iraq would be like post-war Germany or Japan. That was the "neocon wishful-thinking thesis". Others, particularly in the state department, thought things would be more complicated.Freedman asks when the British learnt the state department would not be in charge of post-war Iraq. Manning says he thinks that was in February.3.59pm: Freedman asks about the five tests for military intervention laid out in Blair's 1999 Chicago speech: being sure of one's case, using military action as a last resort, military action being feasible, being prepared for the long term, and military action being in the national interest.Manning says he does not remember these five criteria being considered. But he thinks that they were implicit in the decision to involve the UN.Freedman (who helped to write the Chicago speech) says that's a pity.4.05pm: Sir Roderic Lyne asks if Blair considered whether or not to take part in military action when it became clear that all his conditions were not being met.Manning says he thinks there was some reconsideration.Lyne asks what sort of meetings Blair held in the run-up to Crawford.Manning says there were meetings of ministers "inside the ring of secrecy", including the foreign secretary and the defence secretary.But it would be "misleading" to suggest that there were major shifts Blair could articulate before Crawford. Blair was still trying to find out what the Americans were thinking. It would not be right to say that in February and March Blair was articulating a new policy. Once it became clear that the Americans had changed their view, he was keen to ensure they went down the UN route. Blair did not see this as a moment of decision.Lyne says that Meyer suggested that containment was a "dead duck" by this time. What sort of options review was taking place in London? Manning says London had not completely given up on containment at this point. "I don't think [Blair] thought when he went to Crawford that it was likely that the president would accept containment any longer." But Blair did think there was "everything to play for" in terms of shaping US policy.4.13pm: Chilcot asks about the timing of the decision to invade. What did the UK think about the performance of the weapons inspectors?Manning wants to go back to 1441. The UN wanted a declaration from Saddam relating to his WMD and for him to allow unfettered access to the inspectors.Manning says Iraq had an opportunity to avoid military action.Manning says he personally believed the inspections should have been given more time to work. Although they had not found "the smoking gun", they had "not been wholly disappointing". At some sites they had found some "quite interesting material". He "regretted" that the process ended when it did. But by that stage the US was convinced that these provisions were not working and that a second resolution was impossible.4.17pm: Chilcot says there's any American phrase "let's go fish or cut bait". By mid-March the Americans were at this stage, he suggests.Manning says it is important to remember how "bad" relations were between different countries at this time.Manning says it is possible that if the inspectors had been given longer they might have found something significant. "I felt myself that we should have given longer for this process to work. I'm not at all sure it would have worked," he says.Manning says he went to talk to the Mexican president and the Chilean president to see if they would support a second resolution. He tried to develop "tests" that could have been put in front of Saddam. But the Americans were not willing to allow this to go ahead.Manning says he was not convinced he would have had success with a second resolution. But he does think it would have been worth trying.4.22pm: Chilcot asks if delaying the war would have allowed more time for aftermath planning.Manning says this may have been one of the advantages. The "very strained realtionships" amongst the P5 might have been improved.4.23pm: Chilcot asks about the aftermath of the war. Was there any planning for a breakdown in law and order?Manning says nobody envisaged the extent to which a security vacuum would emerge in the aftermath of the war. "The extent to which security broke down in Baghdad ... was not foreseen and was deeply troubling."The American military thought they were fighting a war. They did not think peacekeeping was their responsibility. They also did not appreciate how quickly Iraqi security would disintegrate.In Basra, where the British were in charge, conditions were different. The British troops followed a different philosophy."It was very difficult to persuade the American military on the ground that they had to take over policing responsibilities," he says.Blair asked Manning to go to Baghdad in May. He was "very struck" by this security problem and by "the reluctance of US soliders to get out of their tanks, to take of their helmets and to start building up relations [with local communities]".There was also a serious infrastructure problem. Manning says he thought it was "vital" that there was a different form of military activity in these areas. He told Condoleezza Rice that the Americans had to improve security and repair the power and water supplies. Setting up the Coalition Provisional Authority did not help. Paul Bremer disbanded the army and puged Baathists from the government. That did not help.4.32pm: Manning says Britain's impact on the CPA (Coalition Provisional Authority) was "limited". Paul Bremer took his decisions about disbanding the army and purging the Baathists on his own authority.4.34pm: Chilcot asks if the insurgency was foreseeable.Mannnig says: "I don't think anybody envisaged the violence on the scale that occured." Had the security arrangements been handled differently, it is possible that things would have been different.If the Iraqi army and the police had been coopted in large numbers, and if there had not been a witchhunt against the Baath party, "the situation might have been very different".There was also a problem with troop numbers, Manning says. It was "very striking" in the first months after the war concluded that there were not enought troops to seal the border with Syria and Iran. This meant that the insurgency could receive reinforcement from those two countries.Also, after the war, "the Americans seemed to lose focus". Iraq was not given as much attention as it had received before. The combination of the poor arrangements put in place by the Pentagon, arrangments on the ground and the lack of focus "proved to be a very poor combination".4.40pm: Prashar asks if Americans agreed with his concerns about the handling of events in Iraq after the war.Manning says that would depend who you spoke to.The state department had done a lot of planning and thought they would be running Iraq. The neocon thought that nobody would need to run Iraq, because Iraqis would run the country themselves.Prashar asks who took the decision about de-Baathification.Manning says there has been a long controversy about this. It took the British "completely by surprise". And, from his conversations with Rice, he knows that it took her by surprise too.4.44pm: Sir Roderic Lyne goes back to the UN. He says that Manning and Greenstock have both said they would have preferred the weopons inspectors to be given more time. Did Britain have any option when told the US had lost patience?Manning says Britain had the option of not taking part. But Blair was "clear in his own mind" that if the UN route he been exhausted he would back military action.So, Lyne says, did Blair feel the UN route was "completely exhausted" by March 2003?Manning says that Blair was keen to keep that going as long as possible. But by the second week of March he had decided it was not going to work.Lyne asks if Britain told the Americans it was essential to have a second resolution.Manning replies: "Yes, I had told them it was essential."He says he thought a second resolution would be necessary to enforce UN policy.This is interesting. But Lyne does not ask him why he thought it was essential? Does he think it was a legal requirement? Frustratingly, no one has asked Manning yet.4.49pm: Manning says that at times Bush thought the UN route would work. But when Saddam produced his declaration on December 8 the Americans concluded that this was a replay of his previous obstructive tactics. They convinced themselves the UN process would not work.The Americans were particularly keen on the weapons inspectors being allowed to interview Iraqi scientists outside the country. The Iraqis blocked this. This had a big influence on American thinking.Manning says there was also quite a lot of pressure on Bush from the military by mid-March. The combination of feeling that Saddam was determined to prevent the UN succeeding and the military timetable led to Bush deciding to invade in March.4.53pm: Freedman asks what Britain thought would happen in Iraq and the region after the war.Manning says there was an expectation that this would at least help to promote a degree of stability in the Middle East. And Iraq without WMD and on the road to democracy would be "a better place".Manning says Blair also felt this would be a liberation for people in Iraq. But London was also conscious that there would be "negatives", Manning says. The government was worried about the impression that the West was picking on a Muslim nation. And there would be concerns that Britain was more interested in WMD than the Middle East peace process.Manning says the British government did not accept the neocon view that this would be a catalyst for democracy in the Middle East.4.58pm: Prashar asks about suggestions that Iraq's neighbours would persuade Saddam to stand down.Manning says this was an attractive idea. But he never thought it was very likely.This "turned out to be a mirage," Manning says. He never saw a "firm, credible plan" to deliver this. Chilcot asks if Manning has anything to add. Manning doesn't.Chilcot thanks the members of the public who are there. He says it is helpful to the inquiry to have them there.And he wraps up the hearing for today.5.03pm: I'll summarise the main findings in a moment.In news terms that was disappointing. There certainly was not anything in the hearing that was particularly embarrassing to Tony Blair. But, even if our picture of the war is not changing, the colours in it are getting richer and deeper every day the inquiry goes on. These are the points that struck me.• Manning was very critical of American post-war planning. (See 4.23pm and 4.34pm in particular). We knew this is what the British felt. But officials and ministers were too diplomatic to say this at the time. As the inquiry moves into the post-war phase, we are going to here more and more of this.• Bush told Blair that there was some evidence of a link between Iraq and al-Qaida when they spoke three days after 9/11. (See 2.06pm)• Blair received a letter from the Ministry of Defence in June 2002 outlining three options for military intervention in Iraq. But he would not take a decision over the summer and in September he was still only talking "on a contingent basis" about troops being committed. (See 2.52pm) Manning thinks Blair perhaps should have committed himself sooner. (See 3.36pm)• Blair told Bush that it would be "impossible" for Britain to join an attack on Iraq without UN backing. (See 2.23pm). We knew that this was Blair's preference. But I don't remember hearing this stated so explicity before as an absolute condition.• Manning told the Americans that it would be "essential" to get a second resolution.• Manning (like Sir Christopher Meyer and Sir Jeremy Greenstock) thought that the UN weapons inspectors should have been given more time.In some ways this was a frustrating hearing because the questioning was particularly poor. Chilcot and his panel do not ask many supplementaries. This became infuriating when Manning revealed that he had told the Americans it would be "essential" to have a second UN resolution. Why was it essential? Who did he tell? Did this reflect Blair's view? And, if a second UN resolution was essential, why did we go to war without one? It would have been nice to have heard some answers to these questions. But Chilcot and his team did not ask them.At the opening of the inquiry, Chilcot stressed that the panel would be holding follow-up hearings and that, if questions did not get asked immediately, that did not necessarily mean the inquiry would not be coming back to them later. So perhaps it's a little too early to write them off as dozy duffers. Maybe the forensic questions will come later. We can only hope.That's it. Thanks for the comments.