A new report from Amnesty International highlights human rights abuses in present-day Iraq, mainly by armed groups, and the failure of the Iraqi authorities to take effective action to stop such abuses. It comes a week after revelations about a secret prison under the jurisdiction of the Iraqi prime minister, where detainees were allegedly tortured. How concerned is the UK government about these issues? Concerned mainly to play them down, it appears.Last Monday the Los Angeles Times reported that: "Hundreds of Sunni men disappeared for months into a secret Baghdad prison under the jurisdiction of prime minister Nouri Maliki's military office, where many were routinely tortured." The existence of the prison is not disputed, and the allegations of abuse – including the death of one detainee –were apparently substantiated by an internal US embassy report.The report received very little coverage in Britain. I asked the Foreign Office if it had any comment, or had taken up the allegations with the Iraqi government. A spokesman said the FCO would not make a statement because of pre-election purdah but gave me general factual information to the effect that: "We discuss with senior Iraqi officials our concerns regarding  allegations of the abuse of detainees, and urge the Government of Iraq to use all efforts to improve monitoring of all detention facilities in Iraq."The implication of this is that abuses are something carried out by people other than the Iraqi government, and something that it should strive to get a better handle on. This accords with what Nouri Maliki told the LA Times, "that he was committed to stamping out torture – which he blamed on his enemies". But, according to the paper, Maliki's critics "question how Maliki could not have known what was going on at the facility and say that regardless, he is responsible for what happened there".It isn't surprising that the British government is reluctant to criticise its Iraqi counterpart directly. It took part in a war that it now largely justifies on the basis of overthrowing a brutal dictator and bringing democracy to the country instead.That democracy is now in chaos. Britain's "commitment" to Iraq involves "building a strong, broad-based bilateral relationship".While it goes without saying that the FCO will be reluctant to criticise Britain's friends, the contrast with what it said about Saddam's regime, when things were undoubtedly worse, is stark. In December 2002 the FCO published a dossier on "Saddam Hussein: crimes and human rights abuses". The document, which has now largely been forgotten, was based on offcuts from the September 2002 dossier on weapons of mass destruction. As it said on the tin, the purpose of the second dossier was to link "grave violations of human rights" to Saddam, to make clear that they "are not the work of a number of overzealous individuals but the deliberate policy of the regime".In response to my inquiry, the FCO helpfully pointed me towards its latest global annual report on human rights, launched by David Miliband in March. This features the work of Ann Clwyd MP, the prime minister's special envoy to Iraq since May 2003, reappointed by Gordon Brown in 2007. Clwyd is a longtime campaigner for human rights in Iraq and was a forceful advocate for war. On the day of the House of Commons vote in March 2003 she argued that war was necessary because Saddam's security services put people into a machine for shredding plastic. This machine has never been been shown to have existed.In a submission to the Iraq Inquiry, Clwyd disclosed in rather more sober terms that last year she raised with both Brown and the Iraqi president, "allegations of the torture and killing of an Iraqi detainee by the Iraqi military". It appears that this is a reference to Adnan Awad Mohammed Thaib al-Jumaili, whose death in custody and the lack of effective action was cited as a cause for concern in a report last year by the UN assistance mission in Iraq.Strangely, there is no reference to any such action in the FCO's account of Clwyd's recent work, and as I write the FCO has no update on the case.Amnesty International says it is very much aware of cases like these where torture of detainees in Iraq has been alleged and where people have apparently been tortured to death. It says that it has repeatedly raised these cases with the Iraqi, UK and US authorities but that the overarching problem is that the Iraqi government is simply not doing anything to effectively stop this happening. The failure to publish information about previous "investigations" is part of a pattern of impunity for perpetrators.For the most part the abuses in Amnesty's new report, Iraq – Civilians Under Fire, are not alleged to be the direct responsibility of the Iraqi government but carried out by armed groups and others. The authorities are, however, criticised for their response:"In particular, the authorities have failed to conduct thorough and impartial investigations into many attacks on and other violent crimes against civilians, and a climate of impunity continues to prevail. In the case of violence against women and girls, and attacks on men perceived to be gay, the climate of impunity is underpinned by Iraqi legislation and jurisprudence, which provides for lenient punishment for attackers who are deemed to have acted in defence of 'honour'."The FCO's annual report is not intended to be an audit of human rights abuses across the world. But what it says – or doesn't say – about the issues Amnesty raises is very revealing about its attitude.Amnesty cites Article 128 of Iraq's penal code, which allows those who have committed a crime with "honourable motives" to receive a lesser sentence. This applies to violence against women seen to have transgressed traditional moral codes and against gay men. It dates from the Saddam era but has not been amended, except in the case of women in the Kurdistan region. Amnesty says this is largely to blame for the culture of impunity.The Foreign Office report makes no reference to this law, except in putting a positive spin on its absence in the Kurdish region – a reference that will baffle many people: "In the Kurdish region honour killings are now punished as harshly as other murders and are not viewed differently under the law."The document's reference to attitudes to violence against gay men is even more misleading: "The ministry of interior has also stated that the killing of homosexuals is considered as murder, as it would be for any other individual, and the perpetrators will be prosecuted." No mention in either case of statutory reduction of sentence on the basis of "honourable motives".The terms of reference for Clwyd's role perhaps sum up the government's priorities in its approach to human rights abuses in Iraq past (hype) and present (gloss over). They are: to increase public knowledge of the human rights abuses committed by Saddam's regime; to advise HMG on ways of helping to protect human rights in the new Iraq and to give other advice to the UK government. Grave abuses are a thing of the past and human rights now merely need protecting. A quiet word will do.