The footage beamed back from the liberated districts of Ramadi is grim: a ghost town littered with debris and smashed concrete, destroyed storefronts, plumes of smoke, the sound of gunfire piercing the air as Iraqi soldiers speak on camera.Much of the capital of Anbar province, the scene of an ignominious defeat of the Iraqi military by Islamic State in May and now largely won back after a gruelling offensive backed by 600 US-led coalition airstrikes, is in ruins.“Daesh did not leave a metre on the ground in the city without planting in it explosives,” said Ahmad Rabih, an Anbar tribal official, using the Arabic acronym for Isis. “That is what slowed down our heroes. They planted them in the streets and homes and shops. You have to blow them up from afar or they will blow you up.”The images of weary soldiers on the frontline, confident they are within hours of the total liberation of the city, offer a brief respite for the Iraqi army, whose retreat seven months earlier in the face of an offensive by a few hundred Isis militants sparked derision.The Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, visited Ramadi on Tuesday, a day after the national flag was raised above the city’s government complex, to congratulate the security forces, who were still sweeping streets and buildings for roadside bombs, booby traps and holed-up jihadis.In spite of the celebratory mood, questions remain about whether Iraq can ever be made whole again after disintegrating in the face of the Isis surge last year, and whether it can re-enfranchise the country’s Sunni community, long abandoned by Baghdad.“Victory does not mean only defeating the enemy but restoring what it destroyed and robbed,” said Hisham al-Hashimi, an Iraqi expert who advises the government on Isis. “We can know real victory when the goals of the military campaigns are accomplished, and these include liberation, cleansing the area, holding ground, securing the liberated areas, security, stability and restoring services to citizens.”The liberation of the city came at the cost of widespread damage, a pattern that has come to characterise operations against entrenched Isis forces who rig entire houses with explosives in the face of impending offensives. Much of the city of Sinjar, the ancestral homeland of the Yazidi minority, was flattened in an anti-Isis campaign led by the peshmerga, the Kurdish paramilitary, and backed by coalition airstrikes.Next, Iraqi forces are likely to set their sights on Fallujah, another city in Anbar held by Isis, whose liberation would be an important step in severing Isis supply lines from Syria into Iraq and Mosul, the crown jewel of the group’s self-proclaimed caliphate and the largest population centre under its control.Residents in Baghdad and other Iraqi cities came out in celebration at Ramadi’s imminent liberation, according to Iraqi media. “I hope I can go back to my home soon,” said Umm Ismail, a displaced woman from Ramadi, in an interview with the Iraqia TV station. “The displaced families have been distributing sweets and juice among themselves and to passersby in celebration at the liberation of the city from the Daesh terrorists.”Rabih, the Anbari official, said 300 civilians who were trapped in Isis-held areas of the city had been freed and placed in temporary shelters while the city was combed to clear out the terror group’s remaining holdouts. “They were using these innocent people as human shields,” he said. “They need everything – tents, medicine, food, blankets because the weather is cold.” There are concerns that residents who remained in the city may face attacks owing to suspicions that they aided the militants.Anbar was the scene of the so-called Sunni awakening campaign during the American occupation. The US financed local Sunni militias and armed them in order to oust al-Qaida in Iraq from their midst. But after the end of the occupation, the Iraqi government reneged on its promises of assistance.The Hashd al-Shaabi, a conglomerate of primarily Shia militias that has played a key role in ousting Isis from cities such as Tikrit, appeared to take a backseat in the liberation of Ramadi, ceding the task primarily to the Iraqi elite counter-terrorism force, local police, the Iraqi army and a small group of Sunni tribesmen, backed by US-led airstrikes. Abadi had been criticised in Iraq for not making more use of the Shia militia in the Ramadi campaign.Rabih said local tribesmen were best placed to hold the territory and clear the rest of Anbar, a province that has seen little peace in the past decade. “The tribes know every inch of these areas,” he said. “These are our homes and our families. We want our land, to be secure in it, to know our destiny.”