A double truck bombing in northern Iraq and a series of explosions in Baghdad today have killed at least 48 people and wounded almost 250, raising fears of a resurgence of sectarian violence.The truck bombing killed 28 people and wounded 138 near the northern Iraqi city of Mosul, 240 miles north of Baghdad, while nine bombs in the Iraqi capital killed 20 people and wounded 108, officials said.Insurgents are targeting Shias in an attempt to reignite the sectarian violence that devastated the country in 2006 and 2007. So far the Shias have not retaliated, according to the US military.The deadliest of the pre-dawn violence was in Khazna village, 12 miles north of Mosul, which is inhabited by the Shia Shabak ethnic group. Two trucks parked less than 500 metres apart in an alley blew up together, flattening about 30 homes in the small village, which lacks the security measures of large cities. Many of the dead and wounded had been sleeping on their roofs because of the summer heat.The explosions left a large crater and reduced the neighbourhood to piles of bricks, twisted metal and smoking debris. Family members pulled the wounded from the debris and carried them away as ambulances wailed through the neighbourhood. Mahmoud Hussein, 28, said his house about 140 metres away from the truck bombs was flattened and he survived only because he was asleep on the roof."If we had slept inside we would have been killed," said Hussein, who had a head wound from flying debris.No one has claimed responsibility for the attack, but al-Qaida in Iraq and other Sunni insurgents remain active in Mosul and surrounding areas.On Friday, a suicide truck bomber destroyed a mosque used by the Shia Turkomen minority just north of Mosul, killing 44 people. The US military says Mosul is the last urban stronghold of al-Qaida in Iraq.The bombs across the capital this morning are a reminder that insurgents remain a threat in Baghdad despite an announcement by the Iraqi government last week that it would remove all blast walls in the city in response to the improved security situation.The first bomb in Baghdad was hidden in a pile of rubbish when it exploded at about 5.50am Iraqi time near a group of construction workers drinking tea and looking for day jobs in Amil. It killed at least seven people and wounded 46, officials said.About 10 minutes later, a car bomb targeted construction workers elsewhere in western Baghdad, killing at least 10 people and wounding 35. Three bombs exploded in the mainly Sunni neighbourhood of Azamiyah shortly before 7am, wounding a member of a government-backed paramilitary group. The army said there were no fatalities. A few hours later a roadside bomb exploded in front of a mosque in the primarily Sunni neighbourhood of Sadiyah in south-west Baghdad, killing two and wounding 14 others, a police official said. A minibus exploded in Shula, a predominately Shia neighbourhood, killing one and wounding three more. Two bombs went off elsewhere in the city, wounding 10 other people.There has been a wave of attacks since US troops withdrew from towns and cities in June. Insurgents are expected to step up efforts to derail security gains as the Americans scale back their presence.US forces are due to leave Iraq by the end of 2011 under a security pact between Washington and Baghdad, and the Americans are in the process of handing over responsibility to the Iraqi security forces.