First order of business this morning is responding to a couple of commenters to my post about the educators' statement in support of Bill Ayers.Of course I don't think that everyone on the left indiscriminately supports the use of violence to achieve political goals. I didn't say that. I did say that the people who signed that letter put their names to a document that included the sentence: It's true that Professor Ayers participated passionately in the civil rights and antiwar movements of the 1960s, as did hundreds of thousands of Americans.That sentence at the very least excuses the use of violence for political ends. It tries to pass off the planting of bombs intended to kill civilians as passionate participation in the political process, no different from marching on Washington or working within one's church or synagogue to support desegregation. It's a disgusting sentence really, the more I dwell on it. But again, I'm talking only about the people who signed that statement. I did suggest, and I do believe, that people who consider themselves genuine leftists are more likely to look beyond a sentence like that than people who consider themselves liberals. But I was clearly referring only to people who signed that statement.Now, to the commenter who suggests I supported the Iraq war. No. Wrong. That commenter refers to a passage I wrote in an essay that appeared in a book in 2003. I could see how the passage, standing alone, could be construed as support for the Iraq war. But there were lots of other passages in that essay in which I strongly reproved what I saw at the time as the Bush administration's and the neocons' push toward empire.The commenter quotes from a review of said book that Anatol Lieven wrote in The Nation, lumping me with George Packer and Paul Berman as "liberal hawks." What the commenter probably doesn't know is that, in a later exchange in the letters column of The Nation, Lieven publicly offered me and another war critic his apologies:LIEVEN REPLIES Washington, DC * First of all, I must apologize if I unintentionally gave the impression that Michael Tomasky and Michael McFaul directly supported the decision to go to war in Iraq. As they have written, this was not the case. Equally, I am quite certain that McFaul never has and never would use a phrase like "the only language Arabs understand is force." As Seymour Hersh and others have pointed out, and as I know from my own experience, such language is indeed characteristic of professed democratizers on the neoconservative right. By contrast, McFaul and Tomasky are undoubtedly entirely sincere in their commitment to the universal values of democracy.Anatol and I subsequently became friends, or at least friendly acquaintances, and he wrote for me while I was the editor of The American Prospect – see this exchange he did with Bernard-Henri Levy, in which he sliced BHL to ribbons. He's moved back to London. Go ask him if he thinks of me today as a liberal hawk. I exist in a state of zenlike serenity as to what his answer will be.I have written very – and I mean very – critically of the liberal hawks. See this review I wrote of Peter Beinart's The Good Fight, which appeared in The American Prospect. Then see this exchange between Beinart and me, which appeared in Slate after my review. I can promise my readers that it would be news indeed to liberal hawks to be told I was their ally.I know this was a little long. But there aren't many things that are more important than establishing the factual truth of one's position on the question of war. I was for the war in Afghanistan and against the war in Iraq. I'm comfortable with the fact that that won't be good enough for a lot of people, because I'm not against all war. I'm no pacifist. I'm very much for responding to people who attacked my country. And I am still for trying to spread democratic values where possible, and maybe – maybe – removing from power a brutal and murderous dictator, but certainly not on the basis of lying serially to the American people about his weapons systems and failing to unite the world's democracies in the cause and botching the military strategy and taunting the opposition to "bring it on" and having an unstated double agenda of showing the rest of the world that America can start a war anytime it wants to and a whole host of other morally unsupportable errors the Bush administration made. That the liberal hawks were able to turn a blind eye to all these sins as less important than their own "idealism" still blows my mind when I think about it.