There was nothing new in the testimony to Congress of General David Petraeus, the top US commander in Iraq. Violence in Iraq is down considerably since the beginning of the surge, but the gains are extremely fragile and could easily be reversed. The improvement is due above all to the mobilisation of Sunni militias on the American payroll - the awakening Councils, the Sons of Iraq, the Concerned Citizens Groups - against al-Qaida and to the ceasefire called by Moqtada Sadr, the firebrand leader of a major Shia political factions and its armed wing, the Mahdi Army. Because the improvement is real but fragile, the United States will continue to draw down the number of troops until July, when it will reach the pre-surge level of 140,000, then pause for at least 45 days to evaluate the situation. There is no telling when a new drawdown could start and what troop levels will be at the end of 2008.Ambassador Ryan Crocker could not point to anything new, either. Political progress in Iraq has been - disappointing was a word General Petraeus had used previously. Yet, the situation is far from bleak. Despite the recent fighting in Basra and Baghdad, the spike in violent incidents and the uptick in the number of US casualties in March, put in the proper perspective the trends are still positive.In a nutshell, the situation in Iraq remains largely unchanged since the last time General Petraeus and Ambassador Crocker testified in September 2007. So does the position of the Bush administration that insists progress is taking place but refuses to be pinned down to any long-term plan.There was not much sign of change on the domestic political front either. Senators stuck to predictable questions and positions. In a by now well-rehearsed performance, each senator asked the questions expected of him or her. The lines were drawn a long time ago, between those, mostly Republicans, who believe that the US can still prevail in stabilising Iraq if it perseveres long enough, and those, mostly Democrats, who are highly sceptical of success, believe that persevering only means adding casualties and expense with no positive outcome and favour disengagement. Senator Edward Kennedy pithily stated, reacting to General Petraeus testimony: "He describes one Iraq, while we see another." The two visions of Iraq are irreconcilable.And that is where things stand today. The situation is stalemated in Iraq and it is stalemated in the United States. Each side hangs on tenaciously to its views, be they Iraqi factions or Democrats and Republicans in Congress. And this is preventing both the political negotiations necessary to lead to a political solution in Iraq and the open debate that might allow for the formulation of a coherent policy by the United States.There is widespread agreement that no lasting solution is possible in Iraq without a political agreement among the factions, but such agreement is as elusive as ever. In fact, so little has happened on the political front that the administration has long since abandoned the idea of requiring progress toward key benchmarks as a condition for maintaining the surge and indeed US support for the Iraqi government. A de-debaathification law has been approved, but implementation is slow and may not help reintegrate Sunnis excluded after the US invasion. The law on the power of the provincial councils has been approved, but implementation will only start after the provincial elections. The vote is scheduled for October 1, but there is no election law yet, and experts involved in the process doubt that the fractious parliament can agree on one by the deadline. The oil law is perennially under discussion, and the gulf dividing Kurdish and other lawmakers is as wide as ever. In the meantime, the number of militias in the country has increased steadily, with Sunnis quickly catching up to Shias in this respect - no matter what euphemisms the United States uses, Awakening Councils, Concerned Citizens and Sons of Iraq can only be described as militias.Political dialogue and political progress in the United States have also ground to a halt, and they are as necessary here as in Iraq. Rational debate about how to put an end to open-ended US involvement in Iraq has long ceased. Instead, each side now spins plans and policies on the basis of politically driven interpretations of the same poor information about what is happening in Iraq. The debate that followed the testimony offered egregious examples. For one side, the recent fighting in Basra and Baghdad is a sign of political progress - a self-confident Maliki is now ready to take on militias and re-establish government control and rule of law. For the other, the same fighting is a sign that the fragile progress brought about by the surge has already come unravelled. One side, as senator Joel Lieberman argued, refuses to recognise anything as progress. The other refuses to recognise anything as failure.Indeed, there is nothing new on the Iraq front or on the domestic front. And that means there is no end in sight.