Where do the presidential candidates stand on Iraq?Barack Obama promises to withdraw one or two combat brigades a month until all are out in about 16 months. But he would leave behind forces to guard the US embassy and station a strike force in the region to fight al-Qaida. He would launch an aggressive diplomatic effort with Iran and other neighbouring states.Hillary Clinton has pledged to draw up a withdrawal plan for US forces within the first 60 days of her administration. She opposes permanent bases in Iraq. She has said she would organise an international aid conference for Iraq as well as heightened diplomacy in the region.John McCain, in contrast, argues that a withdrawal would mean a defeat that would embolden al-Qaida. A strong and early advocate of the surge, he has said he is willing to keep troops present in Iraq for 100 years, if casualties remain low.In reality, how quickly can the forces leave?Military experts say a significant draw-down of US forces could take anywhere between one and three years.About 158,000 US forces are currently in Iraq, with three brigades scheduled for withdrawal by July. That will bring US forces down to a level of about 140,000 by the time Bush leaves the White House in 2009.The Pentagon is likely to follow the pattern set this year in drawing down Petraeus's surge, gradually reducing combat forces deployed in more secure areas.However, there will be pressure to maintain or devote more troops to the training of Iraqi support units: specifically military intelligence, medical and communications experts.Preparations for a final withdrawal must also factor in the difficulties of moving tanks and other heavy equipment that the US will not want to leave behind. At present, heavy equipment remains when troops are rotated in and out of Iraq."Unless we reach some catastrophic point, you are not going to see five or seven brigades redeploying all at once making a run for the southern border," said Michèle Flournoy, president of the Centre for a New American Security (CNAS), a Washington thinktank.What is America's moral responsibility to prevent civil war?In an ideal scenario, the American withdrawal would be coordinated with the government in Baghdad so that Iraqi forces would be prepared and able to take over from the departing troops and maintain order.But US officials describe the government of Nouri al-Maliki as being dysfunctional and corrupt and doing little to reach out to Sunnis or competing Shia groups. "Improvement in stability did not result from a top-down process of compromise driven by the government," Dick Lugar, the ranking Republican on the Senate foreign relations committee, told Congress.There is an argument that announcing a definitive exit would force Maliki to recognise the urgency of reconciliation. Others say that is unlikely and a civil war is virtually inevitable, even if US forces remain in strength."If the United States were to withdraw from Iraq, and the result was severe war and severe civil strife, the Iraqi government only has itself to blame. It has set the stage for that. It has made the policies of the state increasingly sectarian," said Wayne White, who served on the Iraq Study Group, an advisory group appointed by Congress.What about al-Qaida in Iraq? And what about Iran?The Bush administration regularly holds up the Sunni tribal militias who have been fighting al-Qaida as a success story of the surge. The Sunni tribes began taking up arms against al-Qaida before making moves to cooperate with the US.There is a strong argument that the Sunni tribal campaign against al-Qaida will continue even after the US draws down its forces.But Iran's role in the region will form a crucial part of calculations on future US Administration policy. Over the last few years, US officials have regularly warned that Tehran is meddling in Iraq by funnelling aid and arms to Shia militias.Military experts and members of Congress argue that a withdrawal from Iraq must be accompanied by a vigorous diplomatic initiative aimed at Iran and other neighbouring states. "You need to keep an eye on where you are heading. The target is regional stability," Lieutenant General William Odum, a former director of the National Security Agency.