I got back into Gaza in the first days of January. I'd been on Christmas holidays in Ireland with my family, when I'd seen the aerial bombardment unfolding on my TV screen. It took a couple of days to get in because the Israeli ground operation had just begun. A small group of Red Cross doctors and I were the only people allowed in or out.When we crossed into Gaza the scale of devastation and the eeriness were immediately striking. Gaza is one of the most densely populated areas on earth, and on the journey into UNRWA headquarters we travelled down empty streets with rubble and destruction everywhere. The only sign of human life was a single family scurrying across a narrow street with a couple of suitcases. I'd been in Lebanon, Rwanda, Bosnia and Kosovo, and in times of conflict you would find certain dangerous areas that would be very quiet and in other areas a lot of movement. I quickly came to realise that in Gaza there was no safe haven: everyone was terrified. This operation was unprecedented in scale and scope.At the main hospital the ambulances were streaming in endlessly. The quantity and nature of the injuries and the number of young children killed was particularly harrowing to see. The doctors bore the physical signs of exhaustion and bewilderment – there had been no let-up for them. High on their list of anguish was the nature of the injuries; phosphorus burning was very difficult to control and they were talking about other injuries that they couldn't fathom – wounds that wouldn't respond to conventional treatment. There were an extraordinary number of multiple amputations.My job now was solely about getting humanitarian aid into Gaza and out to the people. As the invasion was raging this involved difficult decisions, balancing staff safety and humanitarian need. We were going out in convoys of trucks with UN insignia and being shot at by the Israeli Defence Force. A number of our staff paid with their lives. The problem seemed to be a breakdown of communication between the higher command and the soldiers on the ground.On the night of 14 January we were in the compound. There was artillery and tank shelling in the vicinity – a built-up area of high-rise apartment blocks. We were particularly concerned about our 15 oil trucks, with tens of thousands of gallons of diesel and petrol. The building was shaking with the explosions and shrapnel was landing in the compound. At about 6am there was an influx of about 700 people fleeing their apartments. We were in continuous dialogue with the Israeli authorities in Tel Aviv, but by about 10 o'clock the first rounds landed in the compound. We evacuated the civilians into a nearby school – everyone running the gauntlet of the Israeli fire. Over the next two hours, 13 phosphorus artillery rounds were fired into the garage, fuel depot and warehouse area, setting the place ablaze. We evacuated the fuel trucks, but the food stocks and medical supplies were destroyed.Unfortunately, the first casualty of conflict is the truth. Our military interlocutors were professional and honest and said it had been a mistake. But the Israeli government produced the knee-jerk line that they were responding to fire from our installations – a very grave and egregious allegation to make. This was subsequently, and in every case, corrected.Over the following week we organised operations from another location. Then, when the shelling stopped we had even more work to do. We had 208,000 children in our schools, and large programmes dealing with gender and women's activities and those with special needs. Now our priority was to evacuate the 50,000 people sheltering in schools and get the education going. Along with everyone else the kids were in a state of shock. The Gaza Strip lived in fear for 22 days. Teaching was adapted to give support to what they had witnessed. The particularly severely traumatised required medication, psychiatry, sometimes hospitalisation.My approach is to channel my emotions into determined action rather than into despair. In such an emotionally charged situation that converts into a lot of energy to do a lot of work. When you see the very real and positive impact of helping, it's therapeutic.Looking forward I see a real basis for hope. In Gaza, notwithstanding the awful experiences of the people, they remain decent and civilised in their outlook and behaviour. They are not consumed with hatred, they want nothing more than basic freedoms and basic rights, and they want the conflict resolved in a political way. I also know that the Israelis are a decent and civilised people and therein lies the basis of progress. What's very clear to us is that the political leaders are failing their citizens.