First of all, sorry about going dark yesterday. I will offer up the explanation soon.Now back to the news. It does sound as if Obama and Bibi had a decent meeting yesterday. A world of difference from the earlier one, as the New York Times put it today:Tuesday's much-publicized meeting in the Oval Office was in stark contrast to the frosty reception Mr. Netanyahu received during his last trip to the White House in March, when Mr. Obama left the prime minister waiting in the Roosevelt Room while he went upstairs to have dinner with his wife and daughters. The mood was so sour then that Mr. Obama barred news cameras. On Tuesday, photographers clicked away in the Oval Office as Mr. Obama praised the prime minister as someone "willing to take risks for peace" and blamed the press for reports of discord. Mr. Netanyahu loosely quoted Mark Twain, saying, "The reports about the demise of the special relationship aren't just premature; they're just flat wrong."I think what we have here is basically the end of the territory-marking phase of the relationship. Obama came into office wanting to show that he was going to handle Israel's excesses differently than previous presidents, especially the most immediately previous one. So he did things like talking more publicly about the settlements and making Netanyahu wait in the Roosevelt Room. For their part, the Israelis were inherently suspicious of a guy named Barack Hussein Obama, who went to Cairo for an early speech and who was, because of his background, probably a little more sympathetic to legitimate Arab aspirations than previous presidents. The fact that people like Avigdor Lieberman were in the government didn't help things. So they had to go through that phase of public play-acting. Maybe now they and the Palestinians can burrow down into a phase of diplomacy and work. A key figure here going forward will be Salam Fayyad, the former World Bank executive who has quietly (at least as far as the US press is concerned) been laying the pragmatic groundwork for statehood in what virtually all close observers say is a very impressive fashion. The ever-astute Hussein Ibish noted this to Politico:Hussein Ibish of the American Task Force for Palestine said it was "highly significant" that Obama supported state and institution building by Abbas and Palestinian Prime Minster Salam Fayyad, as is Obama's support for expanding their responsibilities in the West Bank.Inevitably, domestic politics will dictate the speed at which progress can move here. Democrats in Congress will get behind direct talks only if Israel and Aipac seem for the time being committed to them. But at least nothing weird happened yesterday, so the boulder seems to be inching in the right direction for now.