Israel dismissed an offer of a six-month truce from the Palestinian Islamist movement Hamas yesterday, saying the group merely wanted time to rearm.The Hamas offer came after weeks of negotiation with Egyptian officials and after several meetings with former US president Jimmy Carter, who travelled to Damascus last week to meet the Hamas leader, Khaled Meshal. Egyptian officials, led by the intelligence chief Omar Suleiman, are expected to continue talking to Hamas and other militant groups to try to establish a ceasefire in Gaza that might eventually spread to the West Bank. Suleiman is due in Israel next week to speak to officials there.Israel has refused direct talks with Hamas, which Israel, the US and the EU regard as a terrorist organisation. "Hamas is biding time in order to rearm and regroup," said David Baker, an Israeli government spokesman. "There would be no need for Israel's defensive actions if Hamas would cease and desist from committing terrorist attacks on Israelis."Palestinian militant groups continue to fire makeshift rockets into southern Israel. Two weeks ago militants, though not from Hamas, attacked the Nahal Oz fuel crossing into Gaza, killing two Israeli civilians. A Hamas attack last weekend on another crossing left 13 Israeli soldiers injured.The death toll from Israeli strikes in Gaza has been far higher. According to the UN, 53 children have been killed and 177 injured since January. One Israeli operation in Jabalia in early March killed more than 100 Palestinians, at least half of whom were civilians. Two Israeli soldiers and one civilian were also killed. Some believe this high death toll, together with an economic blockade on Gaza, has pushed Hamas into offering a ceasefire. A diesel and petrol shortage meant the UN had to halt food distribution from Thursday to about 800,000 Palestinians. Until now Hamas had insisted on a simultaneous, mutual ceasefire in both Gaza and the West Bank. This latest offer, however, was to begin only in Gaza and brought with it the demand that Israel open the crossings into Gaza. During his meetings, Carter had pushed Hamas to announce a ceasefire. However, Israel's ambassador to the UN, Dan Gillerman, described Carter as a "bigot" for travelling to Syria to meet the Hamas leadership. Carter was told by the Hamas leaders that the group would accept a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza as long as a peace agreement was approved by the Palestinian people.Yesterday a Palestinian gunman shot dead two Israeli security guards at an industrial zone along the line that separates Israel and the West Bank, near the city of Tulkarem. Responsibility was claimed by a group linked to Fatah.