Mahmoud al-Mabhouh, a senior official of the Palestinian group Hamas, was murdered, apparently by suffocation, on 19 January in a Dubai hotel room. The head of Dubai's police said he was 99% certain Israeli agents were involved in the assassination plot, and called for the chief of the Mossad secret service to be arrested if its responsibility was proved.Dubai has identified at least 26 suspects from the alleged hit squad that travelled to Dubai on fake identities and forged European and Australian passports. At least 15 of the suspected killers share names with Israeli citizens, fuelling suspicions that the Mossad was behind the murder. Israel has neither confirmed nor denied involvement in Mabhouh's killing. Interpol has published a wanted list of 27 people in connection with his death.Mabhouh is described by Israel as being responsible for the abduction and killing of two Israeli soldiers 20 years ago and – probably more significantly – as being heavily involved in arms and logistical links with Iran. Hamas controls the Gaza Strip and was the main target of last year's Israeli operation Cast Lead, in which 1,400 Palestinians were killed. Israel, as well as the US and Britain, describes Hamas as a terrorist organisation.Israel's foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, has insisted there is no proof that it was responsible, and says it is sticking to its policy of "ambiguity" with regard to intelligence matters. But Israel has an obvious motive, an impressive capability in covert operations, and a track record of trying to assassinate its enemies. Nearly all Israeli commentators assume that the Mossad was responsible, and many argue that if it was, the operation was politically unwise. Twelve people with dual Israeli-British nationality are also angry at the apparent theft of their identity. Hamas has blamed Israel for the killing and vowed to take revenge.David Miliband, the foreign secretary, has described the use of fake British passports by the alleged killers as an "outrage". Britain says it values its relationship with Israel, despite disagreements over illegal Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian territories and its approach to the the Middle East peace process. But the UK cannot ignore this apparently blatant action.Israeli officials say they believe protests from Britain and other countries are for public consumption only, and that the current crisis will pass. Now the row is set to escalate as Miliband makes a statement to the House of Commons this afternoon in which he will announce the expulsion of an Israeli diplomat over the alleged use of fake British passports in the killing.