It has been described as a "Jewish wish-fulfilment fantasy", and by star Eli Roth as "kosher porn". But how will Quentin Tarantino's Inglourious Basterds go down in Israel? The director is due to find out for himself after flying in to visit the country for the first time yesterday.Tarantino told reporters at a news conference ahead of the film's Israeli premiere last night that he was keen to see for himself how Basterds, which centres on a band of Jewish-American soldiers who slaughter and scalp Nazi soldiers as retribution for the Holocaust, was received"To me, taboos are made to be broken. They're meant to be pushed over," he said. "One of the things that I think is a drag a little bit about movies dealing with the second world war for the last 20 years is that ... all the movies have really focused in on the victimisation of the second world war."I'll be seeing it for the first time in an Israeli cinema. I'll be seeing it for the first time with an Israeli audience," he added. "I'm interested to see, 'OK, are there laughs here? Does the suspense work here as well as it works somewhere else?'"Basterds depicts an alternate universe in which an attempt is made to end the war by brutally killing off all the top leadership of the Nazi party in a single night. It also stars Brad Pitt, Diane Kruger, Michael Fassbender, Christoph Waltz and Melanie Laurent. Reaction has been mixed from critics, with the Guardian's Peter Bradshaw labelling it a film in which "a once dazzlingly exciting artist suddenly and catastrophically belly-flops, to the dismay of his admirers".Tarantino was joined in Israel by the film's producer Lawrence Bender and one of its lead actors, Christoph Waltz, who plays an eccentric SS colonel dubbed "The Jew Hunter". The trio have visited Jerusalem's Holocaust museum together.Bender, a regular Tarantino collaborator who worked on Pulp Fiction, Reservoir Dogs and the Kill Bill films, said he had no doubt that the movie would appeal to Jewish audiences after reading the script."I told him, as a fan, I thank you. As a producer, I thank you. As a member of the Jewish tribe, I thank you," he said.