• A swell gathering at the residence of US ambassador Matthew Barzun to mark Eid. It wasn’t to everyone’s taste; canapes, no buffet, earnest speeches. Still, a good few didn’t make it at all. A group declined, saying they could not attend because of the US position on Gaza. Turning down the ambassador’s invitation in a widely circulated letter, one of them, Midlands community figure Waheed Saleem, said: “I feel the unequivocal stance by the US government in their support of the Israeli government’s actions in the Gaza Strip is extremely disappointing and unacceptable to me and many people in the UK.” Disappointing for the embassy, but on learning of the protest, the ambassador took to Twitter. “We are working hard for a durable ceasefire and a better future for Israelis and Palestinians,” he said, urging refuseniks to keep in touch. Every inch the diplomat. This is why he gets the big bucks.• More woes meanwhile, for London’s Tricycle theatre, heavily criticised for its decision not to host the Jewish Film Festival because it was funded by the Israeli embassy. Donor Sir Trevor Chinn tells the Jewish News that he will stop his four-figure donations. Other funders resolve to do the same. And on the local council, a Conservative move to see if the theatre, through its stance, has breached funding conditions. Positions entrenched. Things may get worse before they get better.• What do we know of the writer Roger Lewis? Four years ago the Observer said this of him: “Roger Lewis is a bad-tempered, embittered, foul-mouthed, cantankerous old fart. Nobody has hated on this scale … for what seems an awfully long time.” And it seems, he has only got worse. What to say about his review in the Spectator of Dusty: An Intimate Portrait of a Legend, a new book about Dusty Springfield? “Call me a crazy old physiognomist,” began Lewis. “But my theory is that you can always spot a lesbian by her big thrusting chin. Celebrity Eskimo Sandi Toksvig, Ellen DeGeneres, Jodie Foster, Clare Balding, Vita Sackville-West, God love them: there’s a touch of Desperate Dan in the jaw-bone area, no doubt the better to go bobbing for apples.” One thing to say is take a hike. Publisher Iain Dale, responsible for the Springfield book, did just that. “I’m surprised and appalled by your decision to publish Roger Lewis’s review of our book Dusty: An Intimate Portrait of a Musical Legend,” writes Dale in a letter to the Spectator. “The reviewer clearly displays homophobic sentiments towards his subject and, indeed, a litany of other lesbian celebrities. The reasoning behind your decision is as incomprehensible to me as his overt homophobia is. We had been discussing with Mr Lewis the possibility of publishing his next book. He has just been told those discussions are at an end.” It’s all political correctness, laments Lewis. Didn’t the Observer call it right.• Troubling times at the justice department following too many stories about our unfit-for-purpose prison service, and comment linking the various wheezes of the justice secretary, Chris Grayling, to prisoner self-harm and suicides. Tensions have been high, and many wonder whether Whitehall is big enough for both a testy Grayling and Michael Spurr, head of the National Offender Management Service. Spurr is a mild-mannered man, but everyone has limits and it’s worth noting that amid the wave of prison problem stories, Grayling and other ministers have been absent. Poor Spurr was dispatched for roasting by Kirsty Wark on Newsnight. Who could justifiably complain were he to conclude that this life is not for him?• Finally, blowback from and on behalf of the Welsh town of Laugharne, home and haunt of Dylan Thomas. Yesterday, after a visit from our correspondent on this the centenary year of Thomas’s birth, we suggested that there were not as many reminders of him as there might be. This caused some disquiet. Thomas may have lampooned Laugharne by dubbing it LLareggub (bugger all, spelt backwards) but they love him well enough. “The boat house is open to visitors and his grave is well tended. To suggest he’s ignored is untrue,” tweeted Kevin Cummins. A second critic also took up the cudgels. “Thomas is everywhere. If you know his words, you can see them everywhere. Wales has celebrated.” These people brook no nonsense. Thomas would have liked them. Twitter: @hugh_muir• This article was amended on 15 August 2014. An earlier version misspelled Kevin Cummins’ surname as Cummings.