Sitting in a hotel lobby in East Jerusalem, Jafar Sabbah is strident in his assertion that both Israeli and Palestinian politicians are dragging their heels over seeking a resolution to the conflict. He says:Neither side has an incentive to make peace. On the Israeli side, the economy is booming, exports are rising, and funding from Jewish philanthropists and the US government continues to pour in. On the Palestinian side, Hamas have an incentive for war because they receive money from Iran, while in the West Bank there is both corruption and [an overreliance] on the 'peace industry' [the NGOs and other organisations that partially prop up the Palestinian economy]. His frustration with the political status quo, combined with his pragmatic, business-minded approach to improving Israeli and Palestinian society, compelled him to establish the Jerusalem Interest-Free Microfinance Fund (JIMF), which provides loans to both Jewish and Arab residents of the city. Despite the ever-deteriorating political climate in which JIMF operates, the fund has enjoyed a year of remarkable success: after granting funds to an initial group of 20 borrowers, the concept has been rolled out on a larger scale, and applications are currently being processed for a further 50 loans.The intentions of JIMF's trustees are twofold: "to alleviate poverty [and] to help to lay the foundations of community cohesion and peace-building by increasing the economic and life chances of Muslims, Jews and Christians within the city of Jerusalem". JIMF does not simply provide loans, but also runs training and mentoring programmes for those borrowing money, in order to enhance the recipients' prospects of making their businesses a success. At the same time, running joint sessions for Jews and Arabs is a perfect opportunity to expose the participants to their peers from the other side of the tracks. With doors to communal cohesion slamming shut all over the country as both Israeli and Palestinian leaders dig in their heels and refuse to co-operate at either state or street level, anyone prepared to jam a foot in the doorframe, as JIMF do, deserves the strongest of support from both local and overseas backers."Some of the women had never talked to the 'other side' before," Sabbah notes. "This is a way to break down stereotypes and prejudices." He recalls some of the Arab recipients querying the intentions of the fund's donors, asking him why Jews would want to help them and whether there was a political agenda."They were suspicious, but there is no hidden agenda, and no ulterior motive."Two months ago, I saw first-hand the effect JIMF's work has had on the initial group of recipients. Several of the women came to address a group of Jewish youth movement workers from Britain, explaining how they have used their loans to expand their businesses, and how much of an impact the project has had on both their working and personal lives. While listening to their anecdotes and seeing the delight with which they spoke of their experience was heart-warming, it was during a break in the proceedings that the true value of JIMF's model came to light.While the movement workers chatted among themselves in the auditorium, several women struck up their own conversation outside in the hallway, orthodox Jews and Arabs swapping stories of their working lives, the gulf between the communities from which they hailed bridged by their common goals and achievements in the world of business. Their stepping outside their comfort zones and making contact with those from the opposition camp is something vitally lacking in communities on both sides, resulting in a situation greatly detrimental to all with an interest in resolving the conflict.The women's cross-communal dialogue was the essence of Sabbah's vision for JIMF: "Economic development is the key to achieving peace in the city," he tells me this week, the significance of the location of our meeting not lost on him. The hotel is in Sheikh Jarrah, one of the most contentious neighbourhoods in East Jerusalem, where settlers and Palestinians are constantly at loggerheads over who has more of a right to property and land in the area. He says:The whole issue of settlement expansion and house demolition will only do harm to the stability [of the region], causing frustration, anger, and making the Palestinians feel segregated and discriminated against – all of which are 'anti-business' factors. Instead, we must seek to improve people's daily lives, and connect the two groups with one another. In a city as poor as Jerusalem – 40% of the residents live in poverty – the capital is an ideal place for JIMF to operate, as has been proved by the massive oversubscription to the second pilot phase of the project. "In Jerusalem, only 9% of Arab women and 45% of ultra-orthodox women are employed, so there is a great deal of scope for our work," says Sabbah.On an individual level, JIMF has undoubtedly changed lives, both of the women who borrowed the money as well as their dependents who benefit from the fruit of their labour. However, an even greater achievement is the collective impact the project has had on both the Jewish and Arab communities, who have put aside sectarian splits and suspicions to work together to better their futures. At a time when there seems little about which to be hopeful in the region at political level, ground-breaking initiatives such as this are worth their weight in gold.Many dismiss out of hand organisations that bring Israeli Jews and Palestinians together to challenge the divisive status quo, labelling the initiatives with the pejorative tag of "normalisation" – claiming that they gloss over the core of the conflict without doing anything to redress the essential inequality of the two sides.However, in the case of JIMF, taking such a view is both unhelpful and short-sighted. The work undertaken by the fund is both productive and positive for all involved, and is a much needed light in the darkness that surrounds both Jerusalem in particular and the region as a whole.• Comments on this article will remain open for 24 hours from the time of publication but may be closed overnight