The daily images of human torment in Gaza have been harrowing and heartbreaking. More than 1,000 Palestinian civilians have been killed. Were it not for international aid rations, half the population would be without food. Hundreds of thousands of men, women and children are seeking shelter in UN schools – and even these offer little safety.It is difficult to deny that Israel’s military action appears disproportionate and, combined with the Gaza blockade, is resulting in the collective suffering of the Palestinian people. Hamas cannot escape blame either. By hiding among the civilian population and stashing weapons in schools and mosques, it has shown it is willing to sacrifice its own people for military advantage. It has spent large sums on a sophisticated network of tunnels through which to terrorise Israeli civilians – money that could have gone on schools, houses and clinics for the Palestinian people.This tragedy is grimly familiar. It is the third major military operation in Gaza in six years, following Operation Cast Lead in 2008 and Operation Pillar of Defence in 2012; the others culminated in ceasefires that sadly did little to address the underlying conflict. The two sides have settled into a routine that is as futile as it is deadly. Hamas’s rocket fire will never break Israeli resolve; Israel’s bombs will never end Palestinian resistance. Even if Israel manages to destroy Hamas, a similar movement will undoubtedly emerge from the destitution and despair of the Gaza Strip. As in Northern Ireland, Bosnia and so many other similar conflicts, a zero-sum game will not bring peace. Only an understanding that all have to share the same space and the same destiny will do so.The Israeli government may feel it has gained the upper hand with its most recent show of strength, but it should know from past experience that any feeling of stability will be short-lived.I applaud Israel’s former president Shimon Peres, who has broken ranks in recent days to call for an end to military action. More Israeli and Palestinian politicians should find the courage to follow suit. If Israel wants to secure lasting safety for its people, it must use political will, not military might, to break the cycle of violence.Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu must now put Israel’s long-term, strategic self-interest ahead of short-term, tactical military gains. It is time for the Israeli government to talk to the Hamas political leadership in Gaza. Israel’s refusal to engage with President Mahmoud Abbas’s new unity government, because it includes Hamas, must be reversed.In 2008, the former Israeli intelligence chief Efraim Halevy called for engagement with Hamas, recognising that, in spite of heavy losses, it would not be cowed into submission. Three military operations later, the case for direct talks is all the more pressing. As Israel’s military might is brutally confirmed, the need for a new political approach is urgent.Hamas is vulnerable and broke. Until forming the unity government with Fatah a few months ago, it could not pay the salaries of doctors and teachers, and faced growing discontent from ordinary Gazans. Hamas is isolated in the Arab world, and Israel cannot destroy militant Palestinian opposition – that much we have seen – but it does now have an opportunity to drive a wedge between Hamas’s political and military wings. An unexpected act of political magnanimity, rather than sporadic military reprisal, would also garner Israel international support.In writing this, I know I will provoke some anger. I will receive letters and emails arguing that Israel should not reward terrorists with talks. I understand that reaction and recognise the existential fear among Israeli people. My response is this: military action has repeatedly failed to prevent rocket attacks against innocent Israelis. Modern history teaches that you can’t shoot, occupy or besiege your way to lasting security. Peace only ever flows from sustained and stubborn engagement. The Queen shaking hands with Martin McGuinness two years ago reminded us that even the most intractable conflicts can be resolved.However, this is only possible when enemies acknowledge the futility of conflict and meet face to face. There is no substitute for the security that peace can bring. In the wake of yet more bloodshed and instability, it is overwhelmingly in the interests of the people of both Gaza and Israel to turn away from this deathly embrace.Nick Clegg MP is deputy prime minister and deputy chair of the National Security Council