My alma mater was demolished shortly after I left its prison-like gates for the last time and, if families get their way, the base where I received my military education will soon suffer a similar fate. Situated deep in the Negev desert, Tel Arad seemed an ideal place to undergo basic training health-wise, far from the smog or pollution of urbanised cities, allowing us to thrive in the heart of nature whilst we were put through our paces. Now, however, it turns out that we might as well have spent seven months doing press-ups underneath mobile phone antennae, for all the good the base's location did our health.Last week, Israeli TV reported the findings of a major survey which suggests that the rate of cancer cases diagnosed in soldiers who serve in Tel Arad is 2.5 times higher than that of soldiers serving in the Infantry Corps as a whole, thanks to the plethora of carcinogens emanating from the chemical and industrial plants dotted around the Negev. Parents of new recruits currently training at Tel Arad are furious that they were not alerted to the dangers sooner, especially since – according to one parent – "the data's existed since 2002, and no one bothered to mention it to the soldiers." One group of Israeli citizens who has for years been pointing out the hazards of living in the Negev in such proximity to factories belching out lethal toxins is Israel's much-maligned Bedouin community, whose own similar plight has been roundly ignored for years. I have been on several tours of unrecognised Bedouin towns near my old base, and each time was shown the alarming evidence of stagnant cesspools of chemical waste and raw sewage contaminating the streams and fields where they were forced to dwell. Despite their year-in, year-out complaints about their perilous situation, next to nothing has been done to assuage their fears on the part of the authorities, which is unsurprising given the paltry amount of press coverage the Bedouin's circumstances received, and their almost complete lack of public support. Yet, within a week of the exact same problem surfacing once more – this time affecting Israel's olive-clad offspring – suddenly the entire press corps was mobilised and the wheels of public outrage set into motion. Now it seems that the lackadaisical, "not in my back yard" approach towards the pollution in the Negev has lost some of its appeal. In a week when a survey found that only 56% of Israelis believe in equal rights for all citizens, it is wholly fitting that such a duplicitous approach towards the health of Israelis from different ethnic groups should bubble to the surface once more. ACRI's annual report, published yesterday, stated that "the main obstacle to preventing discrimination in Israel stems from the lack of true internalisation of the value of equality in Israeli society", a view born out time and again in the double standards applied by both the public and their elected officials. In the wake of the cancer scare in Tel Arad, one father's words spoke volumes about the way in which he – and others – view the society in which they live: "At the end of the day, this matter is important to every parent in Israel. We were all soldiers once, or have kids in the service". In his eyes, Israelis are those that served in the army and/or have children who follow suit. No mention of those citizens not of Jewish ancestry, who on paper should warrant as much compassion and concern as those of Jewish extraction. But it's hardly surprising that he sees his country through such Star of David-tinted spectacles, given the way in which the government and its agencies encourages Israeli society to view itself. The Jewish state; the land sworn to us by our forefathers; the refuge and homeland of every Jew on earth, hardly conducive to an image of multiculturalism and tolerance of those not of the flock. Developments in Tel Arad are worth monitoring, not just for those of us who served inside the apparently-poisonous clime of its razor wire perimeter fence, but for anyone with an interest in how Israeli officialdom deals with a situation that it has known about for years, but done nothing to solve until it became apparent that Jewish children were at risk as well. No one – be they Jewish soldier, Bedouin farmer, or anyone else – should be put at mortal risk because of lax regulation of hazardous industrial practices, and it can only be hoped that the authorities take immediate action to remedy the status quo. However, when such circumstances are brought to light in the future, the government must not be allowed to sit idle on the sidelines just because those affected aren't deemed sufficiently worthy of assistance. Because that way lies a sickness as virulent and destructive to society as any strain of cancer.