The Israeli prime minister, Ehud Olmert, has called a halt to air strikes and raids into the Gaza Strip in response to a drop in rocket fire from the territory, his officials said today.Israeli defence officials and Hamas, which controls Gaza, said there was no formal agreement in place, but an informal truce appeared to be in effect.Officials in the Israeli prime minister's office said Olmert had ordered the army to scale back its operations to allow Egypt to proceed with mediation talks.Palestinian rocket fire and the Israeli response – a five-day offensive into Gaza that left more than 120 Palestinians dead, around half of whom were believed to be civilians - had threatened to scupper peace talks.Olmert and the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, the leader of the Fatah movement which controls the West Bank, have set a target of December for reaching a final peace deal. Abbas briefly called off negotiations last week in response to the Israeli military operation in Gaza. The Israeli prime minister told an audience today that the rocket attacks, along with the shooting at a Jerusalem seminary last Thursday that killed eight young Jewish students, were aimed at undermining peace efforts."Their purpose is to divert us from a path of peace," Olmert said. "There's no chance that they will succeed."Despite the violence, he said, Israel was prepared to take a "significant, important and dramatic step" to advance peace. "We will not give up on this effort," he said.With US backing, Egypt has been trying to mediate a truce between Israel and Hamas. Officials from the warring sides have travelled to Egypt in recent days to discuss the matter. The Israeli defence minister, Ehud Barak, denied there was a truce and suggested the current calm was fragile. "There is not at this point any agreement," Barak said. "We won't complain about every quiet day but any moment we will need to act, we will."A Hamas spokesman, Sami Abu Zuhri, said no comprehensive ceasefire had been reached. Hamas officials have said in recent days that the group would stop the rocket fire if Israel halted its military operations, mirroring comments by Olmert last week that Israel would have no reason to attack Gaza if the rockets ceased.Hamas officials said their leaders would talk to Egypt in the next day or two to continue efforts to work out a deal.Rocket attacks fell significantly over the weekend. The army said two rockets were fired on Sunday, down from a daily average of more than a dozen in the previous week. The Israeli army said it had not carried out air strikes or land operations in Gaza since Wednesday. Israeli army radio attributed the lull to "quiet understandings".Ayman Taha, a Hamas official responsible for talks with Egypt, said today the drop in rocket fire was down to "field tactics" and the group would not reach an agreement with Israel until it opened Gaza's border crossings. Hamas seized control of Gaza last June from Abbas's forces. Since then, Israel has pursued peace efforts with Abbas while battling Hamas in Gaza through military operations and an economic blockade on the area.A report by a coalition of eight UK-based human rights groups last week said Palestinians in the Gaza Strip were living through their worst humanitarian crisis since the 1967 war.Israel today announced the construction of more new settlements, in a move that could undermine the peace process. Officials revealed plans to build 400 housing units in the Neve Yaakov neighbourhood of disputed east Jerusalem.The annexation of east Jerusalem by Israel in the 1967 war has not been internationally recognised, and the Palestinians hope to make the area the capital of a future independent state.Yesterday, Olmert approved 530 new settler homes in Givat Ze'ev, a Jewish settlement near the Palestinian administrative centre of Ramallah, in the West Bank. Abbas has demanded a halt to all construction of settlements.Israel today lifted a border closure it imposed last week after the attack on the Jewish religious school. The measures, which barred most Palestinians from entering Israel, were cancelled "following security assessments", the army said.