President Nicolas Sarkozy has thrust himself and France into the heart of the Middle East, heralding new influence and a role as peacemaker between Israelis and Palestinians. His bold moves will be furthered when France takes on the European presidency on July 1.Aiding him, and of even wider significance, is the growing activity of the EU: a "new era" in Europe-Israel relations was announced earlier this month with the signing of an agreement for cooperation. The EU is poised to step in where the US has failed in helping to bring Middle East peace.Sarkozy had a triumphal three-day visit here this week, offering friendship and support both to Israelis and Palestinians. He told the applauding Knesset, the parliament, that he admired Israel's democracy and he emphasised France's commitment to the country's security.He attacked Iran's nuclear programme as unacceptable. But speaking in blunt terms unusual for a foreign visitor, he also urged Israel to establish a Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital. "We must tell friends the truth and the truth is that Israel's security can never be assured unless an independent, modern, democratic and viable Palestinian state is established finally beside it", he said. He called on Israel to halt construction of houses in East Jerusalem and West Bank settlements.His sharp focus on controversial issues was in contrast to the recent fumbling statement by Barack Obama about an undivided Jerusalem which pleased US Jews and Israel but had to be rapidly qualified. However, Sarkozy's frank speaking did not set off an angry outcry. This was "Sarko", as he is familiarly called in Israel, who repeatedly speaks of his love for Israel and who has proved his understanding of Jewish fears through his commitment to root out antisemitism in France. Even his forging of closer nuclear ties with Arab states through the building of power plants is not opposed. So Ehud Olmert, the prime minister responded mildly: "We don't always agree on every issue, on every detail ... "Sarkozy went to Bethlehem and told Palestinians exactly what he had said to Israelis: Israel must halt settlement construction and Jerusalem must be shared. But in a rejection of Hamas and other violent groups, he warned against terrorism: it could not bring peace. He praised Palestinian Authority chairman Mahmoud Abbas as a man of peace "whom we trust and support". He did more than speak: he signed an agreement for France to fund a $21m industrial zone in Bethlehem which is expected to provide thousands of jobs for Palestinians.Abbas hailed him as a "true and brave" friend. The EU again featured, with Abbas calling on it to play a more active role in solving the Arab-Israeli conflict and helping Palestinians with financial aid.France had close links with Israel in the early years of the state. French Mirage planes ensured Israel's swift victory in the 1967 war with Arab neighbours. But France then imposed an arms embargo and relations soured.Sarkozy has already proved himself a peacemaker: France's intervention ensured a presidential election in Lebanon, ending a lengthy and dangerous political crisis. It needed contact with Syria, which in turn, it is reported, has meant assuring Israel that France will go slow on bringing Syria in from the cold until it shows it is lessening ties with Iran. The next Sarkozy step is a Mediterranean summit in Paris on July 13, with invitations to Arab states and Israel – and Syria too. If everyone comes, the prospects for furthering peace could be dizzying.The change brought by Sarkozy is paralleled in the EU. For years, Israel viewed the EU as hostile and over-sympathetic to the Palestinian cause. The EU was excluded from taking part in the peace process. But European attitudes have shifted, no doubt because of the rise of terrorism. Bombs exploding in European cities have, it seems, created a new empathy with Israel's struggle to survive. In Israeli eyes, the new attitudes are especially seen in Britain's Gordon Brown, Germany's Angela Merkel and in eastern European states which have recently joined the EU.That Israeli mistrust of the EU was not altogether misplaced was admitted last week by Italy's new foreign minister, Franco Frattini. He told a forum in Berlin on Israel-Europe relations that the EU had in the past taken an "unbalanced stance" on Israel, at times blurring the line between legitimate criticism and antisemitic leanings. He also criticised the EU for giving money to some Palestinian NGOs close to Hamas which have used it to indoctrinate children against Israel.Israel's improved status in the EU has now flowered with the announcement earlier this month of significant upgrades in relations. Egypt and the Palestinian Authority asked the EU to insist that Israel first halt the building of houses on the West Bank and in East Jerusalem, but the EU's 27 foreign ministers went ahead. First, there will be increased diplomatic cooperation with regular meetings between diplomats, government ministers, senior officials and parliamentarians. Second, Israel will join European agencies, programmes and working groups which will mean bringing the Israeli economy and society closer to European norms and standards. Third, possible Israeli integration into the European single market will be studied, which could open the way to further upgrading.The new players in the Middle East declare themselves allies of Israel but, as Sarkozy has shown, that does not have to mean lack of criticism. Sarkozy said this week that he was not telling Israelis and Palestinians what to do – they had to effect peace between them – but he was giving advice. Whether Sarkozy's words will have any effect of course remains to be seen. Will the EU also give critical advice, which Israel will have difficulty in ignoring as it comes from an embracing and supportive friend? Even more, and unlike the US, will Sarkozy and the EU use their links to apply pressure to Israel to stop extending settlements and to end the occupation?