Four years ago, Barack Obama skipped Jerusalem during his first presidential trip to the Middle East. Aimed then at restoring America's credibility in the Arab and Muslim world, showing some distance from Israel appeared to be good policy in Obama's eyes. So he spoke to the Arabs but ignored the Israelis. Adding insult to injury, his remarks in Cairo implied that the Jewish state was born out of the ashes of the Holocaust, failing to mention the Bible and the Jews' historic ties to the Holy Land.It took a while for Obama to realise that his cold shoulder toward Israel was counterproductive. It undermined his peacemaking efforts on the Palestinian front, since there was no Israeli constituency supporting him. Moreover, it gave ammunition to the president's domestic rivals, who argued – in the words of former Republican candidate Mitt Romney – that Obama was "throwing Israel under the bus". No amount of pledges to support Israel's security could kill this argument (even senior Israeli officials acknowledged the unprecedented defence and intelligence co-operation under Obama). From Israel, the US president was seen as a hopeless pro-Arab peacenik, naive about the harsh realities of the region and complacent about Iran's nuclear threat.Following his re-election, Obama grabbed Romney's campaign pledge to make Israel his first foreign stop. Landing at Ben Gurion airport on Wednesday, the president lost no time in trying to convince Israelis of his love, affection and support for the Jewish state and its national narrative. His rocky relationship with the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, paved way to a sticky off-jacket walk to visit an Iron Dome anti-rocket battery, built in Israel with American funding. Obama came to charm the Israeli public, which gave in wholeheartedly, with the exception of a few rightwingers.But Obama didn't come here just to show off his considerable PR talents, but to give us a ringing wake-up call. For several months, during the election campaign and ensuing coalition-building, Israel turned inwards as if it lived on a secluded island. The public discourse focused on domestic issues, all but ignoring the Palestinians, Iran, or the turmoil across the border in Syria and Egypt. Obama's visit reminds us that insularity is not an option for Israel, that we live in the Middle East and must come to acceptable terms with our neighbours.Speaking to the Israeli people from the Jerusalem Convention Centre – which raised criticism over his refusal to address the Knesset – Obama said: "Given the demographics west of the Jordan river, the only way for Israel to endure and thrive as a Jewish and democratic state is through the realisation of an independent and viable Palestine."The president left us with a mission: "Political leaders will not take risks if the people do not demand that they do. You must create the change that you want to see." Would it stir our hearts and minds? Obama's task is formidable: mainstream public opinion here believes that we have no credible Palestinian peace partner. Hamas in Gaza is too hostile (and welcomed the visit with rockets on Sderot), the West Bank's Fatah too weak and bound to an uncompromising ethos of victimhood. Things are hardly easier on this side. Although Netanyahu reiterated his support for the two-state solution, it still rings hollow. Bibi's new cabinet is full of rightwing hardliners committed to settlement expansion and opposing Palestinian statehood.Mutual pleasantries aside, the Obama-Netanyahu dialogue sounds like a broken old record playing the same tune for four years, with the Israeli leader pushing for a tougher American stance vis-a-vis Iran, and his American counterpart asking for more time to solve the nuclear issue diplomatically. On the Palestinian issue they switch roles, with Obama eager to resurrect the peace process but Netanyahu being cautious. Ever the realist, however, the president raised little expectations, delegating the hard work of engaging Israelis and Palestinians to John Kerry, US secretary of state, who would stay behind when his boss leaves. Obama has obviously learned important political lessons from his first-year follies. Would we be smart enough to overcome our follies and listen to his message?