All Israeli elections have a significance extending beyond the purely domestic sphere. But the results of the nationwide polls to be held on Tuesday will resonate internationally to an unusual, and potentially explosive, degree. The explanation lies with the policies and personality of one man: Israel’s controversial and outspoken conservative prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, who is seeking a third consecutive term, his fourth in all, following his December gamble in calling an early election. During his recent visit to Washington, when he attacked the Obama administration’s outreach to Iran, Netanyahu was feted by rightwing Republicans and supporters who claimed for him the mantle of a latter-day Churchill. In persistently warning of the supposedly existential threat posed by Tehran’s nuclear and missile programmes, they said, Netanyahu recalled the British leader’s bravely unfashionable 1930s campaign against the appeasement of Nazi Germany.A more apposite historical comparison might be with France’s former president Charles de Gaulle, who became notorious, in the UK at least, for his veto of Britain’s attempt to join the European economic community, forerunner of the European Union. On a nuclear deal with Iran, Netanyahu’s response is a very Gaullist “Non”. On the question of a wider western rapprochement with Tehran, he grimly says no, too. On resumed peace talks with the Palestinians, or a freeze on Jewish settlements in the Occupied Territories, his answers, once again, are bluntly negative.Netanyahu, a former special forces commando and US-schooled neo-con, has made national security the centrepiece of his re-election campaign. In defiance of his own intelligence chiefs, he appears to believe he alone appreciates the true extent of the dangers Israel faces. His hawkish stance and uncompromising rhetoric have so alarmed and alienated many of Israel’s friends in the US that a senior White House official characterised his behaviour as “destructive” of the wider bilateral relationship.The collapse last year of painstaking US efforts to revive the peace process between Israel and the Palestinian Authority was blamed on Netanyahu’s intransigence. European countries have been repelled by the continuing expansion of Jewish settlements, while warm relations with Turkey have turned icy. According to a recent study, during Netanyahu’s tenure the number of Israelis living in the West Bank and in Arab areas of Jerusalem has risen to 650,000, rendering the mooted two-state solution ever more impracticable.Netanyahu, seeing enemies everywhere, viewed the Arab spring revolts as an Islamist conspiracy, rather than an exceptional opportunity to spread democracy across the Arab world. Within Israel itself, the prime minister, along with his Arab-baiting foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, is blamed for the country’s unprecedented international isolation.Little wonder, therefore, or so it would appear, that Netanyahu’s rightwing Likud coalition is trailing in the opinion polls while his ally, Lieberman’s Yisrael Beiteinu – Israel is Our Home – faces electoral meltdown. Final surveys published on Friday suggested the conciliatory, centrist Zionist Union led by Yitzhak Herzog will emerge as the largest party by a margin of four Knesset seats. If Herzog and his principal collaborator, former foreign minister Tzipi Livni, can attract support from second-tier parties such as Joint List, the Israeli-Arab alliance, or Moshe Kahlon’s Kulanu faction, analysts suggest they have a good chance of unseating the prime minister.Yet the paradox, if Netanyahu is deposed, is that this outcome will not be the result, first and foremost, of his hardline foreign policy. Nor will Herzog win because most Israelis disagree with Netanyahu on the Iranian threat, or how to deal with Gaza rocket attacks, or the perceived failings of Obama: many appear to be in broad agreement with him on these issues.If Netanyahu loses – and it remains uncertain he will, given the looming frenzy of coalition horse-trading – it will be because he has failed what might be termed the Bill Clinton test. In other words, when it comes to deciding how to vote, it’s the economy, stupid. The prime minister has tried hard to make the election about national security, but opinion polls suggest that, for most voters, the contest is primarily about social issues, which more than half those polled rated above worries about Israel’s safety.Placing prosperity ahead of security is a new development for Israel. Concerns about the rising cost of living, stagnating wages, lack of jobs, higher rents and a chronic lack of affordable housing came to the fore in 2011, when Israel experienced a wave of street protests. Yet despite promising redress, Netanyahu has presided over a further deterioration in the economic conditions facing younger Israelis and what Herzog terms the “sandwich generation” – middle-class voters simultaneously raising families and caring for elderly relatives. A critical report issued last month by the state comptroller’s office found that house prices rose by 55% between 2008 and 2013 and continue to soar, while rents increased by 30% in the same period, hurting Israel’s 470,000 poorest households. The average Israeli now needs the equivalent of 148 months’ salary to buy a home, compared with 66 in the United States and 64 in Britain. Unsurprisingly, Herzog’s Zionist Union has made “affordable housing for all Israel’s citizens” a key campaign pledge. Meanwhile, the opposition leader has picked the economist Manuel Trajtenberg, who previously worked for Netanyahu on the 2011 protests, as his shadow finance minister. Their promise to voters: a two-year, $1.7bn spending programme on affordable housing, education, health, jobs and poverty reduction.The disconnect is plain. While the prime minister pursues his tax vendetta with the Palestinian Authority, while he balks at peace talks, while he further strains relations with the US by accusing it of “giving up” on Iran, his domestic constituents increasingly despair that he can provide the answers to the everyday problems that concern them most.Like Churchill, Netanyahu appears best-suited to the role of wartime leader. Many in Israel and beyond fear that more war, in Gaza against Hamas, in Lebanon against Hezbullah, or with Iran is what may ultimately result if he is re-elected. But like de Gaulle, who resigned in 1969 after suffering a fatal attack of “I know best” hubris, Netanyahu looks increasingly out of touch. At home and abroad, his premiership has been a costly affair. He is a leader Israelis can no longer afford.• Comments will be opened later this morning