In his analysis ('It's time to get to work': 17 years after Oslo, Clinton takes on the Middle East challenge, 3 September), Ian Black describes Netanyahu as demanding that Abbas recognise Israel "as a Jewish state".However, according to Chris McGreal's report on the facing page ('Together we can lead people to a future that will end conflict', 3 September), what Netanyahu actually demanded from the Palestinians was recognition of "Israel as the nation state of the Jewish people". The difference is significant. Netanyahu is a Jewish prime minister, but he is certainly not the prime minister of the Jewish people, as he implicitly claims.A state defined by ethnic religion is bad enough; but what Netanyahu's actual demand amounts to is legitimation of Zionism, and the "right" of Israel to speak and act for an alleged Jewish "nation" consisting of Jews everywhere, including the UK.Professor Emeritus Moshé MachoverLondon• I hear that the much overused expression "elephant in the room" is being applied to Hamas in the context of the new Middle East peace talks. Maybe if this particular elephant was allowed to enter the room, there would be a bit more chance of some real progress.Owain ClarkeNorth Baddesley, Hampshire• Karel De Gucht's outburst was directed not to the government of Israel, or to some people in Israel, or to some Jews, but essentially to all Jews, moderates or not, religious or lay (Anger at EU chief's Middle East outburst, 4 September) – not that this difference is relevant, but De Gucht made a point of referring to both groups explicitly. This clear manifestation of antisemitism should be condemned if expressed by any government official. It is inadmissible from someone who is a representative of the European Union. His clarifying statement is hogwash. He expressed hatred or derision of every Jew. No amount of explanation can change this. If he does not resign of his own accord, Karel De Gucht should be fired.Professor Jacobo BielakCarnegie Mellon University, Pennsylvania, US• Karel De Gucht, the European commissioner for trade, is indeed purveying blatant prejudice in his statement that Jews are incapable of "rational discussion about what is actually happening in the Middle East". Moshe Kantor, head of the European Jewish Congress, describes this statement not as anti-Jewish, but as incitement "against Jews and Israel". By thus bracketing "Jews and Israel" together, he is ignoring the views of Jews who are brave enough to speak out against Israeli actions, and is thus effectively guilty of precisely the same prejudice as that of De Gucht.Dr Hugh GoodacreUniversity of Westminster• The excellent article by Simon Jenkins on Iraq (A trillion-dollar catastrophe. Yes, Iraq was a headline war, 31 August) follows on from an equally superb article from Seumas Milne (The US isn't leaving Iraq, it's rebranding the occupation, 4 August); both consider that the Iraqi invasion has been a failure. Certainly Iraq would in all other circumstances be considered a failed state. There is though, another viewpoint that has been ignored by both journalists.  From a geopolitical, US/British, perspective, the invasion has been an outstanding success. The threat that Iraq posed under Saddam Hussein, to Middle Eastern dominance and Israeli local hegemony, has been disposed of. A major oil country no longer threatens to price oil in euros, Israel is safer than before, US and western oil majors now dominate Iraqi oil, major bases have been established in a strategic part of the world.If one closes one's eyes for a moment to the immense suffering that has resulted from the invasion, and the fact that Iraq as a nation state has been set back decades, and view the world from the centres of power in Washington DC – from the viewpoint of the planners, who are struggling to maintain the US as the dominant world powerhouse – the invasion has been a resounding success.Roger van ZwanenbergLondon• This column was amended on 8 September 2010. During the editing of a letter from Moshé Malchover the word 'implicitly' was lost. For the avoidance of doubt it has now been restored.