There are basically three options confronting Israel as possible solutions to the Palestine problem, that is, the problem caused by Israel being re-established in 1948 as a nation state in territory occupied for centuries by another people, the Palestinians. The ceasefire in Gaza, long overdue, does not change this basic choice.The first option is that of one nation state. In simple terms, that Jews and Palestinians should have equal citizenship of one and the same country.This option has little backing among Israelis. Israel currently is a religious state, the national state of the Jews. For that state to absorb the Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza would mean the end of the Zionist dream of a Jewish state, able to control its own destiny and that of its citizens, with the full support of its citizens. The one nation state would inevitably be multi-ethnic and multi-religious. Jews would no longer automatically have the majority in such a state.Despite the unattractiveness of this option, however, Israeli policy since 1967 has pushed towards this option. Its consistent policy of expanding settlements in the West Bank has rendered a viable independent Palestinian state less and less feasible. The natural inference from this policy is that it does not want a viable Palestinian state, even within the limited 1967 borders. But just as it does not want to occupy Gaza again, so it does not wish to draw the logical conclusion that it should take over the whole territory and give its Palestinian occupants full citizenship of one nation.The second option is the two-state solution. That Israel should have secure boundaries fully recognised by the international community, including the Arab nations. And that Palestinians should have their own state, control over their own borders and economy, likewise secure from Israeli aggression and at peace with their neighbours, including Israel.One would have thought that this was such an attractive option for Israel that it would have pursued it vigorously and done all it could to reassure its neighbours, the Palestinians in particular, that it truly wanted to see Palestine as a viable and prosperous partner. Sadly it has not pursued that policy, and has failed to pursue it so consistently that it becomes very hard to believe any Israeli assurance that it favours this option. It withdrew from Gaza, but fully compensated for that by further expansion of the West Bank settlements. Its security barrier round the West Bank was an understandable and legitimate, if regrettable, policy to protect its citizens from suicide bombing. What was not acceptable or legitimate was building the barrier inside the occupied West Bank at many points, thereby reducing the size of any resulting Palestinian state to something much smaller, and less viable.The UN has repeatedly rebuked Israel and demanded an end to its expansionist settlement policy and the land-grab of the security wall. Israel has ignored the UN. It is quick to draw attention to Palestinian (Hamas) failure to observe UN resolutions, but is effectively silent in face of its own illegality and inhumanity. Its disregard for Palestinian land and water rights, its humiliating policy of restricting Palestinian movement even within the West Bank, its unequal policy as between Jews and Palestinians on building permits in East Jerusalem, all indicate that it has no real interest in a viable Palestinian state. At best, Israel seems to want a Palestine which is a non-viable Bantustan, wholly dependent in economy, foreign policy and security on Israel's say-so. It wants a Palestine which is little more than a lean-to on the house of Israel.To put the blame exclusively on the Palestinians, on suicide bombers and rockets from Gaza, is wholly to ignore that such unacceptable and disastrous actions have been seen by many Palestinians as the only way they can respond effectively to Israel's continued disregard of its own illegal actions and its abuse of Palestinian human rights. The Hamas solution is no solution. But Israel's policy prevents a solution even more effectively. Where is Israel's sense of justice, the justice to which its prophets called Israel so vehemently in centuries past? Where is Israel's Torah concern for the stranger and the resident alien? Answer: they are all lost in a policy which promises nothing but the continuation of injustice, the increase of fear and hatred, and a permanent absence of peace in the Middle East. Surely there must be Israelis who can see that the most effective way to end suicide bombing and rockets from Gaza is to remove the legitimate grievances of the Palestinians and the injustices against the Palestinians which are the principal causes of such Palestinian hostility to Israel.The third option is one which is rarely mentioned, but actually lies behind much of the West Bank settlement policy. It is that Israel's occupation of the promised land will become complete over time. It will be completed because, as with the original occupation of the promised land, the other nations already in the promised land will be subdued or expelled. This option is rarely mentioned because it is so horrific to contemplate. However, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that not a few Israeli politicians secretly regard this as the most desirable solution to the Palestine problem. And most of those who don't actually espouse the option seem willing to see how events will unfold as settlements expand and strangle the two-state option ever more effectively. Part of the current tragedy is that this option is working to some extent, as evidenced by the exit of so many Christian Palestinians from the land of their fathers.This is presumably why so many Israelis can apparently be so unmoved by the injustices and humiliations Israeli policy imposes on the Palestinian communities. Some must cherish the secret hope that Palestinians will become so traumatised by their experience of occupation and blockade, so humiliated and degraded as self-respecting human beings and as a self-sustainable society, that they will simply give up – give up wanting a Palestinian state and follow their Christian brothers and sisters by trying to emigrate to other Arab countries. Can that really be so? But what alternative does Israeli policy allow? Not the single nation state. And evidently not the two-nation solution.When will Israel and its supporters recognise that by its policy towards the West Bank and Gaza, Israel is losing its moral authority, is trashing basic principles of justice and humanity, and is betraying its own religious commands to love the neighbour including the alien, "as yourself" (Leviticus 19:18, 34)?