What happened when Israeli commandos boarded the Mavi Marmara, the largest ship in a flotilla aimed at breaking the Gaza siege, cannot be undone. But the diplomatic consequences of the assault that killed nine Turks were far from predetermined. Negotiations took place over the next 15 months between Turkey and Israel. Suggested phrases went back and forward, but each time the two sides came close to an agreement, it was leaked. The talks were considered so important that the publication of the UN investigation, chaired by Geoffrey Palmer, a former New Zealand prime minister, was delayed for three months.In the end, that report, which criticised Israel for using excessive force but upheld its right to blockade Gaza, was itself leaked. In offering regret and compensation but refusing to apologise, Binyamin Netanyahu's government made a conscious decision: once again Israel chose a tactical victory over a strategic relationship. At stake was more than an important military association, more than trade and tourism. It was Turkey's decision to waive its veto that allowed Israel to join the OECD. Turkey is an increasingly important interlocutor in an Arab world that has lost the certainties of its dictators, the Mubaraks, Gaddafis and Ben Alis. You may disagree with the line Turkey takes, but there is not a country in the region, including Iran and Syria, that has not used its services.Israel will be able to do so no longer. Where the Mavi Marmara went, Turkey will follow by challenging the Gaza blockade in the international court of justice. And rightly so. The Palmer panel's finding went against every statement the UN secretary general has made about Gaza, the Goldstone report and a report by the UN human rights council in September. If, as Palmer found, the siege is legal in international law, the occupation is too. This must be challenged in court.The Israeli-Turkish rupture will bear on the next instalment of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict – the attempt by the US to forestall a general assembly vote on Palestinian statehood this month. A proposal for new peace talks is being circulated to dissuade the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, from pressing the vote. This would elevate the Palestinians from observing entity at the UN to observer state, enhancing its representation and its ability to pursue cases such as the Mavi Marmara in the international criminal court.The problem with US attempts to restart negotiations is that even if a path could be found through the thicket of Israeli settlements, Mr Abbas would still end up at the table with an Israeli premier who has repeatedly shown an inability to see the wood for the trees.