The laws governing marriage in Israel fly in the face of politicians' assertion that the state is on a par with other Western countries in terms of enlightenment, tolerance and democracy. Despite seventy percent of Israelis defining themselves as secular, Israel's rabbinate has a stranglehold on the institution of marriage, refusing to recognise weddings not conducted in a religious ceremony, and proscribing couples from tying the knot where one partner is not deemed sufficiently Jewish by the authorities.Thanks to the divergent laws governing who qualifies for Israeli citizenship and who the country's dominant rabbis consider a fully-fledged Jew, the chasm between the religious and secular elements of the country is not easily bridged, and grows wider with every new wave of immigrants of opaque lineage. The state grants automatic citizenship to anyone with at least one Jewish grandparent, whilst orthodox Judaism takes a stricter line, going by matrilineal descent: a person is only Jewish if their mother is a Jew (and hence their mother's mother had to be Jewish too, and so on up the family tree).Whilst Christian, Muslim and Druze couples are free to marry outside the remit of the rabbinic authorities, thousands of pairs of potential newlyweds where one half is Jewish and the other not are ensnared each year by the prohibition. Hundreds of thousands of migrants from the FSU, Ethiopia and elsewhere fall into the gap between being Israeli and being Jewish, and as such are prohibited from marrying a 'proper' Jew on Israeli soil. At the same time, secular Israeli Jews who object to being married in a religious ritual are unable to wed in a civil ceremony. Various loopholes exist in order to circumvent the system, but they in no way detract from the violation of basic freedoms that the state's rabbinate imposes on the country's citizens. Israel recognises civil marriages conducted overseas, hence each year thousands of Israelis wed in nearby countries such as Cyprus in order to beat the system and become a recognised married couple. Others become common-law spouses, although such status does not grant them all the rights bestowed on formally married couples. Israel is a signatory to the  Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and as such has a duty to adhere to its charter, which asserts that "men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family". However, in a country which so often acquiesces to the anachronistic demands of religious rulers, modern-day declarations of human rights come a distant second to the shackling legislature of a bygone age. Of late, there has been some movement towards reforming the law and bringing it in line with the requirements of the majority of the population. Avigdor Lieberman, the incumbent foreign minister, promised to legalise civil marriage if elected to the Knesset; the religious parties who entered the ruling coalition alongside Lieberman's Israel Beitenu were forced to agree to the amendment of the marriage law as a condition for joining the government. However, the bill  presented to parliament only deals with couples where neither is recognised as a Jew by the rabbinate, hence those pairs where one partner is Jewish and the other not are in the same bind as before. Orthodox Judaism prohibits marriage between Jews and non-Jews, on the basis that such a path leads to assimilation, the  "worship of false gods", and the erosion of the Jewish people. However, recent off-shoots of the religion – such as the Reform and Conservative movements – take a far more lenient view of such unions, with Reform going as far as recognising as Jewish a person with only a Jewish father, regardless of their mother's faith. The dilemma of Israel's leaders is weighing the demands of the secular populace against the massive influence of the religious sector, which manifests itself in terms of block votes cast at the ballot box and emotional and communal pressure applied by the heads of the orthodox movements on their irreligious peers. Such coercion led to the much-resented status quo in which yeshiva students are exempt from national service in the IDF, and a wider situation where certain neighbourhoods and communities have divorced themselves from the rest of the country, entirely populated and governed by ultra-orthodox adherents and their leaders. When the two worlds collide – such as on the issue of marriage laws for the entire country – the argument boils down to a test of strength between the two camps; going by past form, religion seems set to triumph over reason once more, despite the thousands of helpless couples left out in the cold as a result.