Basta is a word you will hear often enough in Italy, but never, it seems, in connection with the prime minister. However outrageous or unwise the actions of Silvio Berlusconi have been, Italians have never so far said, at least in sufficient numbers or with sufficient conviction, that enough is enough. That may be changing after prosecutors in Milan this week asked for him to be put on trial for sex-related offences. A judge is expected to rule early next week on the application, and if it is granted, Mr Berlusconi could be put on trial as early as April.Mr Berlusconi has of course been painted into an apparent legal corner many times before. He has been in court so many times that the exact number is a matter of dispute, but the relationship between him and the law has in the past resembled that between an agile fox and lumbering huntsmen. He always escapes, even when found guilty. Usually he has done this by drawing out the legal process until the statute of limitations comes into play. When the statute fell short of his requirements, he amended it, and recently tried to do so again. His control of television, in a country where only 10% of the population buy newspapers, has enabled him to bury the issues much of the time. Even now, developments which in other countries would be at the top of the TV news agenda are mysteriously halfway down it or even lower.But this time it will not be that easy for him to leap free. The incident concerned – his alleged payment to a 17-year-old girl for sexual services – happened early last year, too close for a verdict to be timed out. It would be wrong to pronounce on this particular allegation, but what is indisputable is that Mr Berlusconi has had too much to do with too many young women of a certain kind. His People of Freedom movement is a party in more senses than one. What has been going on may or may not be illegal, but it is certainly distasteful. It also a huge distraction from the business of government at a time when Italy has grave economic and social problems demanding sustained attention.Meanwhile, Italians seem to have slipped into a state of cynical resignation that encompasses both their leader's faults and the degradation of the political system. Although a majority do now think Mr Berlusconi should resign, he is still in place, claiming that his reputation is being besmirched and that leftwing magistrates are out for his blood. He says that all this damages Italy, and it does, but not in the sense he means. He may now inflict even more damage by forcing an election on the question of whether the voters or the courts should choose the country's political leadership.