Michele Ferrero, who built up a sweet fortune with his Nutella empire, died on Saturday with a legacy lauded by the Italian president and chocolate lovers globally.Ferrero, 89, died in Monte Carlo after months of illness, leaving a country that had grown up on his chocolate creations in mourning. “We are proud of you. Thank you, Michele,” read a note on the website of Ferrero, the family business started by his father, Pietro, in 1942.Italy’s president, Sergio Mattarella, sent a telegram to the family to express his deep emotion on learning of the billionaire confectioner’s death. “Ferrero was for many years a champion of Italian business, always succeeding in keeping up with the times thanks to innovative products and his hard work and reserved [nature]. Italians remember him with gratitude, also for his work supporting and promoting culture,” Mattarella wrote.Local press described the “great upset” in his home town of Alba, in north-west Italy, where Ferrero’s business empire was born. “Italian industry grieves for one of its great protagonists,” the Gazzetta d’Alba said.In a country beset by economic woes, where the wealthy have come under fire for their lavish lifestyles and countless corruption scandals, the outpouring of grief for Italy’s richest man may seem out of place. Ferrero’s net worth was estimated as $23.4bn (£15.2bn), making him “the richest candyman on the planet” according to Forbes. But by shunning the limelight and becoming the key driver of the global success of the business, he commanded great respect at home and abroad.He took over the family firm from his pastry-maker father, who in the 1940s began blending hazelnuts and cocoa into a chocolatey mix that was ultimately christened Nutella. When Ferrero took over, he went against common wisdom and drove an ambitious international agenda.In an interview released after his death, Ferrero recounted the “moving” moment he brought cherry chocolates called Mon Chéri to Germany. “When we arrived it was after the war, a country still full of ruins with the signs of the conflict, sad, depressed, in which Italians were viewed very badly,” he told Italian daily La Stampa. “I thought of something that would raise morale, that each day could sweeten the lives of the Germans … at a price accessible to everyone.”Winning over post-war Europeans with Mon Chéri was the start of success abroad, cemented in 1983 when the first tub of Nutella arrived in the US. Ferrero Rocher chocolates had been created a year earlier, to be forever associated with ambassadors’ parties thanks to TV adverts.While Ferrero’s son Giovanni took over the business, he was said to have never retired. Speaking softly, he revealed his secret to La Stampa: “Always act differently to the others, have faith, stay strong and put customers at the centre each day.”