The four bottles were identical except for their labels; scraps of paper onto which someone had scrawled A, B, C and D in blue Biro. Actually, that's not quite true; a more experienced eye than mine would have been able to discern the subtle differences in the shades of colour which distinguished their contents. But to me they all looked the same pale yellowy green. Ten of us were sitting around a long wooden table in a rustic restaurant called the Madre Tierra in the village of Francavilla d'Ete. 'We have four olive oils for you to taste,' Ian said. 'One comes from Tuscany, one is produced locally here in Marche,' - we learned to pronounce it mar-kay - 'Bob and I made one ourselves from our own olives, and one was bought in an Aldi supermarket. All you have to do is guess which is which.' One by one, we poured little pools of the peppery oils onto our plates and dunked chunks of thick, crusty, home-made bread into them before popping them into our mouths.'This is our local,' explained Ian. 'It's owned and run by five lads with a lot of help from their mums.' Olive oil tasting over, the dishes came thick and fast: smoked prosciutto, a bean and corn salad, crostini smeared with olive paste, penne with smoked sausage, cream and black truffles, and jugs of red wine from the local cantina. If you want to get a taste of the Marche region of Italy, then a self-styled Olive Discovery Break like this is as good a way as any; not that you have to wait for the olive harvest to sample the abundance of excellent food and wine to be enjoyed throughout the year.Four years ago Ian, a projects manager working in telecoms, and his partner, Bob, working in human resources, gave up their lives in Stoke Newington, north London, and staked everything they owned on converting an old ramshackle ruin of a farmhouse into luxurious holiday flats. The result is Casal dei Fichi in Francavilla d'Ete. It has six self-catering flats, all of which are beautifully furnished and come with fitted kitchens, private gardens and a swimming pool. It stands in landscaped grounds an hour by car from Ancona airport. The Adriatic coast is 30 minutes in one direction and the Sibillini mountains 45 minutes in the other. 'But it was the view that sold it to us,' Bob told me on my first night, and next morning I saw why. I stepped out of my flat and straight into a landscape by a Renaissance painter.A patchwork of green and ploughed fields fell away across a landscape of valleys dotted with forests which had turned to autumnal shades of red and gold. Farmhouses built of honey-coloured brick stood in lonely isolation and, in the distance, hills were crowned with medieval fortress towns whose campaniles and turrets poked up into the pale blue sky, as the faint echo of church bells hung in the chill, early morning air.It's almost impossible not to compare the Marche with Tuscany, which lies on Italy's opposite coastline. I found the Marche to be more rural and, in its own way, just as beautiful. But for me the big difference is that it's less visited and certainly less expensive. I didn't see a single Chelsea tractor, and the only tractors I did see were caked in clay and ploughing fields. November sees the height of the olive harvest which, depending on the weather, can last until Christmas. Bob and Ian devised this Olive Break to encourage visitors to come to the Marche in the low season and to make the most of the seasonal specialities for which the region is renowned. Next morning, we headed to a local food market in the nearby coastal town of Numana. The centrepiece was the pescheria, where the day's catch was being fought over by widows dressed in black and their younger Gucci-and-Prada-clad counterparts. The surrounding narrow streets were lined with market stalls selling colourful mounds of fruit, vegetables and nuts. And fast-food stalls sold focaccia sandwiches of roast suckling pig encased in hard shells of crisp, tawny crackling.Lunch was at La Torre, a modern, stylish restaurant that wouldn't have looked out of place in Notting Hill. Instead, it was perched on top of a steep, craggy cliff face and looked out over the Adriatic coastline. The starter quickly became a talking point. The vongole (clams) were recognisable enough, but we all agreed no one had ever seen anything quite like the sea monster that accompanied it. It resembled a cross between a langoustine and the creature from the Black Lagoon, but was tasty enough for all that. It was followed by salt-baked sea bass and enjoyed with a few bottles of the local Castelverde.That night we dined in the medieval walled town of Loro Piceno. Steep, narrow, paved streets wound their way to the front door of the Taverna Loro. The usual antipasto was followed by potato and spinach soup, tagliatelle with oxtail, and then a main course of roast guinea fowl with chestnuts and chicory, which was accompanied by the house speciality, cremini fritti fatti a casa. 'Well, what do you think of it?' Bob asked. Then, registering my look of incredulity, he confirmed my suspicions. 'Yep, it's deep-fried custard.'Sunday didn't turn out to be much of a day of rest; Ian and Bob put us to work. At Il Maniero, a restaurant which doubles as an art school, and under the watchful eye of Guida, the resident chef, we were taught how to de-bone legs of lamb, make gnocchi and prepare a five-course Sunday lunch, Marche-style. Then, in the afternoon, it was back to Casal dei Fichi to help Ian and Bob harvest their olives for our visit to the olive press the next day.Our last meal together was in Urbisaglia, another spectacular hilltop fortress town. We dined at Le Logge, which stood in an elegant palazzo that had been restored in the early 19th century. Baked goat's cheese wrapped in thin slices of ham was followed by spinach paté, ravioli in pumpkin sauce, paccheri pasta with gorgonzola and hazelnuts and, finally, fried pork in saba, a type of vinegar not dissimilar to balsamic. A liquidy lemon sorbet, drunk from a champagne flute, was the perfect finishing touch. Naturally, local wines were also a prominent feature of the weekend, and one of the joys of the Marche is that it produces a host of fine wines that are little known outside the region. Discovering new ones was always interesting, and we were ably assisted in our quest by Ian and Bob, who had earlier arranged a tasting for us at the Umani Ronchi winery in Ancona. As Bob swirled a particularly fine Lacrima Di Moro D'Alba Superiore around the bowl of his crystal goblet, I asked him: 'So, what do you miss most about Stoke Newington?' He reflected for the briefest of moments before replying: 'Only nipping out for a curry.'On our last morning we were guests of honour on a tour of the local olive press. Olives were being tipped into vast vats where they were washed before being crushed under slowly turning stone wheels, which produced a paste which was then pressed to extract the precious oil. 'By the way,' Ian shouted above the din of the grinding wheels, 'how did you do on the olive tasting on the first night?' Actually, not that well. I had got them all wrong. I had confused the local one with the Tuscan olive oil that sells in Selfridges for £26 per half-litre but, worst of all, I had marked down his and Bob's home-made olive oil as the one from Aldi. But because he and Bob had looked after us so well, I simply didn't have the heart to tell him.Casal dei Fichi (00 39 0734 959018; www.casaldeifichi.com) offers six one- and two-bedroom apartments with fully equipped kitchens. Weekly rates range from £350 in low season to £575 in high season. The four-day Olive Discovery break cost £445, inclusive of transfers from Ancona airport, all meals and wine with lunch and dinner, visits to local markets and olive press and three nights' accommodation. Ryanair flies from Stansted to Ancona (www.ryanair.com).