A 14-year-old British boy has died in an accident while on an adventure holiday with the Scouts in northern Italy.Elliot Peacock lost consciousness after jumping into water in Gran Paradiso national park in the Italian Alps, according to the activity organisers. Instructors rescued him from the water but were unable to resuscitate him.His parents, Collette and Scott, from Newton Mearns, East Renfrewshire, have flown to Italy where police are investigating the accident, which happened on Sunday afternoon.Elliot, a member of the Pegasus Explorer Scout unit linked to the 35th Glasgow Scout group, was with a group of about 40 Scouts organised by outdoor education provider Acorn Adventure, which said they were gorge scrambling. "It is a low-level combined water and rock activity that involves walking up and down a river gorge and jumping into pools. It is controlled by fully trained and assessed instructors and all participants are equipped with helmets, buoyancy aids, full wetsuits and footwear," the company said.Its statement added: "On this particular occasion, the group were jumping from a height of approximately 60cm into the water, where instructors were waiting for them as is normal. Water conditions were optimum for the activity and the weather was warm and sunny. As [Elliot] entered the water for the second time, it was obvious to the instructors that something was wrong, so they rescued him from the water immediately." Attempts to resuscitate him by first aiders, nurses and air ambulance staff were unsuccessful.The reason for his loss of consciousness remained unexplained, the company statement said."Staff have since returned to the site with the police investigating the incident and it is now understood that there was no impact with a rock."Andrew Gardiner, the company's managing director, said, "We are all profoundly saddened by this tragic incident and our thoughts are with the family and friends of the boy. Our priority is to ensure we do all we can to help them by working with the various organisations involved to understand how this happened. The rest of the group are supporting each other and showing great maturity. They are a great credit to their Scout group and their parents."Acorn said hundreds of people had done this activity with the company at the same spot over the past five years. iIt said it was working with Italian emergency services and the UK Foreign Office "to handle the practicalities swiftly and sensitively"."Senior operations staff and a trauma counsellor had travelled to Italy to provide all possible support."The Scout Association said it was "devastated" by the incident and was supporting Elliot's parents, other scouts and their trip leaders."We will continue to work with Acorn Adventure … to establish if there are any lessons to learn from this tragic incident."A Foreign Office spokesman said: "We are aware of the death of a British national in Italy and we stand ready to provide consular assistance."