An early rally prompted by positive news from Greece fizzled out by the close of trading, as worries about the state of Italy's banking system gripped the market and rekindled fears of contagion spreading through the Eurozone.Ratings agency Moody's started the trouble after saying it might downgrade a number of Italy's banks, in the wake of a recent cut in the country's sovereign debt rating. The comments prompted concerns that Italy's banks might fare poorly in the current round of European stress tests, whose results are due in mid-July. At the same time the market had to digest the close of a rights issue from UBI Banca, with talk of poor demand for the fundraising although this was later dismissed. So Italian banking shares fell sharply, with two banks, UniCredit and Intesa Sanpaolo, briefly suspended from trading because of the volatility.The concerns soon spread elsewhere, with UK banking shares also coming under pressure. Lloyds Banking Group - where new chief executive António Horta-Osório is due to unveil his strategic review next week - lost 1.875p to 43.395p, Royal Bank of Scotland fell 1.09p to 35.65p and Barclays dropped 6.05p to 237.3p. Calls from Bank of England governor Sir Mervyn King for UK institutions to give more information on their exposure to Europe also hit sentiment.So after the FTSE 100 touched 5768 on growing hopes of a bailout deal for Greece, it fell back to finish at 5697.72, a rise of just 23.34 points.Mining shares were among the main risers on global growth hopes, with BHP Billiton 56.5p better at 2300.5p and Antofagasta ahead 29p to £12.66. Anglo American added 37p to £28.55 after Goldman Sachs issued a buy recommendation following news of expansion plans at the Collahuasi mine in Chile, which is 44% owned by the company. Goldman said:Lower down the market, mining minnow Stratex International, which has operations in Turkey and east Africa, rose 10% to 8.675p after AngloGold Ashanti agreed to pay £3m to take an 11.5% stake in the business. Stratex is also looking at a possible spin off of its African assets to maximise shareholder value. Analysts at Westhouse have put a target price of 13p on Stratex shares.Elsewhere kitchen supplier Howden Joinery Group added 1.2p to 104.3p after rival Homeform - the owner of Kitchens Direct - went into administration. Analyst Graham Brown at Evolution Securities said:Finally oil explorer Dominion Petroleum fell 1.22p to 3.78p after it announced plans to raise $55m - more than a half of its market capitalisation - to fund its development programme. The company also said it had turned down a number of all-share merger proposals, believing they undervalued the business and that a fundraising was a better way of increasing shareholder value. Analyst Charlie Sharp at Matrix said: