Turin may look a bit like Paris, but culturally, for me, it’s more like Detroit. They have a lot in common. In the 1960s Detroit was one of the richest cities in the world and that was a golden age for Turin too; they were both huge in the motor industry, and now have an edgy, creative, entrepreneurial pulse.When the Fiat factory drastically reduced its production, the city had to find a new way to survive – and our cultural and entrepreneurial side grew. Hosting the 2006 Winter Olympics was fantastic. Before that we were thought of as a grey, industrial city, but we became better-known globally, and more confident, too.Music is massive here: it’s Italy’s capital of electronic music. The Kappa FuturFestival in July takes place in the amazing Parco Dora, one of Europe’s most futuristic parks, created in what was an industrial wasteland. Then there’s the Movement festival in the winter in Lingotto, a former Fiat car factory. There’s a big underground scene, with so many producers and DJs that’s it’s easy to have a lot of fun.You’ll get the best DJs, the best music, but not the best service here! Turin isn’t known for fashionable bars, like Milan – the nightlife is more rough and basic. Go to Mad Dog in the city centre for quality cocktails. It’s got that speakeasy vibe. One of my favourite clubs is Loud, which is about a year old now and plays techno every Saturday.Banco Vini e Alimenti has the best biodynamic wine menu in Italy. Whenever friends come to Turin, I take them there for dinner. Lo Spaccio Alimentare is great for traditional food like vitello tonnato – veal served cold with a tuna sauce. Turin is a culinary destination, the food’s amazing – you must try our chocolate!Turin is one of the most affordable cities in Italy and has a huge student population. There are two big institutions: the uni and the polytechnic, with about 100,000 students and staff. More and more students are coming here because it’s cheap and offers a good lifestyle, a bit like Berlin. There’s no end of cheap bars and places to eat. On every corner there’s a new pizza place, a new ice-cream shop …Via Verdi in the city centre is one of my favourite streets. It’s very narrow, with no cars. You start at Castle Square and follow it to the river. You’ll pass the royal theatre, the royal stables, the university dating from 1700, the national cinema museum, the first radio building … so much history! We were the first capital of Italy – you can visit the Palace of Venaria outside town. It’s our Versailles.The family-run Art Hotel Boston is particularly lovely. Roberto, the owner, is a collector, so the whole place is full of contemporary art, and each room is different.Turin has many old, traditional cafes where poets and intellectuals used to hang out at the beginning of the last century. I love Caffè Mulassano, which recently turned 110 – it’s very decorative, all dark wood, leather and gold. It’s known as the inventor of the tramezzino, a square cut sandwich – there are about 30 varieties and they’re delicious.The best view of the city is from Superga Basilica, site of the Grande Torino football club plane crash in 1949. You can see the Alps from there. We’re close to the mountains and the sea, a perfect location – you can ski or be on the beach in about an hour.• Maurizio Vitale is the founder of Movement Entertainment and Kappa FuturFestival (11-12 July, day tickets from €40)