Lake Maggiore, the 54km stretch of Alpine water that provides one of northern Italy's most idyllic scenes, might better be named Lake Alessi. No fewer than four members of the eponymous design clan have set up homes along its shores. Matteo, 31, is the youngest to own a house here and the only one of the fourth generation to work full-time for the company founded by his great-grandfather, Giovanni, in 1921. Matteo's house, which he shares with his wife Daniela and their twins, Giacomo and Annalisa, sits high up on the steep west side of the lake. They moved in last year, when Matteo returned to Italy after a stint as the head of Alessi UK. Now he is in charge of trade, marketing and international development in the company's headquarters which are nearby on Lake Orta.The highly sought-after plot where Matteo and Daniela's house was built is on a south-facing tongue of land that enjoys day-long sunshine, not to mention jaw-dropping views. It was snapped up by Matteo's father, Michele, in 1993, with any one of his four children in mind. "One of us was bound to work for the family business, which is based a few kilometres away," says Matteo. "That person turned out to be me." In 1999, Michele and Matteo hired the services of architect Alessandro Ciapponi and together they set about designing a house that capitalised on the wonderful setting, wrapping high, sliding-glass doors around the entire house, allowing it to be flooded with light, as well as making the most of the glorious, far-reaching views of the snow-capped pre-Alps of Piedmont.From the outside, the building has a faintly Swiss chalet look to it - Switzerland starts at the northernmost tip of the lake. A wide, sloping roof crowns the building, but step inside and it's all modern, minimal cool.Matteo describes the decor as "uncluttered" and says that both he and Daniela hail from the "less is more" school of thought. The avant-garde design stable Alessi is, of course, famous for celebrating wavy, wacky forms, such as wobbly steel tableware and spidery lemon squeezers, but Matteo himself prefers geometry and linearity, at least in terms of the shape of rooms. Still, the prominent presence of two of Alessi's best-known items - Philippe Starck's kettle, which looks like a Viking helmet impaled by a lurid green relay runner's baton, and Zaha Hadid's gracefully twisting, polished, stainless-steel vase - proves that his taste runs beyond the straight or square."I have led my life surrounded by beautiful, stylish objects," says the goatee-bearded executive as he offers a tour of his sparsely furnished home. Surprisingly this is much more than just an Alessi showroom: a leathery le Corbusier chaise longue is splayed in front of the family iMac, and a Zanotta coat rack, resembling a bundle of firewood, greets you as you enter the property. These two items testify to the young Italian's unpartisan interest in quality design. But, of course, Alessi items do pop up pretty much everywhere else, since, as he says with a knowing smile: 'I have access to a very fair discount.'• Alessi is at 22 Brook Street, London W1 (020 7518 9090) and Westfield, London W1 (020 8576 6100). For more information, visit alessi.com