Donna Agata says: “Buona sera! What a pleasure to see you again!” as she emerges from behind her wooden counter. Her shop, nestled next to the imposing Chiesa Madre on the main square of this small Sicilian town, is hidden behind a screen of green climbers and creepers. A shelf with two crates of tomatoes (one for making sauce, the other for salads) is flanked by a cornucopia of terracotta pots.“If I decided to remove my plants”, she says, “Via Etnea would be as bare as a desert. They don’t belong to the mayor, they are mine!” A keen gardener, Donna Agata has made the traffic-laden main road into a mini-oasis. The shop is part of her house and the large back garden is full of her favourite plants. “I’ve been in this shop for 47 years,” she tells me. “Mine is the last little shop in Mascalucia. The others have all disappeared.”A wooden cabinet with glass doors, displaying various pulses, comes from Catania: “it’s 100 years old but I had it brought here because I like old things.” She points out the photographs above the door: a clown sits at a garishly covered table for carnival, Christmas lights, the procession of San Giuseppe – all festivals that she has participated in, making her shop centre-stage. But many of these festivals no longer take place. “The priests are tired,” she laments, implying that they can’t be bothered with these traditions. Donna Agata keeps much more alive than her plants: she has nearly half a century’s worth of stories and memories as well as being the custodian of dying local folklore.On Easter Sunday, there used to be a procession from San Vito church up to the next village on the foothills of Etna; old and young used to follow on foot. “But the priests are tired”, she repeats. The procession no longer takes place.The last large town situated on Via Etnea – the straight Roman road that leads from Catania to the “mountain” – Mascalucia used to comprise little more than the two churches, a town hall and numerous villas. Chosen for its cooler climate, it has long been a holiday resort. Plush villas with walled gardens abound as do the titles of their owners: barons, baronesses and even a prince. Gardens peek above high walls with plants cascading over the edge, Babylon-style: palm and citrus trees, jasmine, bougainvillea, wisteria. Lava arches carved with plant motifs frame iron gates, allowing one to catch a glimpse of otherwise very private enclosures. Thanks to Donna Agata, there is still some green to please the public eye.The Guardian Weekly regularly publishes a Letter from one of its readers around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letters@theguardian.com