"I was stuck for three hours under the rubble. I could not free myself, but luckily two beams stopped a wall from crushing me. This city is full of army barracks, but I was pulled out by residents digging with their bare hands. I was shouting for help. I could hear my mobile phone ringing but I could not get to it. Finally there was a small opening. Hands reached out, they grabbed me, and I got out."Guido Mariani, 23, a student from L'Aquila"The shocks have been going on since December. We haven't slept for months. Last night there were shocks throughout the evening, including a strong one at about 10.30. Then, all of a sudden, we heard a massive roar. We managed to flee to the staircase, half suffocated by the dust. I looked ahead of me and the building opposite did not exist any more."Lucia di Cocco, 27, L'Aquila"I had given birth at 7.30 in the evening and managed to escape from the hospital with my stitches in, without shoes, carrying my drip, while my mother carried the baby. Everyone was fleeing from the hospital, including the doctors."Annalisa Angelini, 28, L'Aquila"When the earthquake came all the villagers ran panicking into the streets. We saw the village's main tower collapse but thank God no one was killed. I had to persuade people it was OK to return to their houses and now we are drinking a little wine and are all relieved to be alive. Some of us are not so lucky. My friend has just returned home to rest after digging with his bare hands in rubble at L'Aquila for the body of his girlfriend. He will return tomorrow to dig again."Daniele Kihlgren, hotel owner, Santo Stefano di Sessanio"Everything is awful but at least we are alive. We were in our house in the suburbs of L'Aquila when the earthquake struck around 3.15-3.30am. It was awful; we didn't know what to do. It lasted about 20 seconds and everything was a mess, with all our things on the floor. Our flat is on the third floor and it was difficult to go downstairs because there were no lights. Luckily our car was parked outside and not in the garage, and we drove to a village about 10km from L'Aquila, where our other house was nearly destroyed."Graziella Fantasia, 60, an English teacher in L'Aquila"There was a first tremor around a quarter to eleven and we considered going out, but we didn't as we had become so used to them. Then the top floor fell down on the lower one and the corridor was smashed. Our 18-year-old daughter got under the bed as she had been trained to do and we got out before the next big one. We'd lived in the house since 1977, a beautiful old palazzo built in 1703, and now it's destroyed. We will spend the night in someone's garden. I don't think I will be sleeping between four walls for some time."Marion Cadman, a teacher at the English school of L'Aquila"When I left home I saw buildings all around that had collapsed. And then, looking down towards L'Aquila I saw a cloud of smoke rising from within the town that made it seem like the whole town had just sunk into the ground. Before I could get there people were asking [for] help. I began to dig and we got out my cousin, saved because a wardrobe fell across her and protected her. But my uncle, 63 and full of life, died under that rubble."Guido Liris, a doctor in the town of Pianola near L'Aquila