The record-breaking sale of Amedeo Modigliani’s famous painting of a nude, Nu Couché, to a Chinese billionaire for $170.4m (£120m) made headlines around the world this week. But it has prompted lamentation in the Italian artist’s hometown of Livorno, whose mayor said the painting should to have been bought by Italy instead.“I am displeased that it went to a private person because I think it should have been given to a museum so that it could be seen by everyone. Its beauty could have affected many people and now that may not happen,” Filippo Nogarin said.The mayor – who claimed the Tuscan port city of Livorno had a “visceral love” for the 20th-century artist whose nudes were once considered scandalous because of their explicit sexuality – said Monday’s sale of Nu Couché, or Reclining Nude, to Liu Yiqian, a former taxi driver, had been a “missed opportunity” for Italy. Nogarin is a member of the populist Five Star Movement. Related: Modigliani painting sells to Chinese billionaire for record breaking $170m Pointing to a recent controversy over the planned lease of a new Airbus A330 for use by the prime minister, Matteo Renzi, Nogarin said Italy would have been making a wiser investment if it had purchased the painting and kept it in Italian hands. “I would have preferred one more Modigliani and one less aeroplane,” he said.The Modigliani nude became one of only 10 pieces of art to sell for a nine-figure sum following its auction by Christie’s this week. While Nogarin expressed fears that the fate of the painting and the public’s future access to it were unknown, the Chinese buyer plans to exhibit the work in one of two private museums he owns in Shanghai.Liu told the New York Times the work, described by Christie’s as “an overtly sexual, highly erotic painting yet also one that is subtle, elegant, tender, loving and extraordinarily refined”, would be put on exhibit for his museum’s fifth anniversary. It was not clear whether it would have a permanent home there.“It will be an opportunity for Chinese art lovers to see good artworks without having to leave the country, which is one of the main reasons why we founded the museums,” he said.The 52-year-old collector and middle school dropout made his fortune on the Chinese stock market in the 80s and 90s. In a 2013 video interview with the New York Times, he said his museum would serve as an important protector of China’s rich cultural history. “The price of art cannot be separated from a country’s status in the world. It’s two sides of the same coin,” he said.Modigliani was Italian but Nu Couché was initially owned by the artist’s Polish-born poet and patron, Léopold Zborowski, who lived in Paris. Liu’s views about the value of art and its importance to a country’s cultural history is shared by the Livorno mayor.“Livorno has a strange relationship with Modigliani. It’s a visceral love and then also a sense of guilt because Modigliani left Livorno as a young man,” Nogarin said. “Modigliani is celebrated a lot here ... the painting could have become a [local] attraction. This was a missed opportunity to have this kind of painting here.”