History is repeating itself. In the past 10 years, some 580,000 people have left southern Italy, driven out by the financial crisis and rising poverty.The population of Naples has fallen by 108,000, Palermo has lost 29,000 residents and Bari 15,000. In 2010 alone, 134,000 terroni (a derogatory term used by Northern League supporters, which originally meant "farmer") moved to northern Italy, with 13,000 others going abroad.These alarming figures were published last month by Svimez, an agency that has been monitoring the region's economy since 1946. "If nothing is done, there will be a demographic tsunami," the report concludes.The 15-34 age group accounts for the largest number of emigrants. If the trend continues, only 5 million people will be left in this age group by 2050, compared with 7 million at present. Over-75s would represent 18% of the total population, up from 8% currently.With 0.7% growth forecast for Italy as a whole this year, the southern economy will grow by just 0.1%. Only farming has a few jobs to offer. Industry is on the verge of completely disappearing. For the south to catch up with the rest of the country, some €60bn ($80bn) would have to be invested, according to Svimez.With national debt standing at 120% of GDP the government has few resources and little political will, but Brussels may be able to help. The European Union allocated €35bn to Italy for 2007-13 as part of its support for regional development. But only a third has actually been used.A documentary called Ritals (a semi-derogatory French word for Italians) has told the story of earlier Italian migrants who went to France. The father, mother, uncles and aunts of Sophie and Anna-Lisa Chiarello left Corsano in Apulia in the 1950s and 1960s to settle at Enghien, north of Paris. But apart from telling the family's story, Ritals also highlights the suffering emigration entails.Vincenzo and Maria, the two main characters, talk of their early years (working as a mason and a dressmaker, respectively) in a foreign country that while not actively hostile was not very welcoming either. It is the details here that express more poignantly than the Svimez statistics the enduring pain of uprooting one's existence: Maria's fear of the thick, oppressive woodland of the Paris area, having never seen anything other than Salento's olive groves and pine trees; the almost insurmountable difficulty involved in trying to read the word beaucoup (much), the Italian equivalent only requiring four letters.Twenty-five years later the Chiarellos went home to Corsano, their fortune (not quite) made. Of the 30 million Italians who have emigrated in the past 150 years, about a third have not gone back. Too Italian to feel French, the Chiarellos now realised that they were too French to be completely Italian. They inhabit a sort of no man's land, confusing languages and identities, travelling back and forth.Leaving is one form of suffering; going back is another.The Italian Emigration Research Centre (Cisei) in Genoa, the port from which about 10 million Italians sailed to Brazil, Argentina and the US, also tries to flesh out the statistics. Since it was established the centre has collated 3m migrant profiles.The aim is to produce a database that can be consulted on the internet by Italians and their descendants all over the world. Cisei welcomes any material – letters, passports, photographs – that may help to preserve the memory of this exodus.This article originally appeared in Le Monde