A great building in the beautiful Palazzo Graneri della Roccia dedicated to the public for reading. Come to be inspired – by the beautiful artwork of the building, the antique furniture or the regular events and talks by authors and professional speakers. You must ring a bell and enter a code at the gates in the courtyard before entering, which heightens the sense of enchantment. It’s the perfect spot in the city to indulge in Italian culture.Lucy SerlengaFrom the top of Mole Antonelliana, the architectural symbol of Turin, you have a stunning view of the city. If you are lucky and it’s a clear day, you can see the Alps like a panoramic background wallpaper.Anekdotique Built in pure Art Nouveau style and opened in 1907, Mulassano is a little gem of a cafe with just a few tables (three inside plus four outside in spring and summer). Mulassano invented the “tramezzino” sandwich, similar to those you’d find at an English afternoon tea, which every visitor should try.Fabrizio ZanelliGet up early and head down to the Balon behind the Piazza della Repubblica, or Porta Palazzo as it’s more commonly known. It’s a big flea market where you will find a treasure chest of knick-knacks, cheap second-hand and vintage clothes, paintings, electronics, furniture, bikes ... the list goes on. If you get tired of rummaging for bargains, stop for a break at Gelateria Popolare for the best ice-cream in the city.Hannah BrewThere are plenty of bars which offer aperitvo in San Salvario. You can get a glass of wine and access to a buffet of delicious Italian delicacies for around €5 on average. Most bars you’ll stumble across will be good, however my favourites were: Soundart (also do live music on Wednesdays), Lanificio San Salvatore (killer Long Island Ice Teas) and Astoria. Biberon is also a great rum bar, with a pub feel and a token Tom Jones look-a-like.Amy FlynnThere’s a place on the hills, just above the Gran Madre church, which is the perfect spot to look at the city from up high. It’s close, so you can see every detail of Piazza Vittorio and the Mole, but it’s also isolated and quiet. Visit in the winter and you’ll love the amazing light displays put on every Christmas.Paola NavaWell worth a walk up the hill to get this view. Set off northwards from the Gran Madre church.Hannah BrewThis is an amazing castle in the heart of Parco del Valentino, in the middle of the city. It’s home to the Politecnico di Milano, the university of architecture, but feel free to go in and get a coffee at the bar.VallinaThe Egyptian Museum is vast. You need several hours to explore its four floors and many exhibits – from the Book of the Dead to grave goods, and the myriad statues of all sizes. I also loved watching ancient carved figures and hieroglyphs being restored by a specialist.Rossi WritesTake a peek inside Palazzo Scaglia di Verrua – it’s a gem, like most hidden courtyards in our palazzi. For shopping, go to Piazza Benefica market and grab discounted designer gear and other bargains. At night, check out the Jazz Club Torino in Piazza Valdo Fusi and the birreria next to it for amazing local beers. Look for the Maestro del Gusto (Master of Taste) sign of quality outside delicatessens, eateries and bars.Giorgia Pigato