Perched above the sea in north-west Sicily is the village of Scopello, little more than a few pretty lanes with abundant charm and a sparkling cove below, complete with rock stacks and invitingly clear water. The atmospheric old Tonnara (tuna fishery) adds character, and Scopello is a perfect base for spirit-lifting hikes through the nearby Zingaro coastal reserve: paths rise through untouched hills with wildflowers before dipping to pristine beaches otherwise only reachable by boat.riservazingaro.itmarthah This is a stretch of soft, sandy coast between Naples and Rome, backed by hills and with amazing sunsets from the beaches. Take a train from Naples or Rome to Fondi, from where it is a 15-minute bus ride to Sperlonga. Explore the sleepy streets of the old town, stroll down to the Grotto of Tiberius (a haunting, watery cave), try an ice-cream from a local gelateria and admire the view of Monte Circeo from the promenade. goncaSidestep the beachfront tourist traps and head uphill to Gastronomia San Martino. It’s worth turning up early and getting a bottle of local wine while you wait for your excellent food, with adventurous twists on pasta and seafood served on paper plates, as there are only a few seats. For a quieter beach follow the road round the coast (to the left as you exit the train station) and through the tunnel.  Via San Martino 3, +39 346 186 0764  ID7685441  The 5km stretch of sand and shingle beach from Pineto in the Teramo province of Abruzzo to Torre del Cerrano is a welcome escape from the crowds to be found packing the resorts of the Adriatic coastline. The area around the tower is a protected marine reserve and the pine woods that run parallel to the beach provide wonderful shelter from the sun. For a few weeks in summer, classical concerts are held in the tower’s landscaped gardens at sunrise: an unforgettable experience.torredelcerrano.it La Grande Quercia Not many tourists know Rome has beaches just half an hour from the city centre – a welcome relief from sightseeing. The soft sand and warm waters of Lido d’Ostia can be easily reached by taking Metro line B to Piramide, then a little local train to Lido Ostia or Ostia Antica (included in the daily travelcard for less than €10). Go in spring or autumn and you’ll almost have the place to yourself. funinfinland   Over an hour’s drive south of Salerno, running from Agropoli to Scario, the Cilento is blissfully difficult to get to. On the “shin” of Italy, in the country’s second-largest Italian national park, the Cilento is a Unesco world heritage site thanks partly to the preservation of ancient Roman footpaths. The coast of the Cilento is largely undeveloped and sometimes extremely rugged. The sea wins prizes for cleanliness and the wildest stretches are only accessible by boat. It is along these most secluded cliffs I found my favourite olive groves, overlooking the Mediterranean far below. cilentoediano.it dom100  Quaint towns such as Numana and Sirolo cling to the hillside, and the expansive beach at Mezzavalle di Portonovo is well worth the 15-minute trek when visiting the beautiful Conero peninsula. Last year we discovered a path to the rocks where fishermen’s caves are hewn into the cliff – most are abandoned but some have been reclaimed by boating aficionados. Scramble along the shore, chat with the locals and watch them dive from the rocks into the crystal-clear pools. Ian Richards  On a calm day you can hire a boat with an outboard motor from outside Marina Piccola in Sorrento. I found it really simple to drive but if you’re nervous you can hire a skipper. Head south until you see Capri, where you can dock and go on land, but sailing around Capri and Anacapri is a joy in itself. From there, head east towards Positano. There’s no better way to arrive.  marinapiccola73.com WateryEyes  The best way to travel from the north to Puglia (at the “heel” of Italy) is down the east coast by train. The track runs parallel to the coast for a whole six hours of incredible scenery. Start at Rimini or Ancona, grab a seat facing forwards and take a picnic of prosecco, prosciutto and other snacks for the trip! Virginia Stuart-Taylor   The Rifugio degli Dei (Refuge of the Gods) apartments on cliffs above the Amalfi Coast offers exceptional views of Positano and its bay. Around 280 steps lead to the apartments, so it’s not for the faint-hearted, but the rewards at the top are worth it. The family who run the business are warm and welcoming and breakfast includes homemade cakes, fresh fruit from the garden and coffee. For the brave, a further 1,000 steps take you up to the Cammino degli Dei (Path of the Gods), a cliffside walk with views across the coast that should have a place on any walker’s list. There is a beach just over the road with an outdoor bar that serves some of the best fresh fish in town. From €40pp pn or €240 per week, Via Arienzo, 43-84017, Positano, (+39) 339 8390809, rifugiodeglidei.itID8078709 Otranto is one of those little fortified towns that just makes you go “whoa!” and reach for the camera constantly. Walk around the charming historic centre, enjoy the views of the harbour and the sandy beach from the walls and let the waters of the Adriatic hypnotise you. Go for fish of the day or pasta with shellfish or sea urchin, but try to avoid the slightly overpriced restaurants on the promenade. canaria The pretty, pastel-coloured, clifftop villages on the Cinque Terre are best viewed from the sea. Park at La Spezia, take the train to Riomaggiore and hop on the little coastal boat towards Monterosso. It stops at Manarola, Corniglia and Vernazza, where you can to enjoy fresh seafood and crisp white wine at the Trattoria da Sandro. Climb to the start of the Blue Path (sentiero azzurro) to savour the iconic panoramic view of the town and harbour before continuing the two-mile hike westward. Cool down with a gelato on Monterosso’s crescent-shaped sandy beach, before returning to La Spezia by train.incinqueterre.com, cinqueterreriviera.comCaroleTidball