The European Central Bank is under pressure to open the money taps to help Italy, which is struggling to fund its debts through the private markets. Every day private lenders demand Rome pays a higher interest rate. Without help from the eurozone's central bank, Italy could go the way of Greece, Portugal and Ireland, which rely on loans supplied directly from the treasury departments of eurozone countries.Mario Draghi, the new ECB boss, has refused to offer more than limited support. He says the job of a central banker falls short of extending support to individual countries. But there is a problem with his stance: the European Financial Stability Facility, the successor to the hotchpotch of loan packages for Lisbon, Athens and Dublin, cannot cope with funding a country as big as Italy.What has the ECB done so far?The central bank for the 17 eurozone countries has lent €183bn since the beginning of the crisis. Around €110bn of that has been directed at Italy and Spain since August. Capital Economics, a London-based consultancy, said it is likely 80% was directed at Italy.How much can the ECB lend?Unlimited amounts. A central bank, such as the Bank of England, can print as much money as it likes which it can then pass on in loans to eurozone countries. Figures show the ECB spent €9.5bn buying up eurozone bonds last week, more than double the previous week's €4bn.However, many believe even such huge sums are too little too late, and that one or two trillion is needed to show the markets that the euro's central bank means business – a kind of bond market shock and awe strategy, or to use David Cameron's term, a big bazooka. The total lent by the ECB so far is small compared to the €9.2tn income of all eurozone members. In practice, the amount depends on the reaction of banks, businesses and households to a policy that floods the economy with extra currency.More cash in the economy should lead to inflation. As people and businesses spend the extra funds, so demand rises in relation to supply and inflation takes off.Are there no restrictions on the ECB?Draghi says rules adopted at the birth of the single currency prevent him favouring one country over another. The former head of the Italian central bank said his hands were tied. But analysts believe there is plenty of wriggle room and Draghi could be forced to carry out the wishes of eurozone finance ministers should they agree.What is needed for Italy?The Italians have run up debts of €1.8tn, equivalent to 120% of annual income. The yield on 10-year Italian bonds fell marginally on Thursday, but is still unsustainable. Rome will begin to spend more than 20% of its income on debt interest within a couple of years if its rates stay at the current 7% level. It will need a commitment from the ECB to lend about €700b n, says Capital Economics, to reassure the private markets.Who is blocking ECB lending to Italy?A group of countries headed by Germany. Berlin fears giving the green light to the ECB will trigger the hyperinflation that ruined the country in the 1920s. The French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, who is worried about the knock-on effects for his own country, argues that inflation worries are a red herring. The eurozone is heading for recession and inflation is falling. The supply of money is contracting as companies and households save their cash. Loans to Italy will have no impact, he says, on the wider economy. And in any case a little bit of inflation erodes debt.Is there anything else the ECB can do?It has two main options. It could cut interest rates. At the central bank's last monthly meeting it shaved 0.25 percentage points off the previous 1.5% rate. They are still higher than the UK's 0.5% and the US's 0.25%. Draghi could ease the debt burden on the entire eurozone – countries, businesses and households – not just to help Italy but also to prevent a recession that is inevitable without a change of policy.And the second option?Draghi could follow the Bank of England and the US Federal Reserve with a programme of quantitative easing. This involves printing money to buy government bonds from European banks. Increasing the demand for government bonds (which is the name given for the thousands of loans each government has built up from years of overspending) increases the price and depresses the yield, leading to lower interest rates.Why not carry out these policies?Draghi says there is no mandate for starting quantitative easing. He may cut interest rates further, though it is difficult to know what the ECB council is thinking as unlike the Fed and the UK central bank, it refuses to publish minutes of its meetings.