If a contest was to be held to choose Europe's most sexist politician, Silvio Berlusconi would undoubtedly win. It was Berlusconi who said that the Spanish cabinet, with its equal number of male and female ministers, was "too pink". It was Berlusconi who said there were not enough soldiers in the army to prevent rapes, because Italian women were too beautiful, and who suggested that foreign firms should establish themselves in Italy because Italian secretaries were the most attractive in the world.And, if it is objected that these were only words - harmless fun, in the president's own estimation - his behaviour toward the women in his own life has also been much criticised, not least by his wife. So it is fitting that a growing scandal concerning a series of beautiful women should be a cause of embarrassment, and perhaps of more than embarrassment, for a leader who had hoped at this moment to be concentrating on his statesman's duties as host of the G8 summit next month. When his wife announced her intention to divorce him because, among other reasons, of his relationship with the 18-year-old model Noemi Letizia, Berlusconi went into his standard escape and evade pattern - alternating dismissive jokes with attacks on the press while refusing to answer any questions - it seemed for a while as if he would get away with it. Now a new set of allegations has surfaced, concerning the attendance of other young women at lavish parties held at Berlusconi's villa. This seems more like dotage than dalliance.His attitude to women is only one among the constellation of reasons why Italians should not have three times voted Berlusconi into power. His refusal to recognise any conflict between his business and media interests and his political position, his attacks on parliament and the judiciary, his use of his majority to give himself immunity against prosecution, his failure to act against organised crime, his economic mismanagement and the illiberal reforms he is planning would all compete for the top position.But Berlusconi's success, sadly, is a product rather than a cause of the collapse of Italy's political system, a collapse which has fatally weakened both left and centre, leaving the field free for opportunists and xenophobes. It is a tragedy that the "mani pulite" judicial investigations into political corruption which seemed to promise a grand renewal of Italian politics in the early 90s have led Italy to this pass. Berlusconi's promise in the elections earlier this year - that he would bring Italy stability - means not much more than that Italy and the rest of Europe will have to endure him for quite a while longer.