Images of a sun-drenched Italian beach began flooding media outlets across the world on July 19. Unlike most photographs of the idyllic Mediterranean shores that usually adorn the travel sections of newspapers and glossy magazines, however, the pictures – showing two young girls' bodies laid out on the sand next to apparently oblivious sunbathers – shocked those who saw them.The bodies belonged to two Roma sisters, Violetta and Cristina, who had been selling trinkets on the beach in Torregaveta, near Naples, and who had given in to the temptation to take a refreshing dip despite not knowing how to swim. Two of their companions were saved by local lifeguards and coastguard officials, but Violetta and Cristina did not make it back alive. Their bodies were then laid out on the sand for hours while picnicking locals carried on with their day out by the sea. Paramedics eventually carried the coffins away, skirting tanned holidaymakers sprawled on their deckchairs. Despite the foreign media highlighting the "outrage" sweeping the country, reactions to the incident have been few and far between. Opera Nomadi, a Roma rights organisation, and UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, expressed their shock at onlookers' indifference. The Archbishop of Naples, Cardinal Sepe, also released a strongly worded statement, stressing the fact that he hoped "never to see such images of our city again – images which are worse than those which showed Naples covered in rubbish". Local and national politicians chose to ignore what had happened and coverage of the incident quickly faded from major news outlets.Anti-Roma sentiments are deeply entrenched in Italy, with parents still telling their children that they will be stolen by the Gypsies should they misbehave. International organisations such as the Council of Europe and the OSCE, as well as leading human rights groups, have been sounding the alarm about discrimination against the Roma in Italy for years, highlighting successive governments' systematic policy of confining Roma to run-down camps which would not look out of place in an African shanty-town.Yet the last few months have seen an unprecedented explosion of anti-Roma feelings as settlements have been torched and their inhabitants forced to flee; families have been harassed and attacked. Inflammatory statements on the part of government and opposition representatives, coupled with a frenzied media campaign linking the Roma to alleged rising crime rates, have led most Italians to view a minority whose roots in the Belpaese can be traced back to the 15th century with deep distrust. A Eurobarometer poll published on July 1 found that 47% of Italians would not want to live near Roma citizens against an EU average of 25%, 14% feel they can trust the Roma (against an EU average of 36%) and only 5% have Roma friends (the EU average is 14%).The government rolled out plans to identify Roma living in the country at the beginning of June. All Roma, including children, were supposed to be fingerprinted and to fill in forms specifying their "ethnicity" and religion. The census has sparked outrage on the national and international scene, with Terry Davis, the secretary general of the Council of Europe, stating that the Italian government plan "invites historical analogies which are so obvious that they do not even have to be spelled out". Gad Lerner, an influential editorialist, published an article in La Repubblica on July 5 in which he compared the ongoing census to the one carried out by Mussolini in 1938 prior to the rounding up and deportation of thousands of Jews. Lerner noted that most Roma have already been identified by local authorities and the police, with the census being used to demonstrate – as in 1938 – that the government is cracking down on inherently "deviant" groups. Following the uproar, government plans have been modified. The questionnaires currently being used in Roma camps make no reference to ethnicity or religion and will allegedly only serve to collect data on Roma communities' health and social inclusion. Despite the apparent backtracking, the interior minister remains adamant that the census will go ahead and that it will be over by October. In Naples and Milan, unlike Rome, where the prefect has refused to fingerprint children and the census appears to be "voluntary" (Roma who do not wish to be identified are apparently being allowed to do so) both adults and children have been fingerprinted.Violetta and Cristina, whose grandfather left Macedonia 40 years ago to start a new life in Italy, were born in Naples and lived in one of the hundreds of squalid settlements dotting the country. The girls, who were 11 and 12 when they died, were in essence Italian, despite the fact that Italian-born children whose parents are foreigners are not automatically granted Italian citizenship.Their deaths have not, apparently, dampened anti-Roma feelings – three days after they died, a Roma settlement on the outskirts of Rome was torched. Harsh new legislation cracking down on migrants has just been approved by parliament, part of a government drive to make Italy "safer". For Mioara Miclescu, a resident of the camp which was attacked on Tuesday night, and her fellow Roma, however, Italy is not a place where they feel safe. "We are afraid", she told journalists.