A week-long press freedom mission to Italy by the International Press Institute (IPI) uncovered "pockets of serious concern" about the state of the country's media.The major worry, unsurprisingly, centred on the media holdings of the prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi. These have, said IPI's report, "negative effects on the diversity and plurality of Italy's television news spectrum."It referred to Berlusconi's ownership of Italy's most powerful private broadcasting company, "in what by many democratic standards would constitute a clear conflict of interest, along with his willingness and ability to politically influence Italy's public broadcaster, RAI.According to a news report by IPI's press freedom manager Anthony Mills who led the mission, "the politicisation of public broadcaster RAI is worrisome". Though it pre-dates Berlusconi's rise to power, "it appears to have intensified under his leadership."Television concentration is significant because the vast majority of Italy's citizens use TV as a primary source of information.By contrast, IPI found that "the country's print media enjoys a far greater breadth of political opinions and freedom, although leading national newspapers were backed by powerful industrial groups and advertisers whose priorities did not always coincide with those of news editors."The institute was concerned to hear of the difficulties faced by Italian journalists in covering organised crime, particularly in regions of the country in which crime syndicates exert significant influence. But there was relief at the apparent stalling of the Italy's so-called "wiretap bill". Portrayed by the government as a measure to protect privacy, IPI considers it "questionable from a journalistically ethical perspective."Mills noted: "Portions of the bill... including restrictions on the legitimate reporting of investigations and potential fines for publishers of up to almost €500,000 had sparked strong concerns about press freedom, particularly following a string of political and corruption scandals in Italy."The IPI mission also raised its eyebrows at the official accreditation procedures for journalists. If they wish to be considered bona fide journalists they must join the National Order of Journalists, which involves sitting an exam.This is presided over not only by senior journalists but three magistrates. IPI thinks the involvement of state judicial authorities is "troubling."The mission completed its work on Friday. The members of its delegation included Simon Li, the IPI vice-chairman and former assistant managing editor at the Los Angeles Times; Alexandra Foederl-Schmid, an IPI board member and editor-in-chief of Austria's Der Standard; and Barbara Trionfi, IPI's press freedom adviser. They met a broad array of media stakeholders, politicians and government representatives. IPI will now produce a report laying out in detail its findings.Source: IPI