The Italian government was today facing an outcry from art lovers and historians following the discovery that one of the most important archives of Renaissance documents had been sold to unidentified Russian buyers, reportedly for €150m (£138m).The collected papers of the artist, architect and writer Giorgio Vasari include his correspondence with five popes, his friend Michelangelo and the ruler of Florence, Cosimo I de' Medici. They also include Vasari's notes for his own works."They want to sell a piece of our history," declared Carlo Arturo Quintavalle, professor of art history at the University of Parma. "We must stage a revolt."Born in Arezzo, Tuscany, in 1511, Vasari is regarded as the father of art history. In his Lives of the Artists, he detailed the careers of his late Renaissance contemporaries and gathered together all that was known about many of their predecessors.He was a fine painter in his own right. But he is probably best known to tourists visiting Italy for having designed the "Vasari corridor", an elevated passageway built at Cosimo's behest, which runs for a kilometre through Florence and across the River Arno.Considerable mystery surrounds the sale of Vasari's papers, which are kept in the house the artist bought for himself in his home town and which he decorated with his own frescoes. The mayor of Arezzo said he had only learned of the transaction in a letter from a government official which said it had taken place on 23 September – days before the death of the owner of the archive, Giovanni Festari.The letter informed him that, under the terms of a 1994 government order, he could block the sale by matching the price supposedly offered by a Russian company. "Madness," said the mayor. "Where am I going to find €150m? That's equivalent to five times the annual budget of the Arezzo council."The discovery comes at an embarrassing moment, as preparations are being made to celebrate the 500th anniversary of Vasari's birth. Fanfani said he would call off the events if the sale went through.In a statement, the government expressed doubts about the "vastness" of the sum involved, clearly implying it might have been inflated to scotch a rival offer. But it stressed that a government order 15 years ago had specified that the archives must remain in Vasari's house, which is owned by the state."The restriction is in place today", agreed Arezzo's mayor. "But it could be lifted tomorrow. And it is scarcely credible that someone would pay €150m to leave the archives in Arezzo."He said he had already written letters to members of the regional parliament, the Russian ambassador, the heritage minister and the prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, who by coincidence was in Russia today visiting his friend and counterpart, Vladimir Putin. "If the state doesn't block this deal, I shall be ashamed of being Italian", Fanfani declared.