If you've always wanted to sleep in a fairytale castle, you'll love this new horsey holiday staying in not one, not two, but three impressive castles. On a guided trip for intermediate and advanced riders, you'll spend the first three nights in an ivy-covered room at the 17th-century Castello di Santa Cristina, riding out to lakes for swimming and waterside lunches. Then you'll ride on to the Orsini Fortress, high above the Etruscan town of Sorano, where you'll stay for two nights. The final castle is in the centre of the little town of Proceno, and has a swimming pool with panoramic terraces – medieval living with a touch of modern luxury.• From £1,537pp for a week full-board, departures in June and September, theridingcompany.comCycling isn't the most obvious way to get to Venice, but it makes sense in a strange way. The string of long, flat, narrow islands that separate the lagoon from the Adriatic are perfect for cyclists – you can take your bike on the short boat rides between islands, then simply lock it up when you get to the Lido and take a vaporetto to Venice proper. Indeed, that is the last leg of a new independent cycling route from Inntravel, which starts in swanky Vicenza and takes in venerable Padova and the fishing port of Chioggia. On the way to Venice, the route passes through a pretty landscape of gentle green hills and valleys. Accommodation is in three- and four-star hotels, and you can spend a night or two in Venice as an optional add-on. • From £825pp for six nights' B&B, including cycle hire and luggage transportation, inntravel.co.ukSpend an idyllic week cruising around the gorgeous Amalfi coast on your very own yacht. Bareboat Sailing Holidays has yachts for charter for those with sailing qualifications, while the rest of us can hire a skipper to do the hard work as we kick back on deck or swim in the sea. Either way, the Bay of Naples and beyond is your oyster. Drop anchor at Capri, volcanic Ischia or the other Phlegrean islands; work your way along the Amalfi coastal resorts of Sorrento, Positano and Ravello; or head north to the Pontine islands. The area is dotted with great beaches and rugged landscapes, plus top-notch nightlife for party animals.• A six-berth yacht costs from £1,434 for a week in June, starting from Salerno or Procida, bareboatsailingholidays.comMake like Audrey Hepburn and Gregory Peck on a Vespa holiday for two. Don't worry, unlike the Roman Holiday stars you get one each: matching shiny red scooters for exploring the rolling hills of Tuscany. You'll stay in a luxury villa in a converted 14th-century building in Radda in Chianti, a medieval town between Siena and Florence. It's a beautiful base for exploring the surrounding vineyards and villages, and you'll be provided with lots of local information, maps and a GPS so you can hit the open road with confidence. There is also a guided group version of the holiday if you'd rather embrace your inner biker and travel in a pack.• From around €1,390pp for a week's all-inclusive stay, excluding flights, italybyvespa.comForgo creature comforts on a sea kayaking adventure around Sardinia. You're eased in gently with three days' paddling around little islands and along a river, staying in family-run hotels, before heading off on an expedition along the wild coastline. You'll spend two nights camping under the stars on deserted beaches, eating simple Sardinian food, snorkelling, rock climbing and watching the sun set over the Med. The last night is spent in a lovely agriturismo overlooking the sea, refuelling with a four-course dinner followed by a nice soft bed.• From £995pp for seven days, including accommodation, meals and equipment but excluding flights, responsibletravel.comDiscover the black volcanic beaches of the rocky Aeolian islands off Sicily on a self-guided walking trip. You'll spend four nights in a converted country house on Lipari, the main island in the archipelago, giving you plenty of time to hop over to spectacular Stromboli, where the volcano regularly erupts, and to the smaller Vulcano and relaxed Salina. After that it's off to a 400-year-old mansion in Sicily for walks with great views of Mount Etna, including one on the flanks of Europe's largest volcano. But it's not all walking and volcanoes – there are plenty of picturesque fishing villages, Roman ruins and spots for swimming, too.• From £625pp for eight days' B&B, excluding flights, for departures in April and October, walksworldwide.com