"There is a feeling in Asia that this crisis could go terribly wrong," said Stuart Gulliver, chief executive of HSBC, this morning as the yield on 10-year Italian bonds approached 7%.Actually, there's a feeling everywhere this morning that it's already going wrong. As Gulliver also said, the reality is dawning that the crisis is moving faster than politicians' ability to deal with it.With Italian yields now at 7.4% (at 11am), Italy will need a bailout if prices were to stay even roughly were they are. That's just arithmetic. As a Lombard Street Research note pointed out, International Monetary Fund (IMF) simulations show that if Italy's funding costs rose to 8%, its interest payments on outstanding debt would reach 20% of government revenues by 2015. That 20% level is generally regarded as intolerable for any country.The problem, of course, is that Italy cannot be bailed out – or, at least, not easily or quickly. The European Central Bank is not allowed to buy vast quantities of sovereign debt and its new boss, Mario Draghi, is disinclined to read his rulebook a different way. As for the European Financial Stability Facility, the intended saviour, it's not big enough and it's not even up and running. Indeed, its construction appears a complete botch: it rests on guarantees from member states rather than hard up-front cash.So something has to give. As a temporary measure, Italy could call upon the IMF for help. Alternatively, if Silvio Berlusconi were to depart immediately rather than at an unspecified time, it might be possible for the ECB to step up its buying of Italian bonds via its established Securities Market Programme, which is designed to support monetary policy; it would a blurring of the lines but, arguably, the lines are already blurred.The trouble is, both temporary solutions could quickly run out of road themselves. We seem to be fast approaching the point where Germany has to choose: either order the ECB to ignore its mandate and buy Italian bonds with enthusiasm by printing euros; or make plans to break up the single currency.More as the day unfolds …