Japan today set a target to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by up to four-fifths by 2050.The prime minister, Yasuo Fukuda, said Japan would achieve the target through carbon trading and by raising the proportion of the country's energy produced from "zero-carbon" sources, such as wind, water and solar power.Environmentalists, however, expressed disappointment with the government's failure to set an interim target for 2020. The prime minister said an interim target would be made in the future, adding that Japan could cut its current greenhouse gas emissions by 14% by 2020.Fukuda's comments came in a speech a month before he is due to host a G8 summit at which global warming will be high on the agenda.Japan is the world's second-largest economy and the world's fifth-largest emitter of greenhouses gases.Tokyo would also contribute up to $1.2bn (£600,000) to a new multilateral fund with the US and Britain to help developing countries fight global warming, Fukuda said. "When talking about the near future, we no longer have the luxury of encouraging others or spending time playing a game of setting targets for political propaganda." Kathrin Gutmann, WWF climate policy coordinator, said the organisation was disappointed at Fukuda's proposals.She chided him for setting the base year for reductions at current levels rather than 1990, as used by the European Union. Japan's emissions had risen since then, she said. "The G8 leaders need to make concrete steps forward to a low-carbon world, and Japan's Prime Minister Fukuda needs to push hard to trigger that leadership."In this light, Fukuda presents only a blurred vision, and the lack of a 2020 target for emissions reduction is utterly disappointing."Japan hopes to clinch an agreement on a "shared vision" to halve global emissions by the middle of the century at next month's G8 summit, where big emerging countries, such as China and India, will be attending a session on climate change. "It is impossible to achieve this goal without the participation of major emitter countries and unless all the countries of the world take part in some form," Fukuda said. Developing countries and the European Union, which has set a target of reducing emissions by 20% by 2020, argue that rich nations should take the lead, setting bold 2020 targets for reducing emissions.But the US – which, with China, is one of the world's biggest emitters - has said it will accept binding emissions curbs only on the condition that major emerging countries do the same, which they have so far refused to do so.Washington's stance may change after a new president takes office, in January 2009. Opposition party lawmakers and environmentalists had urged Fukuda to take a bold stance on an interim target to persuade industry and voters to get serious about climate change and convince emerging countries to join a new global framework. Today the opposition Democratic party said Fukuda had watered down his proposals. "The content is extremely meagre," said the Democratic lawmaker Katsuya Fukuda, sponsor of a bill to set a midterm target to cut emissions by 25% from 1990 levels. "It is completely unclear how he will confront the G8 summit with such content and what he will try to achieve." Fukuda said Japan would in the autumn introduce a trial system for carbon trading, seen as one effective way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. But he steered clear of giving a date for the launch of a full-scale trading scheme. Unlike the EU, which imposes a cap-and-trade system to bind polluters to mandatory emissions limits, Japan has encouraged voluntary reduction pledges from industry. Some Japanese industries, such as steelmakers, oppose a European-style system, saying it would hurt their global competitiveness. Fukuda proposed raising the proportion of Japan's energy from "zero-emission power" sources, such as nuclear, solar, wind and hydro power, to more than 50% from the current 40%. He said an environment tax should be considered as part of overall tax reforms to be debated later this year. Japan is the only one among the world's top five emitters under pressure to meet a Kyoto protocol target.Domestic industries still object to the target of reducing emissions by 6% set for Japan under Kyoto, which binds 37 industrialised nations to cut emissions by an average of 5% below 1990 levels by 2012.