The first arcades in Japan weren't video arcades, and they weren't even in game centres. In the decades following the second world war, gamers played electro-magnetic games in bowling alleys and on department store rooftops. Families would take shopping breaks, playing carnival-style shooting games or riding rinky-dink kiddy trains. Gradually, early analogue arcade games began popping up – driving games in which the road was on a rotating belt, and players had to steer a small car through obstacles. Companies like Namco and Sega started joining in, releasing magnet-powered cabinets that were the forerunners of the modern arcade game.In 1978, everything changed as Space Invaders enthralled the country – and the rest of the western world – spawning a slew of arcades and players dedicated solely to the new game. The game's release came just as Star Wars was hitting Japanese cinemas – and the timing could not have been better. Thanks to Space Invaders, for more than a decade Japanese arcades were dominated by shooting games, something that would not change until the release of Street Fighter II in 1991. Like Space Invaders, Street Fighter II, with its colourful characters and engaging gameplay, set the theme for the decade: if the 80s was about shooting, the 90s were for fighting.In the second half of the 90s, and for the bulk of the noughties, arcades opened up to an even wider audience thanks to female-aimed sticker picture machines, and rhythm games like Dance Dance Revolution. The rhythm games unleashed a new type of spectacle in Japanese arcades – this wasn't about gameplay any more, but the act of playing. Complex dance performances were performed on DDR machines, and arcades started to feel more like dance clubs. In Shibuya, Tokyo's teens line up for blocks just to squeeze into clusters of photobooths with their friends – the images can be digitally customised after they're taken, like a touch-screen Photoshop. Japanese arcades are constantly evolving as the games change.As part of the Guardian's Tokyo City Guide, we've highlighed some of the best places in the city to play games and where to buy them. Here are the most influential games in the history of Japanese arcades – click on the links below to play them.The game that started it all. Space Invaders wasn't the first ever arcade game, but it was the first to capture Japan's imagination, as dedicated arcades, called "Invader House", sprang up all over the country. It was so successful that it triggered a national shortage of ¥100 coins as kids queued up to slot money into the new machines. Space Invaders inspired games like Galaxian and Galaga. • Play Space InvadersThe 1980s were dominated by shooting games, mostly set in space, the exception to the rule being Pac-Man, which became the biggest grossing arcade game ever. The circular character became a global icon that shifted millions of bits of yellow merchandise, inspired an animated television series and even cheesy top-ten single. The pellet popping character, famously inspired by a pizza, was originally named Puckman after "paku paku", the Japanese onomatopoeic phrase for eating. But it was changed because of the English word that puck unfortunately rhymes with, and the ease of vandalising a P into an F. • Play Pac-ManThe game that made Nintendo a gaming giant, featuring, among other innovations, the first appearance of Mario, then dubbed Jumpman. While other game companies were feverishly trying to emulate Space Invaders or clone Pac-Man, Nintendo released something totally different – even if Universal Studios unsuccessfully tried to sue for ripping off King Kong! This is the first video game to feature a story, movie-style cut scenes, and the subsequently much-imitated "rescue the girl" motif. • Play Donkey KongSure, this classic run-and-gun game (you run, you shoot) aimed to capitalise on Hollywood action flicks like Commando, but it did it so well. Notoriously difficult, the game allowed two players to play co-op together, ushering in a wave of multi-player shooting games that currently dominate computer consoles. The Nintendo home console version had the infamous Konami Code, a secret code that could be entered to give players much-needed extra lives. • Play ContraWhat Space Invaders was to shooting games, Street Fighter II was to fighting games. Taking inspiration from Hong Kong kung-fu flicks, Street Fighter II featured colourful characters and cool, complicated moves that made it a game of skill, speed and strategy. The game's success meant that arcades were dominated by fighting games throughout the 1990s, and rival studios made exciting brawlers of their own (such as SNK's The King of Fighters). Street Fighter II was so popular that Nintendo designed the Super Nintendo Controller with enough buttons to play the game's home version. • Play Street Fighter II• Brian Ashcraft is a senior contributing editor of the Kotaku gaming blog