Japan yesterday defied international opinion when the authorities executed two men on the same day that a UN human rights body was due to issue a report critical of the country's death penalty.The executions brought the number of hangings in Japan this year to 15, the highest number since 1975 when 17 inmates were sent to the gallows.The two hanged men were Michitoshi Kuma, 70, and Masahiro Takashio, 55, the justice ministry said in a statement. Kuma had abducted two seven-year-old girls as they walked to school in 1992 and strangled them in his van. Takashio stabbed to death a 83-year-old woman and her 55-year-old daughter at their home in 2004, and fled with 50,000 yen (about £330) in cash.The justice minister, Eisuke Mori, said that the men had "taken precious lives", describing the cases as having caused grief and heartbreak to the families of the victims, and adding "so I humbly carried out my duty".Although domestic support for hanging remains strong, Japan is at odds with a growing international trend towards abolition of the punishment. According to a recent UN report, 141 countries have abolished the death penalty, or at least no longer use it, while 56 retain its use, including the US, Japan and China. Almost 90% of all executions in 2007 were carried out in China, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and the US.The hangings took place as the UN commission on human rights prepared to issue its first review of the human rights situation in Japan for 10 years. The report, due to have been submitted to officials in Tokyo yesterday, is expected to be critical of the use of the death penalty. "Choosing the same day to hang two men sends a clear signal to the UN that Japan is not willing to listen to criticism or take on board recommendations," said Makoto Teranaka, secretary general of Amnesty International's Japan office. Japan has executed inmates at the rate of about one every two months since the previous justice minister, Kunio Hatoyama, took office in August 2007. No executions were carried out for 15 months until 2006 because the justice minister at the time, Seiken Sugiura, said his devout Buddhist beliefs prevented his signing execution orders. Japan has also been criticised for the manner in which it carries out its "secret" executions. Inmates, some of whom spend many years on death row, are told of their impending execution shortly before they are led off to the gallows - a tactic that is an attempt to avoid eleventh-hour appeals. Their relatives and lawyers are notified after the fact so they can collect the body for cremation. Of the 101 inmates on death row in Japan, 42 are demanding retrials and another 19 plan to follow suit, according to the pressure group Forum 90.Although Teranaka stopped short of accusing the government of using the executions to detract attention from Japan's economic woes, he said it was pandering to public opinion. "Crime is falling, and the murder rate is very low, but blanket reporting of crime by the media has made people more afraid and less tolerant" he said. "In that sense the Japanese government is indulging in penal populism."