I think I might have to move to Japan. It seems to be the most brilliant country. The evidence is stacking up in such abundant piles that it is becoming foolish to ignore it. To wit:1 Sushi Obviously. It's beautiful, it looks like sweeties and yet it's healthy. You can actually feel the raw fish mopping up the burgerlesterol inside you and the industrious little bits of seaweed sweeping the accumulated crud out of your arteries and letting the blood run free once more. And it's all laid out on teeny plates for you, so you can pretend that you are either a dolly or a giant, as the fancy takes you. You just don't get to make those kind of imaginative leaps in the face of a chicken korma or an Ulster fry.2 Kitten cafes This – this may be the greatest stroke of genius any nation has ever had. Sure, the lightbulb, the telephone, the plough, the internet, Kettle Chips – they've all been great. Met a need, served a purpose. But has there ever been a more delightful, a more – and I shall coin a whole new word here, in honour of this most innovatory creation – people-enhappyfying invention than a cafe that supplies kittens to play with while you drink your coffee and eat your cake? Let me say that again, because it was by some margin the most – ah yes, already I feel it slipping seamlessly into my personal lexicon – enhappyfying story of last year and yet I never got around to mentioning it: many urban Japanese live stressful lives in apartments too small to allow them to keep their own pets, so cafes have started to spring up that supply kittens to play with while you are drinking your coffee and eating your cake.Imagine. While we have to stagger on through this vale of tears with only YouTube videos of tiny cats playing in tissue boxes to sustain us, others get to say, "Yes, I'll have a tall, non-fat macchiato, a yarn ball and a go of the blue burmese bundle of fluff in the corner, please." The rest of the world should get together and forge a giant medal, embossed with beaming urbanite faces, in honour of this achievement and hang it round Tokyo's neck. The Felix Award.3 Ear-cleaning services Stressed businessmen can now avail themselves of a new service, during which they lay their heads on the welcoming lap of a lissom young thing skilled in the art of lobe-massage and mimikaki (ear pick) wielding. For the equivalent of about £25, you can have your aural needs taken care of for half an hour.Come back here, please. Thank you. Yes, the set-up has about it something slightly, um, well, let's call it unenhappyfying for the moment. Infusing ordinary daily acts with a weird semi-erotic undertone is one of the delicate arts at which the Japanese are masters, but the basic premise is terrifically sound and, I would submit, wholly importable. Who wouldn't, after all, love half an hour of being petted like a kitten in a cafe?You would have to tweak it a bit to take away the unsavoury tang – laps provided by starched-aproned matriarchs and fully-vetted grandads sitting on battered sofas instead of charming young ladies kneeling on the ground, maybe. Women and their ears allowed in for half price to encourage a gender balance and civilising influence on the clientele, perhaps. And if anyone does misinterpret the services on offer, hey, there's only one person in that little relationship who's armed with an ear pick.Maybe I don't have to move. Maybe I just have to bring the best bits here. How difficult can it be? Twenty kittens, a bottle of olive oil and a set of mimikaki, a decommissioned Starbucks and a few decommissioned aunties, and I'm ready to roll. Now, please form an orderly queue.