Left to their own devices, relations between Japan and China are bound to improve. Both economies need each other. China is Japan's single largest trading partner and bilateral trade hit a record $345bn last year. But things in the East China Sea are rarely left to their own devices. A move by the Japanese government to defuse an attempt by nationalists to buy disputed islands in fish- and gas-rich seas, by buying them itself, has led to six days of demonstrations in China. Japanese cars and car dealerships have been attacked, factories have been torched or broken into. Hundreds of Japanese companies and offices have been forced to suspend operation. And the biggest wave of protest since the two countries normalised relations in 1972 – there were demonstrations in 70 Chinese cities – is not over yet.Tuesday is the anniversary of the Japanese attack on China in 1931 that led to the invasion and occupation lasting 14 years. That Japan should use this date above all others to reassert its sovereignty over a group of uninhabited islands is – in Chinese eyes – nothing short of provocation. As 1,000 fishing boats were on their way to the islands the Chinese know as Diaoyu and the Japanese call the Senkaku, the People's Daily warned on Monday that the incident could lead to a full-blown trade boycott.Below the surface, the politics of these mass demonstrations are a good deal more complex. They are undoubtedly officially sanctioned and serve as a useful outlet for popular rage. But whether the protests are more than just diversionary, whether they are an expression of some crisis going on in the transfer of power from one generation of leaders to another, can not be said with any confidence. It is therefore hard to predict with any accuracy just how far China will take this. Thus far, the flag-waving on the high seas has been ritualistic. Three Chinese marine surveillance ships entered Japan's territorial waters but withdrew again afterwards, and no landings were attempted.In Japan, which is facing its own general election soon, there is a good deal of anxiety. On the one hand, history teaches them that similar anti-Japanese protests in China in 2005 and 2010 were short-lived. On the other, the current prime minister, Yoshihiko Noda, who is unpopular over tax increases, faces his own pressures from those who say Japan should be more forceful in defending its territorial rights. One of those is the son of the governor of Tokyo, Shintaro Ishihara, whose plan to buy the islands in April led to the crisis. Nobuteru Ishihara is one of five candidates for the leadership of the opposition Liberal Democratic party. What both Japan and China lack is a functional mechanism for dealing with these incidents. It is high time one was created.