The dispute over uninhabited islands in the East China Sea and the extent of Beijing's claims in the South China Sea are, by common consent, typhoons gathering off shore. Rising Chinese military power, a historic multilateral dispute involving at least six sovereign nations, potentially vast oil and gas reserves, and the busiest shipping lanes in the world are all combining to form one large low-pressure centre. So the election of a Japanese prime minister on a ticket of getting tough in the territorial dispute might appear to be a further cause for concern.China's Xinhua agency lost no time in seeking to extract gain from Japan's lurch to the right. It reminded its neighbour of its second world war record and its ability to upset the status quo once more. This is grossly unfair to a modern-day Japan that, under left or rightwing control, has eschewed militarism to the point of exasperating its western allies. But this is not to say that Tokyo is immune from populist lures. If the Liberal Democratic party went ahead with a pledge to build on a group of islands it knows as the Senkakus but which China calls the Diaoyu, it would mark an unnecessary escalation. Japan's sovereignty over this group of rocks is longstanding, and China's renewed claim to them is by comparison recent, although this too is disputed. But as neither side has done anything to assert their rival claims, an uneasy peace, broken only by fishing squalls, has prevailed.It is often forgotten that a third power is involved in the dispute – Taiwan. This is the land to which the islands are closest and with which they are geologically linked. Japan's relationship with Taiwan has none of the prickliness of its relations with the Chinese mainland. Taiwan's re-elected President Ma Ying-jeou recently proposed an initiative to shelve the sovereignty dispute and jointly develop the resources that lie around and below the islands. This is the best solution but, being reasonable and internationalist, it is one that could all too easily get drowned out. Japan's purchase of the islands from their private owners was an attempt to stop nationalists from staging provocative acts. But that in turn provoked waves of attacks on Japanese businesses in China.It would not be the first time that an incoming prime minister abandons an election pledge but that is what Shinzo Abe should now do. China is Japan's biggest trading partner, and, if he wants to last longer than he did the first time he was premier, Mr Abe should play the long game. That means not upsetting the status quo whereby Japanese sovereignty is maintained by nothing more threatening than coastguard vessels. China's newly elected leaders also need time to get their feet under the table.