In the mountains of Shima Onsen, three hours north of Tokyo, the night is quiet, cold and starless. The sun dropped behind the wooded peaks hours ago, leaving behind a biting wind and snow flurries that have dragged the temperature down below -5C.The region's name explains its attraction: shima means "forty thousand"; and onsen means "hot springs". I have come here to experience old-school hospitality and bathing at a traditional Japanese inn, or ryokan.It's my first time at an onsen, but fortunately a large poster lists all the do's and don'ts. The pictures and captions explain the importance of washing thoroughly, leaving no room for ambiguity.After scrubbing my skin pink in a steamy communal bathroom, I slip on my cotton yukata robe and wooden-soled sandals and head outside, up a narrow wooden staircase that climbs the steep hillside to a small onsen overlooking the ryokan.I deposit my yukata, towel and sandals in a wicker basket in the changing room, as onsen must be enjoyed naked. I arrive at the edge of the small, rectangular pool, desperate to escape the cold. But as I dip my quickly numbing foot in, I recoil: the water is insanely hot.Tiny snowflakes melt on my skin as I hesitate awkwardly, unable to advance or retreat. The intense heat stuns my mind and body and I remain stone-still for a minute, clasping my knees. Only my eyes move, tracing the falling snowflakes as they disappear into the clouds of steam on the water's surface.I soon acclimatise to the water temperature, and feel comfortable enough to stretch out my limbs, deepen my breathing and let my muscles relax. All day I have been looking forward to this unique feeling of heat in the cold, and as I savour the all-enveloping warmth my thoughts drift back to the 12-course Japanese dinner I am still digesting.But the heat overwhelms me, after five minutes my body can no longer cope. As I stand up, I sway light-headedly for a second before stepping carefully from the pool. Retracing my steps towards the changing room I know the memory of the nocturnal onsen will linger long after the heat subsides, but for now I just want to be back indoors.• Every week Guardian Weekly publishes a Letter from one of its readers from around the world. We welcome submissions – they should focus on giving a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com