The instructor is down on his knees, peering between my legs, licking his lips like a pervert. "You're a woman," he tells me, "naked from the waist down, walking across a glass floor. Everyone is watching you from below." As I walk mindfully across the room, he commands me not to act, but to be the ekisu, or essence, of that woman. I'm at a butoh dance workshop run by Seisaku and his partner, Yuri Nagaoka, in a Tokyo community centre.Ekisu is a word I hear a lot at these workshops. There we are asked to become, among other things, the ekisu of kabuki actors portrayed in ukiyoe paintings. We freeze into positions, intensifying our expressions as the instructor vocalises the sound of a jet engine winding up.Butoh is Japan's best-known contribution to modern dance, and even those who don't know the word are probably familiar with the typical butoh form: a dancer, nude except for a fundoshi (loin cloth) and white body paint, usually with a shaved head. Developed in the 1950s, butoh still manages to surprise. My initial attraction was to the spectacle, or even gimmickry, of dancers emerging from a bath of mud, twitching and making other movements unfamiliar to me as dance.In practice, butoh feels something like a combination of modern dance, Zen meditation and yoga. Butoh workshops always contain an element of body awareness, usually imagining the body as an empty bag, animated from within by a variety of items beautiful, ugly, and neutral: fireflies, worms and ball bearings.Through seven weeks of butoh practice in Tokyo, I came to understand the form less as a spectacle, and more as a spiritual endeavour. Openness is a characteristic of any butoh workshop I've attended – but openness, in butoh, is part of a dichotomy with vulnerability. Clearly, it takes guts to become, in a public setting, the essence of fireflies or pant-less women; to improvise a dance comprised only of twitches; or to contort your face like an ukiyoe kabuki character.That's why butoh is not for everyone, and why it will never fill stadiums like Cirque du Soleil. But it's also why, as a friend and I decide over a post-workshop lunch, anyone you meet at a butoh workshop probably has a really good ekisu.