A week after an earthquake powerful enough to shift the earth's axis by 6.5 inches, shorten the day by 1.6 microseconds, and push Japan two feet into the ground, the country is struggling with multiple crises. Any one of these would test the strongest of nations. Japan has a nuclear crisis, a fuel crisis, 430,000 people homeless, 2 million households without power, 1.4 million without water – all that running concurrently with the task of recovering the bodies of over 9,000 people still thought to be missing. To say that this is the greatest emergency Japan has faced since the second world war – as the prime minister, Naoto Kan, said on Monday – is no exaggeration.Radiation levels above and around the two stricken reactors of the Fukushima Daiichi No 1 nuclear plant have reached such a peak that crews trying to douse one reactor and its spent fuel rod pool were forced back. Increasingly, the ad hoc attempts to cool down the reactors and the pools – by using high pressure hoses from fire engines and Chinook helicopters dumping water from the air – appear not to have worked. The latest status of the four reactors at the plant hardly makes reassuring reading. That leaves reconnecting the plant to the grid and restarting the cooling pumps inside as the last line of defence before a major release of radiation.It is not difficult to make the calculations of population movement that will ensue if large amounts of radioactivity are released into the atmosphere, particularly by one reactor which uses a mixture of uranium and plutonium. About 70,000 people have already been evacuated from a 20km radius around the plant, but double that number, who live within 30km, have been told to stay indoors. This advice has been contradicted by the US and Canadian governments, which have instructed their citizens who live within 80km of the plant to leave. Germany's embassy moved its operations from Tokyo to Osaka. If the Japanese government issued the same instructions to residents within 80km of the plant, you would have a major evacuation of hundreds of thousands of people. Where would they all go?The perception of danger even in areas with lower radiation levels is enough to stop truck drivers delivering much-needed fuel to the areas devastated by the tsunami from using the Tohoku Expressway. So the road is being bypassed, causing further delays. Precise, real-time information to reassure emergency workers about local radiation levels is turning out to be as important as the supplies of fuel and food that they deliver. The Tohoku Expressway and other key routes should be lined with Geiger counters.Mr Kan initially reacted well to the tsunami by mobilising 100,000 troops. He learned that lesson from the dithering of a precedessor at the time of the Kobe earthquake – the last comparable event. Mr Kan swiftly toured the earthquake zone and made a good national address on television. But he has since been absent from TV screens, letting his cabinet secretary do all the talking. With one crisis in danger of obscuring another coming up behind, Japan needs political leadership as never before. People need reassurance and a constant stream of information on which they can depend. They are getting little of either at the moment.Of all the authorities, the Tokyo Electric Power Company, the operator of the plant, comes off worst. The most dangerous uranium at the plant is not in the reactor cores but in the 11,195 spent fuel rods stored at the site. Why so many? Because it is cheaper to store them on site than to dispose of them, while Japan awaits the opening of a reprocessing plant. Temporary storage pools have become permanent fixtures at power plants. The same is practised at plants in the US. The nuclear industry's inability to deal safely with its waste is coming back to haunt it.