Political analysts have long warned that Japan has fallen prey to widespread popular discontent with the democratic process. But this week, the country succumbed to an outbreak of election fever focused on what, for many, was by far the most pressing issue of the day.Watched by millions on TV, the victors took to a stage in central Tokyo to deliver tearful acceptance speeches, as analysts offered interpretations of the vote's wider meaning.But this was not politics as usual. There was no place for greying, middle-aged men in dark suits - the candidates were dozens of teenagers and women in their early 20s, all vying for the title of president of the J-pop phenomenon AKB48.In a contest that has gripped Japan for weeks, Yuko Oshima – a relatively mature singer at the age of 23 – emerged as the most popular member of the band, whose sugar-coated refrains have rivalled their Korean counterparts for the affections of Asian pop fans.Japan's broadcasters spent weeks trailing the vote, culminating in three hours of live coverage from the Nippon Budokan venue in Tokyo on Wednesday night.Images of Oshima, who will lead the group for the next year, were plastered over the following day's newspapers and generated hours of analysis on daytime TV shows. Even the normally staid broadsheets recognised that her election, with 108,000 votes – putting her well ahead of her closest rival – was a significant moment in J-pop history.Likening herself to a flower bud about to come into full bloom, she told her fans: "You have given me water and light. But flowers wither eventually. Please be my sunshine forever."Oshima and 15 other performers earned enough votes among the 1.4 million cast to guarantee them a place in the lineup for the group's 27th single, to be released in August. The group's 90 members appear in rotation depending on their popularity with the public.The marketing brilliance did not end there: the public could only secure votes by buying a copy of the group's latest single, a Japanese and English track about the joys of summer. Each copy came with a code number enabling consumers to cast their votes online.With the most devout snapping up multiple CDs to boost the prospects of their favourite singer, the single sold a record 1.62m copies in its first week. One fan reportedly spent US$6,700 to secure 2,700 votes in online auctions.Since their debut in 2005, AKB48 have built up a huge following among girls in Japan and, more recently, other parts of Asia, as well as salarymen who flock to concerts and publicity events for the chance to shake hands and exchange a few words with their idols.The group, named after the geeky Akihabara district of Tokyo, have had a succession of million-selling singles and generated sales of more than US$200m in CD and DVD sales last year alone. Members appear in commercials for everything from chocolate to mobile phones, and they were recently enlisted in campaigns to sell Japanese government bonds and prevent teenage suicides.Their performances owe more to a heightened sense of kawaii cuteness than overt sexuality, but AKB48 members courted controversy over a recent confectionary commercial that some conservative commentators deemed inappropriate. But neither that, nor the arrest of one singer's mother for allegedly having sex with a minor, has slowed the group's rise to J-pop's apex.Together, the 48 stable has more than 230 members comprising four main groups and several smaller offshoots. Just as K-pop has outgrown its South Korean roots, sister groups have emerged in Jakarta, Taipei and Shanghai.This week's election fever has been attributed to discontent with conventional elections, with one expert even drawing an improbable comparison with the Arab spring. Hidetomi Tanaka, a professor at Jobu University, offered a more prosaic explanation. "These girls start from the amateur level with few singing and dancing skills," he told Reuters. "But the thing is they grow up with their fans."While some heralded the election as a popular challenge to the authority of the AKB48 impresario Yasushi Akimoto, the vote left some fans feeling disillusioned. "It's supposed to be a general election, but it's the people with money who determine the result," a 16-year-old high school pupil told the Asahi Shimbun. "It's like shareholders who have a bigger say if they invest more. It's not a genuine election."