Shizuku Kanzaki sips the Château Mont-Pérat 2001 Bordeaux - cue guitar-strumming musicians and raving fans. "I know what you mean - it's like Queen!" Shizuku's friend, a barman, exclaims. Next they are comparing the wine's acidity to Freddie Mercury's voice.If the standard wine manual is not for you, the manga comic series Kami no Shizuku (The Drops of God) may be just the thing to show you the difference between Burgundy and Bordeaux while keeping you gripped. Written under a nom de plume by Japanese brother and sister Shin and Yuko Kibayashi, who became wine enthusiasts after tasting an amazing Burgundy, the comic is the story of a young man, Shizuku, who discovers the beauty of wine after his father, a famous wine critic, dies and leaves an unusual will: a description of 12 wines he considers to be the best in the world, comparing them to Jesus Christ's disciples. The first person to find these "disciples" will inherit the father's wine collection, a contest that pits Shizuku against his adoptive brother, Issey Tomine, who works as a sommelier. Shizuku has no previous knowledge about wine but, with his strong senses of taste and smell, what he learnt from his father and the support of his friends, he submerges himself in the world of wine and tries to solve the mysteries of the disciple wines. The unique style of wine reviewing in Kami no Shizuku has rocked Japan, as well as the growing wine scenes of China and Korea, and boosted European wine sales in the process. "The minute it was translated into Korean, we had calls from three importers," says Basaline Granger Despagne, the producer of the Château Mont-Pérat, whose family has made wine near the Dordogne river for 250 years.Appealing to young readers and a range of budgets - wines costing £5 can spark just as much excitement among the characters as the fine Bordeaux - the comic was published in French earlier this year (as Les Gouttes de Dieu), and may make it into English one day soon. Even a film version is in the air. Manga fans, winemakers and merchants around the world eagerly anticipate the next instalment ...