The Japanese have developed their own style of Christmas, despite being largely a non-Christian people. The streets twinkle with lights, and you’ll even hear festive music, but it is not Christmas as we know it.Christmas in Japan is all about love or, more precisely, about lovers. Come Christmas Eve, you’ll find every smart hotel and restaurant fully booked with couples on what is the most important date of the year as far as impressing your other half goes. For Japanese young people, there is immense pressure to find a girlfriend or boyfriend before 24 December, even if it is just for Christmas.I had been in Tokyo for about a week. I had spent hours enjoying the outlandish Japanese youth culture and fashion in Harajuku district, nibbled on potentially fatally poisonous fugu (pufferfish) and had sung, badly, in a stylish karaoke bar.Because I was travelling alone, staying in Tokyo for a romantic Christmas wasn’t all that appealing. I decided to try something completely different. I took the bullet train to Kyoto.There, I stared in wonder at the Kinkaku-ji golden temple, its reflection shimmering gloriously on the frozen pond beside it. I strolled reverently through the dry rock garden at Ryōan-ji, one of the finest examples of Zen landscaping, and then lost myself in Gion, the city’s historic geisha district. I walked through the maze of Gion’s narrow streets, clutching an address a friend had given me, and arrived at a simple wooden building. It was a respected house of geisha. An old woman bowed, wished me “Meri Kurisumasu” and waved me upstairs.Two trainee geisha – maiko – greeted me and, with little ceremony, peeled off my clothes. Moments later I was shivering in a thin slip. A thick white paste was adeptly applied to my face and neck – I was thankful that modern geishas no longer use nightingale guano to whiten their faces.Two hours later, I emerged transformed, though bewildered and barely able to breathe or walk. The white paste had hardened like a mask, my torso was as tightly bound as an Egyptian mummy, and I was draped in an extraordinarily heavy silk kimono. On my head was an enormous, unwieldy wig-cum-helmet, complete with braids and baubles. I couldn’t have looked more festive. (Then, over a decade ago, I was lucky to have a friend with connections: to be allowed into the world of the geisha for a day was a chance of a lifetime. Now, a “transformation experience” can be booked online.)Later that evening, my face scrubbed and breathing easier back in my own clothes, I joined the throng at KFC for another modern Japanese tradition: Christmas Day fried chicken. Altogether, it was the most unforgettable Christmas I’ve ever had. • The Maica dress-up shop in Kyoto (maica.tv/e/) has various geisha and samurai “transformation” packages for around £70