During the second week of September, I attended the World Assembly for Women in Tokyo (Waw! Tokyo). This four-day event brought together both international and Japanese leaders across politics and business. I was impressed by the real sense of urgency in working together to increase women’s active role in economies worldwide – and by the efforts of prime minister Shinzo Abe to champion the need for women to play a vital role in reinvigorating the Japanese economy.Organised by the government of Japan, along with other Japanese organisations and institutions, the focus of the event was the link between female participation in the workforce and economic growth. This is particularly pertinent to Japan, which has an increasingly ageing population and a very great need for higher labour force participation rates among women. Even though Japanese women graduates are among the best qualified in the world, they face huge discrimination in the workforce – and this is despite the Equal Opportunity Employment law which came to effect in the country in 1986. Increasing the level of women’s participation in the labour market to that of men’s could see 7.1m people join Japan’s shrinking workforce, potentially increasing the country’s GDP by nearly 13%. While female representation on Japanese company boards is a mere 1%.While women in north America and Europe have been vital participants in the workforce since the 1960s, going from housewives, to clerical workers and finally to top executives, Japan has lagged behind. Now about 60% of women quit their jobs when their first child is born.Prime minister Abe believes that in order to modernise the Japanese economy, the country needs to start “tapping into its most underutilised resource: Japanese women”. Abe insists that his policies are all about empowering women and is actively trying to promote higher participation rates with his goal for Japan to have 30% of all leadership positions filled by women by 2020.During the opening session of Waw! I joined Japan’s first lady Akie Abe in conversation on stage. In a country where first ladies are considered best when seen but not heard, Mrs Abe’s public appearance at a government-sponsored women’s conference was anything but conventional. Mrs Abe is a huge supporter of her husband’s policy of promoting women’s advancement, which has been described as “womenomics”. In a light hearted exchange with her husband on stage, she revealed that he undertakes domestic chores, something that may seem unremarkable, but given that only 2.6% of men take paternity leave in Japan for fear of harming their career prospects, her message was clear albeit subtle, that men have a part to play in helping women take their place in the workforce.2015 is the 20th anniversary of the Beijing declaration and Platform for Action, and the 59th session of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) will be held in March. This will be an opportunity to measure progress in achieving gender equality during the past 20 years, and also a space to come up with innovative ideas on how to move forward, as still no country in the world has achieved equal opportunities for women and men.There is also real momentum to strengthen women’s empowerment within the post-2015 development agenda. This link between female participation in the workforce and economic growth is at the heart of our work at the Cherie Blair Foundation for Women. We are calling for gender equality to be mainstreamed across the new framework – not buried within specific goals.Women are still disproportionately concentrated in the informal economy. We urgently need a joint effort by governments, international institutions and non-governmental organisations to ensure women are at the heart of economic growth across developing economies – without this, a valuable opportunity for sustained improvement to the lives of millions of people will be lost.