A few weeks have passed since my fiancee Katy Morrison and I were selected ahead of nearly 2,000 other applicants from 85 countries to become travel volunteers in Japan. A judging panel headed by a local tour agency came up with the idea in order to give a realistic account of Japan's tourism industry following the trio of disasters in March this year. Now we're darting around the country, blogging every day, and we will cover all of its 47 prefectures. We've got just 100 days to do it.It is not, as some of my friends continue to assert, just a big holiday. An average day will have us out at 8am, back by 10pm, with the blog uploaded sometime around midnight.But if there are complaints, they're extremely minor. By the time we're finished, we'll have seen parts of the country that most Japanese never get to, and, hopefully, have helped the country recover a little quicker along the way.With more than 30 prefectures still to visit, here are ten of the highlights so far.As far as aggressive alcoholics go, the Namahage aren't a bad bunch – they just want you to think they are. Or, more accurately, they want your kids to think they are. Every New Year's Eve, these anti-Santas visit homes to terrify children into promising to behave over the coming year. The parents, meanwhile, stand in mock shock as the monsters threaten to abduct their soon-traumatised offspring. Eventually the beasts (the Namahage, that is) are appeased with a healthy dose of sake. Would Supernanny approve? Does it matter? For those who can't make it on 31 December, the appropriately named Oga district has a museum and several Namahage re-enactments throughout the day. • Namahage Museum, Aza-Mizukuisawa, Shinzan, Kitaura, namahage.co.jp, adults £4.20, children £2.10There are hundreds of onsens – traditional, strictly naked Japanese spas – around the country, but they're of wildly varying quality. Some are little more then leisure centres with communal baths. The best are more like Nyutou Onsenkyo, deep in Akita prefecture. Once upon a time this was the kind of place where a ninja would have slipped through the low bamboo roof and tried to catch a samurai off-guard. Steam rises from milky volcanic water in tiny wooden huts with the sound of a stream running just outside the clouded window: altogether almost certainly enough to have distracted the other patrons as I wrestled awkwardly with the concept of my nakedness. • Nyutou Onsenkyo spa, tsurunoyu.com/english, £4.20 for a day pass, 10am-3pmThe hour-long trek to the top of Mount Hakodate would be worth recommending at any time of the year. Within a few minutes of starting the trail, the noise of the city below drops off completely, and the views from the top are spectacular day and night. But at the end of summer, during the typhoon season, electrical storms are a fairly regular occurrence. Then the views become genuinely dramatic. We made it up just in time to see the start of a colossal cloud burst, lightning and all, before we were sent running for cover, giggling and trembling as the thunder shook the observation deck.There are plenty of towns and cities in Japan that are almost unbearably normal. Perhaps that's not surprising as the second world war effectively hit the reset button across the country. Initially, we'd worried that Towada City in the far north of Honshu might be crushingly functional, but then we were taken to the Towada Art Center. Sometime just before the global financial crisis (it's hard to imagine it getting the green light today) the city commissioned a very modern art gallery featuring works from Ron Mueck, Hans Op de Beeck and Yoko Ono, among others. The little white building hasn't been enough to contain it all, though, so dozens of works are out in the street too.To the mild disappointment of many people we meet on the road, despite being Scottish I don't actually like whisky. But that seems to be changing with my visit to Japan. It's not technically Scotch but Nikka whisky is as close as it gets: Masataka Taketsuru founded the company in the otherwise unremarkable town of Yoichi, after studying the distilling process in Glasgow. He picked Hokkaido as the site of his maiden factory as he thought it most like Scotland – the Glaswegian wife he brought back with him in 1920 agreed. How their union would have gone down in the Wee Smoke when razor gangs were ruling the streets I can only imagine, but years later the whisky and its visitors' centre are roaring successes. • Yoichi distillery, nikka.com/eng, +81 135 23 3131, self-guided tours free, 9am-5pmWith a plate of shark fin soup sitting next to a bamboo bowl of whale sashimi in Konnyaku Basho, we were getting ready to saddle the high horse when our guide explained that everything in the restaurant is made from miracle food konnyaku (also known as elephant yam). Nothing was as it seemed: the grilled chicken tasted like grilled chicken; the clam tasted like clam; the snozberries tasted like snozberries. Presumably the whale and shark were accurate representations too (neither were very nice) which meant our innocence was intact – and not just because konnyaku is said to be virtually fat-, calorie-, soy- and gluten-free.Even the locals aren't sure if Kurobe Gorge falls within what are known as the Japanese Alps or not. To us, it didn't'really matter: the train ride over rickety bridges, along tracks that wailed like perturbed banshees, was unforgettable. The half-dozen hydro-electric power stations that line the river below are, in light of the Fukushima disaster, probably more popular than ever. And when we looked up at the waterfalls, at the soaring pine trees that covered mountains beyond mountains, we didn't really notice them. The track was originally laid to transport workers further into the gorge for excavations – what a commute that must have been. • Kurobe Gorge train, kurotetu.co.jp/en, return fare from Unazuki to Kuronagi, adults £5.65, children £2.35It may reek of novelty tourism, but the "cuckoo dumplings" you can eat at the viewing platform for the Gembikei Gorge are worth the 400 yen (£4.35). Patrons are invited to place their money in a basket which is then whisked away on a pulley system over the green waters below. All being well, a few seconds later it returns with three sticks of gooey rice dumplings covered in soy, sesame and sweet bean paste. They didn't sustain us all day, so I shelved my dignity for half an hour to indulge in the gluttonous practise of wanko soba, a speciality in Iwate. It sounds like a dare between students, but the idea is to eat as many small bowls of buckwheat noodles as you can. I got to 36 before nausea took over.All the carbohydrates in Hiraizumi were at least put to use walking around nearby Mount Kanzan, the centre of Japan's newest Unesco world heritage site. Full of tales of bloodthirsty warlords, disembowelments and deaths by blunt sword, it delivers on the fantasies of every baka gaijin (stupid foreigner) about feudal Japan. There are half a dozen pagodas, temples and shrines spread across the hill, the star of which is Chusonji, the Golden Hall. Unlike much of Iwate's coast, the site escaped any significant damage during the earthquake and was only added to Unesco's list in June. When so many other foreign bodies deserted this stricken prefecture, it's somehow reassuring to know that the UN had not.Less than 20 minutes away from the very worst of the tsunami zone, the Shiogama Nakaoroshi fish market was heavy damaged on 11 March. Six months later it was as though nothing happened: old men were elbow deep in enormous tuna heads while their wives tried to tempt us with writhing octopus. We walked around collecting the best offerings at knock-down prices, then sat down for a sashimi breakfast. Not all of it was good: uni (sea urchin) looks and tastes like a dolphin has sneezed on the plate. But the caught-that-morning tuna, mackerel, eel and scallops were oishii (delicious). Washed down with a can of cold coffee, it was the sort of breakfast that would have our grandparents grimacing in disgust. They're missing out.