I am sitting in an onsen, an open-air hot volcanic pool, looking at a Japanese guy meditating with an inch of fresh powder on his head. This has to be the strangest après ski ritual I have ever experienced but it's the perfect interlude between skiing and hitting the karaoke bar.I had an image in my head of what skiing in Niseko was going to be like. Located 500 miles north of Tokyo, Niseko is the largest resort on Hokkaido, Japan's second largest island. It's at the fat end of Japan's 600 plus resorts, with 60 runs, although it can't compete with Shiga Kogen on Honshu with 179. I'd imagined state-of-the-art lifts packed with skiers squeezed in by those guys you get on Japanese commuter trains, whisking you off to the top of the mountain in seconds. Actually the lifts are quite basic. Some we christen "danglers" are just a single half-wooden seat with no safety barrier swinging you up to the summit, like kittens by the scruff of their necks. Niseko village is small, arranged around one set of traffic lights. Everything is covered in metres-thick drifts, and the windows of the wooden guesthouses and bar doorways peek out from under their huge snow hats. The feel is traditional, yet touches of technology remind you you're in Japan. For instance, there's no ATM, yet the main road is heated. These contrasts are everywhere: young Japanese boarders plugged into their i-Pods, while 1940s-style loudspeakers blare across the pistes. The Higashiyama Prince Hotel rising up like a moon base, dwarfs our small green wooden backpacker's hostel, Shizenkan. Fish-tail flouro-painted boards on the slopes set against the hire shop board we were offered that Rolf Harris could have got a tune out of. Another reminder of where we are is the karaoke bar. We are greeted at the door by a "song-pusher", who thrusts paper and pencils in our hands and does a little jig to encourage us to sing. It doesn't work. There is a woman singing an intimidatingly pitch-perfect version of Christina Aguilera's "Beautiful". Then a bloke growls his way through something unrecognisable, threatening to set off several small avalanches.  Skiing attracts people that love barging you out of the way in a queue. In Niseko, it's more relaxed and friendly. There are always people on hand to help you on the gondolas or to brush the snow off the chairs before you sit down. They give it a brush even if there isn't any snow, suggesting this is a matter of courtesy. Admittedly there are hardly any queues to barge. As Hokkaido has a relatively small population, it means the slopes are often empty. More than 50% of the skiers who visit are Australian. Skiing in Japan is popular among Australians because of its accessibility compared to Europe and North America. As an Aussie guest at our hostel said, "This was going to be a trip to Europe, until I looked at the price and realised I could come here for half the cost". The Australian contingent fuels another contrast: the small but lively bars, like Splash and Wild Bill's, which have a completely different atmosphere to the restaurants which feel more Japanese. Lying back on cushions in our socks at low tables eating yakitori (grilled meats) off a skewer feels like the more authentic Japanese après ski experience. Reliable snow has to be weighed against the lack of gradient and scale compared to the big North American or European ski areas, however. The runs tend to be short with few steep sections and not all are groomed. However, it keeps us interested not least because of the night skiing. Niseko has the best in the world. We ski every night apart from one when the temperature drops so low our nostrils start to freeze. My friends have invested in Hannibal Lector-style face masks, but I only have a thin scarf and my face nearly freezes off. But blasting down an empty run three abreast, in the dark, is the most snow-derived fun I've had in years.There's also a huge amount of off-piste available. The risks of skiing the back country are relatively high given there's no avalanche bombing and the weather sets in quickly. We found this out when we started an off-piste itinerary in bright sunshine which soon became a white-out as the weather closed in. Accompanying the snow showers was a dramatic fall in temperature, and when one of the lads hadn't arrived at the lift after an hour, we decided to contact the ski patrol. We were just pinpointing where we'd last seen him, when he rang. He'd got lost but luckily spotted a couple of boarders who were being guided back to the resort. He followed them and ended up walking out through chest deep powder. He dried his sweat-soaked clothing over the log stove in our favourite lunch spot - the 1,000m Hut. The 1000m Hut is what Niseko does best. A small traditional restaurant where the atmosphere is warm and friendly and the food reasonably-priced (750 yen for pork soup and rice). In fact, all the food on the hill is better value than in town where the portions are small and expensive. At one restaurant we were served one shrimp in a glass as a starter. Over lunch, Rocky Osaki, who works at the hut, tells us that Hokkaido is still mainly a rural island. He says a lot of the farming villages are disappearing as young Japanese are moving to the cities to find work and not returning. He manages a fishing centre and it is his dream that skiing will attract more foreign tourists who might also be keen to visit the more remote parts of the island where a foreign face is still a novelty. Outside the hut is an old bell which is rung by passing skiers. On the wall of the hut is the explanation: "The bell of Mr Kosukegawa. His age was over 100 years. He loved to ski in Niseko. He built the bell to pray for the safety of the skiers. Now, he listens to the bell in heaven. Please ring the bell for Mr Kosukegawa". The trick will be to deliver further proposed development without losing these traditional touches that give Niseko its charm.Tom Collinson is the writer of radio 4's Self Storage, which begins its second series in the autumn.Shizenkan offers backpacker private rooms for 14 nights (based on triple share) and a 13-day all mountain pass, plus airport transfers for £536 per person.Ski Independence offers 10 nights in Niseko from £1,199 per person, including return flights from London Heathrow, return transfers and accommodation in the Niseko Apartments (4 star), based on two people sharing a one bedroom apartment. This price is based on a mid-March departure date. Call 0845 310 3030 for details