

12.15am GMT
00:15

We’ve covered many a mile, set a new record for markets visited in one day, flown in a hot air balloon, located a large, tame pig, and had a fascinating and fruitful discussion about the future of the city for women. Phew …Sincere thanks to all our intrepid live bloggers, to Gustavo and Lisa at MásPorMás for their hospitality, to Sean and all the team at Flying Pictures (including pilot Odin Aragon, a national champion no less), and to Elena at Rosetta for introducing us to some heavenly new culinary experiences.And we’ve got loads more to come through the rest of our special live week in Mexico City. Tomorrow we’ll be in Iztapalapa at the Deportivo Chavos Banda – look out for a really fascinating story on this pioneering community centre; on Wednesday we hope to interview the mayor of the city; and on Thursday our Latin-America correspondent, Jonathan Watts, will be on the tortuous trail of Mexico City’s water supply, as it is pumped up nearly 2km and along almost 150km to reach (some of) the city.We won’t be live-blogging, but you can follow us throughout the week on Twitter #GuardianMexico, on Instagram, and on the Guardian Cities website. Hasta mañana. MH Updated
at 3.29am GMT


12.06am GMT
00:06

Proof at last: Guardian Cities has come face to face with the mythical Roma Pig.I have now met the world-famous pig of Mexico City. #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/MohNJVK6BIThe first thing you have to know about La Chata, Mexico City’s (now) most famous pig, is that she’s out here for herself, not for you. Or, as her owner Angel Arredondo explained: “She’s a bit of a diva.”No wonder: she’s got people taking her picture where ever she goes, asking for selfies, even stopping cars and motorcycles abruptly to gawk at her magnificence. Miss Piggy would be justifiably jealous.Arredondo has had her a year and a half, ever since his girlfriend brought her home as a birthday gift. He thought it was a crazy idea but, within a few days, he was in love ... and so were all his neighbours.Walks are some of La Chata’s favourite things, both because of the attention of strangers and to greet her friends, from the guys at the taco shop to the newsstand lady who sneaks her chips.She even has her own official artist, Ruben Ochoa, best known for (appropriately enough) Bestiary, a take on the seven deadly sins. Ochoa risks life and limb for that perfect photograph of La Chata crossing the road, getting a bath or scaring the neighborhood dogs, who aren’t quite sure what those squeals and grunts mean.To follow La Chata’s urban adventures (and you should), check her out on Instagram or Twitter: @LaChataPigMCUpdated
at 12.46am GMT


11.57pm GMT
23:57

Martin’s incredible expedition around Mexico City’s markets concludes in Tepito, at the Altar de Santa Muerte.Altar de Santa Muerte, Tipito. "There's no good or bad, just faith" #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/XM2PJsDwGoWe’ve just been talking to the indomitable Doña Queta, who set up the DF’s biggest shrine to Santa Muerte in 2001. It’s in Tepito, a neighbourhood best known as Mexico City’s most dangerous.The shrine itself is pretty modest : behind polished glass stands a skeleton dressed in white satin – La Flaca (the skinny lady). Every first of the month, thousands crowd into the street outside Doña Queta’s house to pay their respects.“The church doesn’t like us, but we live in a free country and we can do whatever we like,” she said. “Dios es el mas chignon.” Loosely translated: God is the baddest motherfucker."A civilization which denies death ends up denying life" - Octavio Paz, the Labyrinth of Solitude #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/7dosb7J8zdUpdated
at 4.00pm GMT


11.24pm GMT
23:24

On the border between La Condesa and Roma lies Parque México. It’s a little green oasis with smooth brick sidewalks, well-maintained gardens ... and lots and lots of dogs, on and off leash, at almost any time of day. Dog walker in La Condesa #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/JnVSC6oHlUMexico City’s inhabitants love their dogs: the rise in income and education, along with people’s choices to put off parenthood and have fewer children, have led to a boom in pet ownership. The city is home to as many as 3 million pet dogs; New York City, by comparison, has around 600,000.But all hasn’t been well of late: a serial dog-killer was stalking the bushes of Parque México in October, and poisoned 19 dogs in just four days. Police eventually arrested a 75-year-old resident, reportedly angry about off-leash dogs and unscooped poop, who was said to have spread tainted food in the underbrush. (The suspect has reportedly since been released.) MC

11.05pm GMT
23:05

Martin Hodgson is outside the federal prosecutors’ office.Protesters have been camped out here since December, demanding the safe return of 43 teacher-training students who disappeared just over a year ago, after they were with local police in the town of Iguala. The case has become emblematic of state violence and impunity – and the vast number of people who disappear every year in Mexico.Protestors camp outside federal prosecutors' demanding return of 43 missing students #Ayotzinapa #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/vwttkne8f0“We can’t let this continue in the 21st century. It’s the worst barbarity. But most people are indifferent because they’re too focused on their daily lives,” said one protester, Victor.Twenty-eight thousand people have officially disappeared since 2006, but the real figure is thought to be much higher: mass graves are discovered with depressing regularity. Activists in Mexico City calculate that around 1,000 women disappear in the capital every year.Updated
at 11.17pm GMT


10.25pm GMT
22:25

Today’s discussion at the Frida Kahlo Museum culminated in our all-female panel (of all ages and backgrounds) drawing up a set of recommendations for the city’s authorities. Here are three key points from their “manifesto for the city”:(1) Insecurity and violence against women continues to be the number one priority for women living in the city. This panel seeks urgent action to tackle society’s tolerance of the harassment of women – in public and private spaces, including among those working within an official capacity – and to challenge women’s representation as lesser, sexual objects in the mainstream media. (2) The absence of gender equality within the school curriculum is a huge concern. There is an urgent need for programmes (within both public and private schools) that teach all children about equality, rights, sexual choice, sexual health, diversity and respect. It must be a priority that women defending the rights of other women can carry out their work safely and securely. Any threats or violence against female human rights defenders – for example, the massacre in Navarte – must be a priority for the city’s authorities. It must be dealt with transparently within the criminal justice system and not be played out in the media.(3) The vast majority of women in the city rely on public transport, where many feel vulnerable and unsafe. Women-only carriages will only be effective if they are properly controlled – and even then, they are only part of a solution. There must be long-term, effective public campaigns to eradicate sexual harassment, which must include messages about equality and respect from school-age onwards. A more detailed report on the discussion, and a full set of the recommendations arrived at, will be published later this week. MH

9.52pm GMT
21:52

It’s a heady time for Mexican film-makers abroad. The country has bred the past two Academy Award winners for best director: Alfonso Cuarón for Gravity and Alejandro González Iñárritu for Birdman (Or the Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance). And Emmanuel “Chivo” Lubezki rode both those films to two consecutive Oscars for best cinematographer.Cuarón and Lubezki have another thing in common: they both went to the prestigious CUEC film school of Mexico City.So we knew that challenging CUEC’s first-year class to make a series of three-minute films about Mexico City would generate something interesting.On Friday, they screened the results for us. Here’s one.I say again: first-year students. It’s enough to make you hopeful that the days of judging Mexican directors by their Oscar haul are numbered. Though the students also had an axe to grind about how difficult it is to distribute independent Mexican films, even in Mexico. “So far from God, so close to the United States.”More to come.CMUpdated
at 10.13pm GMT


9.22pm GMT
21:22

Martin has spent some time with the migrants at La Merced market.Mexico City’s been a magnet for migrants since the Revolution, and people are still coming from the countryside, to flee violence or find work.For no particular reason, these butchers at La Merced market broke into a chorus of "¡Viva México!" #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/fQLy24m7Z3...which quickly became a chant of "¡ Que viva Oaxaca!" in honour of their home town #GuardianMexico“In the countryside there are no jobs, so we had to move,” said Ricardo, who was selling calla lillies. “I don’t like Mexico City, but I had no choice.”Valeria selling jelly in La Merced market: "Mexico City is pretty but I worry about insecurity here" #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/Gjc5a04e4JAnother woman, Elena, said she and her family had moved to the DF from Guerrero when their father was killed 40 years ago.Luís + tripe: "The best thing about Mexico City? You can find anything. The worst? Too many people" #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/YZ6TwjIMcBBut what’s striking is how migrants hold on to their identity: even though Elena has never been back to her home state, she still called herself a Guerrerense.Rosa, who was selling potatoes and tomatoes in a corner of the Merced market, is a member of the Mazahua indigenous group. She moved to the city from Michoacán when she was five years old; she’s 55 now, but doesn’t consider herself a chilango and still speaks Mazahua at home. “You don’t give up who you are just because you move.”Gabby and Anna-Maria selling nopal cactus in La Merced market. #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/Yi5jCtr1htGabby (above) and Alejandro moved from Oaxaca six years ago in search of work, but now that their daughter, Anna Maria (pictured) is starting to grow, they’re thinking of heading back. “When we were younger there was no work in Oaxaca, but things are starting to change now, so we’d like to go back home. The food is much better there...”Updated
at 9.23pm GMT


9.00pm GMT
21:00

As mentioned, Guardian Cities was in a need of a temporary home to bring you this live week of content, and we are very grateful to Mexico City’s leading free newspaper, máspormás, for welcoming us into their (literally) brand new office building today.While here we’ve come across a really interesting new project of theirs called Pictoline. It’s a constant stream of smart data visualisations tackling a wide range of news and lifestyle stories from around the world. Here’s a recent one we like (also good for practising your Spanish) …Estas son las palabras (y conceptos) más populares del 2015 pic.twitter.com/iN4zfYugaC… and a brief video explaining more about Pictoline:MH

8.53pm GMT
20:53

Meanwhile, back at Rosetta in Colonia, we’ve been tasting some really exquisite, locally sourced examples of Mexican cooking, courtesy of Elena Reygadas and her talented team. Here are some photos to make your collective mouths water ...This indescribably delicious dish is a persimmon salad, mixed with requesón cheese (a type of ricotta), all manner of herbs (sorrel, shiso, mint, tarragon), plus pistachios for added crunch. Personally, I don’t ever remember trying a persimmon before, and now I have, I don’t think I’m ever going to look at a tomato the same way again.And this is an octopus rushed here fresh from Campeche, a state on the Yucatán Peninsula, then accompanied by chickpeas, coriander and purslane.There is desert too, but I honestly think it would be cruel to show you a photo of it – so I’ll just tell you the ingredients and let you imagine for yourself:Red mole sauce with chocolate in a peanut ice cream, dressed with caramelised peanuts with salt, toasted corn and – who’d have thought it? – lemon thyme. Heaven. MH

8.24pm GMT
20:24

It’s not always easy switching between different locations and subjects across Mexico City today. We want to capture all the excitement of being in the city, but we’re also feeling pretty serious about some of the tough conversations that have been had by our guests at the Frida Kahlo Museum today.Some of Mexico City's most influential women @museofridakahlo discussing challenges for women in DF #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/xWZNJXLqMTWe will certainly follow up on some of the important points that have been made – for example, we’ll talk at length to Marcelina Bautista and other (anonymous) domestic workers this week about their often gruelling experiences of life in Mexico City. Marcelina herself moved here aged 14 to work as a live-in housekeeper, and worked as a domestic for 22 years – often in very difficult circumstances.Then in 2000, she set up the Centre for Support and Training of Domestic Workers (Caceh) – an employment rights association which recently converted into a fully-fledged union, becoming the first national union in Mexico to be run by domestic workers themselves. It’s been an honour to have her and the rest of this eminent group of Mexico City women sharing their experiences with us today. MH

7.34pm GMT
19:34

Back at the Casa Azul, the discussion on women and Mexico City is exploring inequality, violence and security …“The city is a microcosm of the best and the worst of Mexico. Security and inequality are huge challenges for women here” – @DeniseDresserG"Last year 178 women were assassinated in Mexico City. Just 31 cases were investigated as feminicide": Luz Estrada of @OCNF #GuardianMexicoLuz Estrada on feminicide in Mexico: "we still don’t have clarity on what’s making women disappear. They are invisible" #GuardianMexicoMarcelina Bautista (from Un Trabajo Digno) talked about the situation of domestic workers in the city and the discrimination and violence they suffer from their employers, including the negation of their identity (forcing them to change their names) and physical abuse. The law doesn’t stipulate a minimum salary for domestic workers. 2.3 million people work as domestic workers in Mexico – in Mexico City there are 250,000, the majority of them women.

7.26pm GMT
19:26

Martin’s latest market visit is the freakiest yet.Mercado de Sonora, for all your spiritual-magical-syncretic needs #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/LOegWdl0vLThe Sonora Market specialises in medicinal plants and herbs ... and the paraphernalia of the paranormal. Stalls here sell everything from statues of Catholic saints to beads for Cuban Santería, from Copal incense to “Break-up-couples shampoo” and “Pants-off lotion”. Javier sells Santería artefacts: "I'm not a Santero, but everyone's got to believe in something" #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/yZFZN4chSwDoña Aurora: "Mexico City is getting better. When I started here the roof was made of cardboard" #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/GDNVE5UR9WThere are plenty of folks saints are on display, too – figures of power in popular religion, but not recognised (and sometimes actively repressed) by the Catholic church. Some are from as far away as Venezula, such as Jose Gregorio and the Three Powers of the María Lionza faith. But several are specifically Mexican: Jesus Malverde, known as the “angel of the poor” or the “narcosaint”, and Santa Muerte, or Holy Death. Doña Flor: "all the saints are powerful, but Santa Muerte is the strongest. Don't make her angry." #GuardianMexico pic.twitter.com/tyzv8rFYoIAlso known as the Skinny Lady or the Bony Lady, Santa Muerte emerged some time in the 20th century, but in the past 15 years has become enormously popular among Mexico’s poor and downtrodden. She is considered to be particularly powerful, but also vengeful. “Sometimes people promise to make an offering and she helps them,” says Doña Flor. “But if they don’t keep their word, then everything they asked for will turn out wrong.”See more images of Sante Muerte here.  Related: Inside Santa Muerte, Mexico's cult of death - in pictures 

7.14pm GMT
19:14

Pigwatch: Hour 4Reports are surfacing from people who claim they knew the pig before he was cool.I once met the pig (before he got famous) at a party in la Roma. He's called Harrison and his best mate's a husky. Nice guy. #GuardianMexicoThanks Peter ... but can we really trust this information? Given that the crack investigative team at Máspormás – whose headquarters Guardian Cities are working from this week – reports that the pig’s name is, in fact, El Chata?@guardiancities Everything is explained here: https://t.co/VRRosnbejz She's a Vietnamese pig and her name is 'Chata'. #GuardianMexicoStay tuned for an exclusive interview with the pig at 5pm CST. All will be revealed.CM