While visions of taxes and tea parties danced in the heads of most Americans last week, preparations were being made south of the border to welcome President Barack Obama, who stopped over in Mexico City for less than a day before heading off to the Summit of the Americas in Trinidad and Tobago – just long enough to give Mexico bragging rights as the first country in the hemisphere to welcome him.An official state visit from the world's most popular and powerful leader, no less. A historic opportunity. Given the current panorama and dire nature of bilateral issues – immigration, drug trafficking, arms trafficking, Nafta enforcement – local expectations ran high. As the front page of tabloid La Prensa put it: "Our future hangs in the balance!"US secretary of state Hillary Clinton had already set the stage back in March, and Obama's arrival was timed to coincide with Alan Bersin's déjà vu appointment as the new border tsar. For days, the press bubbled with an anticipation unparalleled since Kennedy's visit in 1962. Analysing Mexican media coverage of Obama's visit takes longer than the visit itself did. President Felipe Calderón rolled out the bulletproof red carpet to welcome the world's most powerful political leader: 4,500 local and federal agents. A military salute. Choirs of fresh-faced children. A cordoned route along a one-mile stretch of Reforma Boulevard that led from the helicopter pad at Campo Marte to the press conference at the presidential residence, Los Pinos, over to the gala dinner at the Museum of Anthropology, then back to his suite at the aptly named Hotel Presidente. Transportation was furnished by The Beast, a limousine outfitted with shotguns and tear gas, a chassis reinforced with a five-inch steel plate to withstand any blasts, kevlar-coated tires, wi-fi and direct satellite communications with the Pentagon and vice-president to tide him over during those 10-minute car rides and (my personal favourite) a trunk equipped with bottles of the president's blood in case of emergency. Fortunately, no transfusions were necessary.So after all the build-up, what was in the news the next day? Obama admitted, as his secretary of state had before him, shared responsibility for the ongoing cartel-related violence in northern Mexico. Calderón obligingly offered several strategies to contain the flow of semi-automatic weapons into Mexico – where gun-control legislation is far more stringent – without challenging the constitutional right to bear arms in the US.Other than that, there were only a few tidbits scattered among the overwhelming consensus that Nothing Happened.During a gala dinner graced by the presence of the world's richest man, Carlos Slim Helú, Obama was approached by teachers' union leader Elba Esther Gordillo, a rather polemic figure who helped swing the presidential elections in 2006. Clinging to his arm, she pointed out Calderón and assured Obama that he's a "good man".But look who didn't come to dinner: members of Congress representing the leftwing Labour, Alternative and Social Convergence parties had first been invited, then crassly uninvited, triggering a boycott of the event by all Representatives who weren't members of the National Action Party (PAN). This, together with the removal of anything or anyone falling within the perimeter of Obama's mini-Mexico City, meant there was no chance he would come into contact with any form of opposition to Calderón's policies (otherwise known as democracy).In order for the United States and Mexico to achieve a significant change in their relationship, one that will reflect a changing reality, lip service regarding joint efforts must be complemented with a crash course in Mexican society, culture and history. You cannot help those whom you do not understand.And the need for greater awareness is pressing, given that our understanding in the US of, for example, Cuba is far more developed than our understanding of Mexico. This despite the fact that the island's importance is largely symbolic at this point, whereas Mexico's role in the future of the US is vital.He came, he saw ... he left. Unfortunately, the current Mexican administration made sure that Obama's visit would provide him with only an extremely limited bird's-eye view.