There's something mythological-sounding about Mexico's Isla Mujeres, a tiny scrap of land separated from Cancún by a few miles of turquoise-dappled sea and a somewhat wider gulf in attitude. As the small passenger ferry chugged along, I pictured a shipwrecked mariner licking his salty lips as he realises he's washed up somewhere called the island of women. Cancún's highrises shimmered on the horizon as I disembarked the ferry and stepped into a cheerful little port splashed with Caribbean colour. Pastel-coloured shops hawk bead-and-shell knick-knacks and grizzled vendors hack machetes into coconuts for passing gringos to quench their thirst as they flip-flop their way to Playa Norte, the island's main beach. Although most visitors are happy kicking back on the milky sand with a glass of something cool, there are opportunities for shaking down the towel and appreciating some of the surrounding marine beauty. Before Cancún began to germinate, fishing was the region's economic mainstay. Nowadays, the fishermen have formed a cooperative to supplement their income by offering tourist excursions. These maritime multi-taskers will take you snorkelling, deep sea fishing, or to the Parque Nacional Isla Contoy, a tropical idyll home to more than 150 species of bird. The next morning I was down at the docks in good time for Fausto's prompt 9am cast-off. It was a glorious day and, as we sped out of the harbour, the captain, a smiling advert for the outdoor life, told me a little more about the cooperative's role in promoting ethical tourism. The government regulates and subsidises the cooperative to ensure the protection of Contoy's pristine environment is prioritised. They seem to take a green view on Isla Mujeres and its eco-credentials are further enhanced by a sea turtle sanctuary which was set up to provide safe breeding conditions and is open to tourists.Back on the boat, Fausto killed the engine halfway through the crossing. Demonstrating that dabbling in the cosseted world of tourism had done nothing to diminish their primary skills, his crew nonchalantly began to whip fish out of the water with the ease of seabirds. The captain assured me that a thrashing barracuda, the most impressive addition to the haul, would be our lunch.Snorkelling is permitted in the bay and the cooperative provides equipment on its trips. As I swam back towards the shallows, I was thrilled to find myself alongside a huge manta ray. These glide right up to the water's edge to bask and seem completely unperturbed at sharing their habitat with curious humans. Drying off, I thought a combination of heat and hunger was inducing a hallucination when what appeared to be a miniature pirate's galleon docked at the jetty. Those disembarking, however, were wielding cameras not cutlasses and were daytrippers from Cancún. Although visitor numbers to Contoy from both Cancún and Isla Mujeres are strictly limited, with waste from the trips assiduously collected and removed from the island, I couldn't help feeling I'd had the more intimate experience. There was something reassuringly authentic about the matter of fact way lunch had been acquired, the sea providing the fishermen with their living as it had for generations.Finally the shout went up for lunch. The mock pirate's galleon may have been an ostentatious reminder of the real world but it's hard not to feel momentarily at peace when you're sitting on a beach and eating a barbecued barracuda taco, the contents of which you saw hauled from the sea a few hours previously. · Paul flew from Mexico City to Cancún with Mexicana and stayed at the Posada del Mar on Isla Mujeres (doubles from £30 low season, £51 high) as a guest of the Isla Mujeres and the Mexico Tourist Boards (00800 11112266).· The Isla Mujeres fisherman's cooperative has a booth on Av Rueda Medina. Telephone: +52 998 877 1363.