Viridiana Martinez was accepted into her dream school a decade ago. It was the worst day of her life. Martinez was an undocumented migrant. With no green card, she was still able to attend an American high school and become an honors student – a perfect scenario, until she found out that colleges could not accept her without a visa. Getting the acceptance letter from North Carolina State University was, she says, like a “funeral”.“The day that that happened, my whole world came tumbling down. I still remember what that was like,” says Martinez, voice shaking. “I still remember what graduation day was like. What was supposed to be this next step, this transition in my life was not a good transition. It wasn’t positive. It was like a funeral.” Shortly after that, Martinez tried to kill herself. She was 17. Martinez is far from alone. In 2010, undocumented Texas teenager Joaquin Luna discovered the Dream Act failed to pass the Senate. A few months later, he put on his best suit and killed himself.Martinez and Luna are among the hundreds of thousands of undocumented youths who have risked their lives and safety to make it into the US. They get the dream – for a while. They have access to public education and other perks of being an American. But there is a ceiling on their achievement: as high school graduation approaches, reality changes. Colleges in most US states won’t accept them until they are legal. The number of job prospects shrink, and what’s available is low-paid. Depression and suicide often follow. The bitter disappointment that comes with growing up undocumented in the US can be traumatic. Most undocumented migrants don’t have healthcare or counseling resources to deal with their emotions, so they bottle them inside, remaining silent about what’s it like to grow up undocumented in the US. There’s also little hope that things will change. This past Saturday, the White House announced that it would hold-off action on immigration until after the midterm elections. The Obama administration has made other attempts at reform: the Dream Act, which failed, and in 2012 the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (Daca), which would “lift the shadow of deportation” from the undocumented youth.There are 775,000 undocumented youngsters under 18 living in the US, according to a recent report from Pew Research Center. Another 850,000 are eligible for Daca. This means they are at least 15 years old, were under 31 in June 2012, when Daca was announced by the White House, arrived in the US before their 16th birthday and have lived here continuously since 2007.Under Daca, these undocumented migrants then qualify for temporary relief from deportation and a two-year work permit which has to be renewed every two years. The estimates for the total potential Daca-eligible community range from 1.2 million to 2.1 million, yet only 673,000 have applied for their initial work permit by June of this year. “Daca is like crumbs. It’s little thing so that you can get ahead, but then you are stuck anyway,” explains Angy Rivera, and immigration activist and advice columnist.Martinez now describes the day she tried to kill herself as a turning point. Instead of going to college, she devoted her time to immigration activism and is a co-founder of North Carolina Dream Team. “Stopping deportations, that’s what I do,” she says.One of the deportations that Martinez has attempted to stop was that of Yanelli Hernandez. The attempt failed. Hernandez served nine months in jail for driving under the influence. She was sent to an immigration detention center. In detention, Hernandez, who attempted to kill herself in 2008, tried to do it again.Immigration activists lobbying to prevent her deportation tried to make a case that were she deported, she wouldn’t have access to the level of mental health care available in the US. “[It] would be very sad if she goes to [Mexico] and commits suicide there,” said Jorge Martinez, who filed an emergency stay of removal on her behalf. Hernandez was sent back to Mexico in January 2012.“I haven’t had any contact with her after [her removal],” Martinez told the Guardian. “I was informed that the next day after removal she was robbed in Mexico of the little money she had with her.”Rivera, the advice columnist, says that talking about her undocumented status with others in similar situations helped. Rivera came to US as a child in 1994, to “escape a life of violence and poverty in Colombia”.As with Martinez, her defining moment was when she found out that she wasn’t eligible for financial aid. Rivera applied for and was awarded a New York State Youth Leadership Council scholarship, which came with a summer internship. Working there was the first time she saw others talking about their legal status and decided to share her story.“It was the first time that I had been able to talk to somebody who understood,” she says. “Having someone to talk to who understands is a big deal.”Although undocumented youths can find support in each other, many activists believe that they can do better job of being there for each other.“We haven’t addressed our own internal issues and mental health and made it priority to be there for each other, because we are all so broken. We all have our own traumas,” says Martinez.For Rivera, that trauma was being sexually assaulted when she was a teenager.It wasn’t like the typical teenage drama, like liking a boy, or trying to figure out who your friends are. I was dealing with being undocumented and what the weight of that was and then also coming to terms with the fact that I had been assaulted. That impacted the way I trusted and communicated with everybody.The assault made her eligible for a ‘U’ visa, something that she wasn’t aware of until she went to file for Daca. ‘U’ visas are for crime victims “who have suffered substantial mental or physical abuse and are willing to help law enforcement authorities investigate or prosecute those crimes”, according to US Citizen and Immigration Services. There are only 10,000 U visas available each year.As President Obama postpones action on immigration until after the November election, activists urge those in the undocumented community to find someone to talk to about their struggles.“Living in that fear, living in that silence, it’s very lonely,” says Rivera. “And you drown. I did. For a long time.”