Mexico's supreme court will uphold trailblazing abortion laws in the capital by dismissing a challenge from the conservative federal government.Mexico City's law, in effect since April last year, requires city health services to provide a free abortion to any woman who seeks it up to 12 weeks into a pregnancy.It was challenged in the supreme court by the chief federal prosecutor, which is a cabinet post in Mexico, and the national human rights ombudsman. They argued that the constitution's guarantee of the right to life obliges the authorities to protect an unborn child from the moment of conception, overriding a woman's right to determine what happens to her body.In a lengthy and televised discussion lasting several days, eight of the 11 justices said they would dismiss the challenge. A decision is due within days, possibly today.Mexico City sits alongside Cuba in having the most liberal abortion legislation in Latin America. One country – Nicaragua – has prohibited abortion in all cases since 2006.The law has shattered the longstanding suppression of the abortion debate in Mexico. Politicians and bishops had avoided touching the question for decades, fearful of exposing bitter divisions in a country that values its anti-clerical political tradition as deeply as its Catholic heritage.The laws of most Mexican states, as was the case in Mexico City, allow terminations in cases of rape, danger to the mother's life or catastrophic deformations of the foetus. But in practice, very few women in these situations get the option. The states do not prosecute either the doctors who offer safe illegal abortions for those with money, or the life-threatening backstreet practitioners used by the poor.Many expected tighter controls when the Catholic conservative National Action party took control of the federal government in 2000, after 71 years of one-party rule by the nominally progressive Institutional Revolutionary party. But the right wing remained wary of upsetting the status quo.The leftwing administration in Mexico City eventually took on the taboo, and the discussion has stretched far beyond the supreme court to become an unprecedented national debate. Anti-abortion activists have blasted passers-by with the sound of foetal heart beats, while the Catholic hierarchy ran anti-abortion television commercials in prime time. Feminists have shouted their determination to push for abortion on demand elsewhere in Mexico.About a fifth of the 12,000 women given free abortions in the capital travelled from elsewhere in the country. There are no figures available for the private sector.The majority of public doctors have declared themselves conscientious objectors and refused to do abortions, forcing the city to set up special clinics, some of which have been picketed by activists.