Donald Trump has been dropped by NBC following the businessman and presidential candidate’s tirade of derogatory comments about Mexico, in which he characterised some Mexicans as criminals and rapists.NBC Universal said it will no longer broadcast the Miss USA or Miss Universe pageants, which are co-owned with Trump. The businessman, who likes to refer to himself as “The Donald”, had already said he would step aside as host of The Celebrity Apprentice, which also airs on NBC.“At NBC, respect and dignity for all people are cornerstones of our values,” a spokesperson for the network said on Monday. “Due to the recent derogatory statements by Donald Trump regarding immigrants, NBCUniversal is ending its business relationship with Mr Trump.“To that end, the annual Miss USA and Miss Universe Pageants, which are part of a joint venture between NBC and Trump, will no longer air on NBC. In addition, as Mr Trump has already indicated, he will not be participating in The Apprentice on NBC.”In a statement Trump called NBC “weak” and “foolish”. “We must have strong borders and not let illegal immigrants enter the United States. As has been stated continuously in the press, people are pouring across our borders unabated. Public reports routinely state great amounts of crime are being committed by illegal immigrants. This must be stopped and it must be stopped now,” said Trump.“If NBC is so weak and so foolish to not understand the serious illegal immigration problem in the United States, coupled with the horrendous and unfair trade deals we are making with Mexico, then their contract violating closure of Miss Universe/Miss USA will be determined in court. Furthermore, they will stand behind lying Brian Williams, but won’t stand behind people that tell it like it is, as unpleasant as that may be.”Trump sparked a minor diplomatic incident when he launched his presidential bid earlier this month with an attack on Mexico for “sending people [to the US] that have lots of problems, and they are bringing those problems to us. They are bringing drugs, and bringing crime, and their rapists.” He also called on Mexico to fund the building of “great wall” along the southern border to prevent the supposed influx of Mexican criminals to the US.Speaking at an event at City Club of Chicago, Trump said: “I love the Mexican people. But no apology because everything I said was 100% correct – all you have to do is read the newspapers.”Spanish language channel Univision had already severed its ties with Trump and refused to air the Miss USA pageant following the “insulting remarks about Mexican immigrants”. “At Univision we see first-hand the work ethic, love for family, strong religious values and the important role Mexican immigrants and Mexican Americans have had and will continue to have in building the future of our country,” the network said. Trump accused the Mexican government of forcing Univision to drop the five-year Miss Universe deal, which was valued at more than $13m. This year’s Miss USA contest was due to air on 12 July. “Mexican gov doesn’t want me talking about terrible border situation & horrible trade deals. Forcing Univision to get me to stop- no way!” he tweeted. “Univision apologized to me but I will not accept their apology,” he added. “I will be suing them for a lot of money. Miss USA contestants are hurt!” Trump continued his attacks on Mexico in a CNN interview on Sunday despite a petition on the Change.org website calling on NBC to ditch Trump. More than 200,000 people signed the petition. NBC’s ditching of Trump could become even more awkward for the White House hopeful as the network is due to host one of the key 2016 Republican presidential debates on 26 February 2016. It will be the last GOP debate before the 1 March “Super Tuesday” contests of Colorado, Massachusetts, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Texas, Vermont and Virginia.