It's been a year since Eastbound & Down last lurched across British screens, writer-star Danny McBride giving a career-defining turn as washed-up pitcher Kenny Powers, Olympic-standard bigot and asshole everyman.Last we saw, Powers was dumping his childhood sweetheart at a gas station as his major league baseball comeback fell through. The surprise cult comedy hit of 2009 is back, and with it, its touchstone – the worst human being in history.Season two ushers in a new Kenny: he's rocking cornrows, based in Mexico, promoting cockfights but still as feral, foul-mouthed and noxious as ever. It could be worse. He's making money, has a couple of new sidekicks and there's a whole new culture for him to defile.McBride feels the move to Mexico was necessary. "We always imagined he would get out of North Carolina to solve his problems somewhere else". Co-writer Jody Hill agrees: "Kenny has always been the star of the movie in his own mind. It seemed natural because in the kind of movies he would be watching, the outlaws go to Mexico."The lure of a struggling local baseball team quickly proves too strong for a douchebag Messiah like Kenny and he's soon declaring himself their new star player. But when the crowd greet his pitching genius with a big "so what?" he looks hurt. Is the shocking truth about Kenny Powers that all that braggadocio is just a front?"Oh yeah, he's an emotional train wreck," Hill laughs. "He's worse than a middle school kid."Both men are clearly having a blast with the show and Hill in particular laughs a lot when discussing Kenny. It sounds like they're ragging on an absent drinking buddy – Kenny, the asshole. They clearly like the guy, so there must be some lines they won't allow him to cross?"We never think about lines or boundaries when we write," says McBride, "It's what feels natural for the character. Luckily, Kenny is a character for whom you can go way outside those boundaries and somehow still feel organic to the show." Really? No lines at all? "No," says Hill. "As long as it comes from Kenny, not the writers."Although Eastbound & Down is now considered a success, it took a while for word to get around. Season two debuted in the States in September to an audience 150% higher than the season one premiere. "It didn't do huge numbers to begin with. As writers, Jody and myself don't really pay attention to audience numbers," says McBride. "Right now, it feels that you can take chances on TV that you just can't with film. Everything in film is based on the numbers it does. If you're aiming for a goal like that, it doesn't allow you to take chances."Those chances have paid off, gaining it some notable celebrity fans (when both Don Johnson and Marilyn Manson endorse your show you know you're cross-demographic). I mention that Father Ted co-creator Graham Linehan is a vocal supporter. "Oh wow, that's incredible," says McBride who knows his Britcom alumni. "That's a pretty huge compliment. We're big, big fans of British television and British sitcom was making bigger marks for me, as far as what I found memorable, stuff that really stood up to repeat viewings."Hill talks excitedly about the classic six-show British series compared to the 24-show seasons common in America. "Even with my favourite US shows, only half of the episodes are really good. In those big seasons you're forced to have filler episodes where you almost have to turn the comedy to some sort of formula to maintain a story with that many episodes."We were always interested in shows like The Office and Spaced that were made by just a couple of core people," he continues, "and focused on a limited number of episodes."Their Anglophilia doesn't stop at TV. Having included a track from Nottingham chamber-rock stalwarts Tindersticks in season one, the new season employs the band's song Hubbard Hills. "We're big fans of Tindersticks. I think we're the first comedy that has ever used Tindersticks as part of their score!" Another feature they keep from the first season is Powers's memorable oratory.Moving to Mexico means that another country gets to hear his inspirational speeches, each one a trailer-park Gettysburg Address."He loves to give speeches and grandstand to everyone," McBride reflects fondly. "Although, most of the time, those speeches are really just for him; they're nothing to do with the people he's speaking to." In reminding his new Mexican team-mates of the importance of pulling together he tells them: "There's no 'I' in team but there is a 'U' in cunt". Ageless folk wisdom from the pitcher philosopher. "Yup," McBride deadpans. "That's something a lot of people have forgotten," Hill cackles. "My brother taught me that many years ago"And yeah, Eastbound will learn ya something. It barely matters that Kenny the asshole really is an asshole – people respond and people relate. Powers endures, and as an object lesson of brute persistence in the face of indifference he has few peers. In his own sick way, he is redeemed, prevailing through sheer force of knowing no other way. "That's what it's all about," McBride confirms. "It's about redemption, it's about finding love, it's about finding his place in the world." Mark the lesson well, assholes. Mark and watch.