Mexico has protested about an international backlash against Mexican travellers who have been quarantined and banned from several countries as suspected flu carriers.Mexican authorities tonight singled out China for its draconian measures and criticised four Latin American countries for restricting air links. More than 70 Mexican travellers were quarantined in hospitals and hotels in China as part of sweeping measures against swine flu."Mexican citizens showing no signs at all of being ill have been isolated under unacceptable conditions," said Patricia Espinosa, Mexico's foreign minister. "These are discriminatory measures, without foundation. The foreign ministry recommends avoiding travelling to China until these measures are corrected."Hostility towards Mexicans spread to the United States where talkshows referred to "fajita flu" and "infected illegal aliens", injecting fresh rancour into the immigration debate.Colombia and Chile denied the use of stadiums to two Mexican football teams for the Copa Libertadores de America, a regional tournament.A Mexican team that was allowed to play in Chile complained it was treated "like lepers". One player, Hector Reynoso, responded to apparent taunts by coughing and blowing mucus at an opposing player and shouting: "Now I have infected you with swine flu." He later apologised.Peru, Argentina, Cuba and Ecuador have restricted flights to Mexico, prompting complaints by Espinosa. "We're surprised by the adoption of unjustified measures," the minister said.Health officials said Mexico's epidemic appeared to be ebbing after a national shutdown. The death toll remained at 19 and the number of confirmed cases increased slightly to 506, including the dead. "The evolution of the epidemic is now in its declining phase," said Jose Angel Cordova, the health minister.The diplomatic flap with China broke after Mexicans were reportedly asked to identify themselves on arriving flights and then isolated. A 25-year-old Mexican man became China's – and Asia's – first confirmed swine flu case on Friday. He transited through Shanghai en route to Hong Kong, where he has been hospitalised. Some 350 people have been quarantined at the Hong Kong hotel where he stayed.The Mexican consul general in Guangzhou was briefly detained after returning from a Cambodian vacation, said Jorge Guajardo, Mexico's ambassador to Beijing.In another case, a Beijing hotel woke a family of five at 4am, moved them to a hospital for tests and then drove them to a hotel near the airport where they were being held incommunicado with other Mexicans, said Guajardo. police rebuffed the ambassador's attempts to gain entry.Chinese officials said tough measures were justified and legal."I think they can understand what we have done," Xu Jianguang, director of Shanghai's health bureau, told a news conference. "This is for the sake of their own personal health and for the rest of society."The Sars outbreak in 2002/3 and cases of avian flu have made officials anxious about controlling the spread of swine flu. The size of the population and the patchy health system increase the risks of a serious outbreak.