A senior Mexican minister has described the disappearance and possible murder of 43 student teachers as a “wake-up call” for the country, but has rejected accusations that the government has been too focused on its economic agenda to tackle violent crime and corruption.The disappearance of the students 10 weeks ago in the southern city of Iguala – allegedly after corrupt municipal police handed them over to a local drug gang – has provoked protests across Mexico and led to a slump in the popularity of President Enrique Peña Nieto amid accusations that he has done little to address the country’s security crisis.Juan Manuel Gómez Robledo, undersecretary for multilateral affairs and human rights at Mexico’s foreign ministry, said the students’ disappearance had strengthened the government’s determination to root out corruption and fight drug gangs. “[The disappearance] is a big challenge, but it does not mean we were not working on these issues before,” he said. “It sounds a warning and tells the people, the government and the private sector that economic reforms will never bear their fruit if rule of law does not prevail.”Despite the discovery of at least 38 bodies in mass graves near Iguala – and the official report that dozens of young people were killed and burned in a rubbish tip outside a neighbouring town – Gómez Robledo said the government was still treating the students’ disappearance as a missing persons case.“The search continues, and no evidence has been released so far by the University of Innsbruck where the remains were sent to be examined,” he said. “As the director of that institute said, it will take some time before they release any of the results of their investigation. Until then, we have to consider them to be missing, and the search continues. We are treating this as a case of forced disappearance.”Gómez Robledo denied that the authorities had been too slow to respond, saying 79 people had been arrested in connection with the disappearances, including local police officers and José Luis Abarca, the former mayor of Iguala, and his wife María de los Angeles Pineda. It has been alleged that the attack was ordered by Abarca, who thought the students were planning to interrupt a speech by Pineda, and was carried out by police working with the Guerreros Unidos cartel, for whom Pineda was an operative.Gómez Robledo argued that security had been central to President Peña Nieto’s agenda since his election two years ago. He pointed to the recent creation of a 5,000-strong national gendarmerie, moves to limit the jurisdiction of military tribunals, and the introduction of a national code of criminal proceedings. The minister said the president had acknowledged the growing problem of kidnappings a year ago during a meeting of the national security council. “He recognised that we were not doing enough in terms of fighting kidnappings, because the more we are successful against the narco gangs, the more they go and specialise in other fields of criminal activity. In 2013, we saw a surge in kidnappings and extortions which are now peaking and declining. He said very clearly, ‘We are not doing enough on that.’”At the end of November, Peña Nieto responded to growing public anger by unveiling a 10-point package to address the vulnerability of local governments to infiltration by drug gangs – an issue perhaps highlighted by events in Iguala – and to strengthen his government’s commitment to human rights. However, the package was dismissed by many security experts and human rights organisations, such as Human Rights Watch (HRW), as a simple rehash of previous plans and commitments.Gómez Robledo brushed off the criticism, saying the measures would allow the government to put serious political weight behind plans that had been devised in consultation with the UN and various NGOs. “They have become presidential initiatives,” he said, “but where HRW is absolutely right is that it’s not just a matter of making new laws, it’s a matter of implementing them and of holding accountable those who do not respect them.”While he conceded that far more work needed to be done to tackle corruption at a local level, the minister said the government was committed to being open about the findings of its investigation. “We’re being transparent about what we are doing and what we’re not doing, so all the Iguala investigations will be checked, reviewed and assessed by an independent group of experts we’ve called in from the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights.” Asked whether Peña Nieto – whose approval rating recently plunged to 39% – had the support and strength needed to address the security crisis, Gómez Robledo said: “He has the intelligence, the conviction, the strength and the youth to face all of the challenges. He has four years ahead of him, which is a lot of time if you want to do things – it’s the equivalent of a presidential term in the US.”Gómez Robledo said thatevents in Iguala and the public fury that followed show that Mexico remains deeply divided by inequality, of which grotesqueviolence is a symptom.“This proves that there are too many Mexicos living side by side without always connecting,” he said. “You have a very prosperous and competitive Mexico where more engineers graduate each year than in many countries and where you have a booming aerospace industry. But you also have a very, very poor Mexico – especially in the south and south-east – where people have no hope of a better life. And that creates a class of hopeless people who are ready to do anything just to live. That fuels organised crime and a violence that is very disturbing.”