With animal acts about to be banned from all circuses in Mexico, the fate of the non-human performers has become mired in acrimony and doubts over whether the legislation will actually lead to an improvement in animal protections.Rather than bring relief to the elephants, lions, tigers and other animals they currentlytransport around the country in cages, circus owners claim the ban in fact puts the animals in danger. Related: Bolivia bans all circus animals “A lot of owners don’t want to give the government the animals that are their livelihoods, and which they look after well,” said Armando Cedeño, president of the national association of circus owners. “Some are looking to sell them, and you don’t always know who is buying. Others are so desperate they are thinking of putting them to sleep.”But the government of Enrique Peña Nieto has brushed aside such warnings with promises of a bright future for Mexico’s four-legged circus performers. The implementation of the ban is just three months away.“We will ensure that all the animals have top-level destinies that attend to their comfort and wellbeing,” the chief environmental prosecutor, Guillermo Haro, told reporters earlier this month. Such optimism sounds a little glib given the vagueness of the legislation, the state’s limited capacity to provide sanctuary and a long history of a black market trade in exotic species. All within the context of wildly varying estimates of how many circus animals there are.The ban explicitly gives Mexican zoos first pick of the animals. The rest, the legislation says, can be handed over to the authorities, though this is not obligatory.So far, the big public zoos have expressed little interest in the animals, given their tight budgets, and other state-owned sanctuaries do not have the infrastructure to receive more than a small number. Expansions have been promised, as have arrangements with privately run sanctuaries, but how this will be arranged or funded remains a mystery.Although authorities have said that the owners could face legal action if they put their animals down, there has been almost no comment on the prospect of mass sales of old circus animals. A thriving black market in exotic species already feeds unregulated private collections – such as the tigers found in drug traffickers’s mansions – as well as the trade in pelts.“It’s very difficult to get a handle on what is going on,” said Dilce Winders of the international animal rights group Peta that lobbied energetically in support of the Mexican ban. “And the deadline is looming.”Winders stresses that there is still very little solid information about the animals that will be needing a new home. This should come, theoretically, when the owners provide a census immediately after the ban comes into force in early July, but they currently claim it is about 4,000. The authorities say their existing registers suggest the number is closer to 2,500.Tim Phillips of Animal Defense International, a group which has been at the forefront of campaigns to ban circus animals across the world, has dismissed the larger figure as “circus propaganda”, and the warnings of deaths and mass sales as “outrageous threats” designed to force some kind of compensation deal.Still, Phillips, who said ADI had been involved with the Mexican case from the start, added that the Mexican authorities seemed “a bit overwhelmed” in recent meetings and suggested they may soon announce a delay in implementation. ADI, Phillips said, had already “emptied Bolivia” of old circus animals with a number of “rescues” in the wake of its ban in 2010. The group is currently finishing a similar operation in Peru, preparing to airlift 33 lions and a bear to sanctuaries in California and Colorado. Phillips expects ADI will be invited by Mexico to help place the animals and, perhaps, even to help enforce the ban.“Often the countries most in need of animal protection laws are the ones with the least resources to enforce them,” he said. “We are getting a taste of that in Mexico.”Phillips said that he expected the numbers to fall dramatically as the most common species, such as llamas and horses, were sold off easily. He said some of the exotic ones might also “disappear”, though he insisted that feeding the black market is a longstanding practice among circus owners and should not be blamed on the ban.“We have to be realistic,” he said. “If this is the last generation to suffer in circuses in Mexico it is a very positive thing.”The ban is already partially in action, thanks to local-level legislation in about a third of Mexico’s states.Circus owner spokesman Cedeño said this has had a major impact on audiences for the family-based companies that set up their big tops in small towns and poor barrios across the country, forcing some to close down altogether.“They are killing the industry,” he said.Cedeño insists the ban goes beyond concern for animal welfare and is – at least partially – a cover for powerfully connected people seeking a cut from selling off valuable animals appropriated from the circuses. Related: Circuses to be banned from using wild animals The evidence is suspect, but such stories gain some traction in Mexico thanks to the dubious reputation of the Green party, which has been the ban’s main promoter and whose leadership is mired in allegations of corruption.They have also previously used publicity campaigns that have had little to do with environmental issues. One candidate used an elephant to launch his campaign in 2012, and the Green party governor of the state of Chiapas gave a key position to a businessman who boasted of his exploits hunting elephants in Botswana.But animal rights activists insist that none of this is relevant to the task at hand.“No political party has a good reputation in Mexico,” said Leonora Esquivel of the group AnimaNaturalis that has worked closely with the Green party on the ban. “Our responsibility is to ensure that this opportunity results in the end to the exploitation and mistreatment of animals in circuses.”