A voice from head-quarters crackles over the army radio. "Shots fired on Avenida de los Insurgentes. Gunmen operating from two, maybe three vehicles. Target unknown." It is 9.20am, a remorseless sun is already blistering the city, and the soldiers have their first mission of the day. Engines roar into life and the convoy of green army trucks and blue-and-white police cars swerves through traffic in a blur of sirens.Amazingly, the target is still alive. Suit saturated in blood, skin flour-white, eyes wild, but alive. He is slumped at a shopfront, red palm-prints smeared on the glass door; behind him a trail of dark stains, a black shoe and broken glass from a framed painting that he dropped. The gunmen are gone. The victim, a 51-year-old businessman, took two bullets escaping a kidnap attempt. Given the grotesque ways that captivity tends to end in Ciudad Juárez, he is lucky.An ambulance ferries the stretchered figure to hospital while a familiar tableau arranges itself. Soldiers seal off the scene with yellow tape. Photographers and TV crews stake out positions. A police helicopter clatters overhead. The owners of the bloodied property - a graphic design company called Pop Estudio - attack the stains with brooms and an orange tub of Mr Musculo Multi-Accion. In Juárez, everyone knows to clean quickly, before the blood stinks in the desert heat.I have witnessed just one skirmish in a multi-pronged, brutal drugs war that is convulsing Mexico. Forget the swine flu epidemic, this war has proved many times more deadly. Since 2007, approximately 7,600 people have been killed - more than double the number killed over three decades in Northern Ireland's Troubles. Some Mexican cities have surpassed Iraq's levels of mayhem. Drug cartels are butchering weaker rivals in a Darwinian contest for la plaza - trafficking routes that bring unimaginable wealth to those who control them.The savagery is numbing. Mutilated bodies turn up daily - some suspended from bridges, others dumped in schools or on roadsides. Human remains are found in barrels of acid. Severed heads are rolled on to nightclub dancefloors, or left at monuments with notes stuck in their mouths. Police chiefs are ambushed in broad daylight, after which the killers play narcocorridos (ballads glorifying their deeds) on police frequencies. Somewhere in the middle of all this are 111 million ordinary Mexicans, aghast at the horror.In Juárez, graffiti spraypainted on a wall reads: "My city asks for clemency amid your madness." Another says: "Assassin do not kill me, I want to keep growing - the children."The United States is worried, too. Barry McCaffrey, a former drug tsar and retired general, has raised the prospect of "millions of refugees" if the mayhem continues. The US Joint Forces Command warns of the danger to US security. Analysts have debated at what point Mexico may fit the definition of a failed state. On a visit to Mexico City in April, President Barack Obama warned that border violence spillover was "sowing chaos in our communities". All of which begs the question: is Mexico doomed?The answer resides in Juárez. This hardscrabble sprawl of slums, sweatshop factories, strip malls, motels and gas stations, all bleached and peeled by desert wind, is the war's crucible. Walk to the end of Avenida Juárez and you see why: across a dry riverbed - the Rio Grande - sits El Paso, Texas. More than a frontier between the developed and the developing worlds, it is a gateway to the American drug consumer. It takes 10 minutes to cross the Paso del Norte international bridge and you pay three pesos (20 US cents) at the turnstile. Smugglers tend to prefer sandier, clandestine crossings.More than 1,600 people were killed in Juárez last year, a ferocious number for a city of just 1.3m. Knock off two zeroes and you get El Paso's murder total: 16. Little wonder billboards on the southern side of the border are obsessed by salvation. "God is the solution," declares one. "Give peace a chance," says another, beside a picture of John Lennon. Avenida Gómez Morin has the most plaintive: "Pray for Ciudad Juárez. We need it."A hundred yards up the highway, a grieving family were doing precisely that at the Eternal Flame funeral home when gunmen stormed in to re-shoot the corpse in his coffin. The owner of a bar called Amores, he had been killed days earlier by a narco gang that evidently felt more punishment was needed. For good measure, in the second attack they also shot his brother, the owner of another bar. "It was a difficult time," says Ricardo, the funeral home manager, with magisterial understatement.There is a logic to the bloodshed, which goes something like this. Colombia, the source of most US-bound cocaine, used to be the main narco battlefield until the 90s, when Mexican gangs seized control of the transit routes north. Juárez was the domain of Amado Carrillo Fuentes, the legendary "Lord of the Skies". Since his death in 1997, the cartel has been headed by his brother Vicente.Two rivals, the Sinaloa cartel from the Pacific coast and the Gulf cartel from the other side of Mexico, invaded to wrest control of la plaza from the homegrown Juárez cartel. In addition to their own death squads, they sub-contracted killings to local gangs with names such as the Aztecas (affiliated to Juárez) and the Mexicles (Sinaloa). Now the Gulf cartel has withdrawn and a faction from Juárez has defected to Sinaloa, giving the edge to its leader, Joaquin "Short and Stocky" Guzman, Mexico's most wanted man.In theory, killings and kidnappings are tactical operations to defeat the other side and extort money from those caught in the middle. In practice, anarchy reigns. Police in the border city of Tijuana recently announced that drug traffickers had smothered three women, aged 23 to 25, and dissolved their bodies in a caustic substance because of an argument in a bar.Meanwhile, in Juárez, the plague of disappearances of young women that made the city infamous in the 1990s continues unchecked. Whoever abducts them - theories include human traffickers, rogue police and narco gangs - exploits the insecurity and impunity wrought by the drug war. A wooden cross memorial with more than 300 nails - each representing a desaparecida from the last decade - is inscribed "Not one more". Yet shopfronts and lampposts are haunted with posters appealing for information about recent victims. Typically in mid-to-late teens, the girls gaze from grainy photographs, some grinning, some solemn. "The police did nothing. The army did nothing. They're like toy soldiers," says Maria Hernández, 70, the grandmother of Lidia, a medical student who vanished last December. Asked what age Lidia was, the elderly woman, eyes moist, amends the tense. "Is," she says quietly. "What age she is. Seventeen."But if Juárez embodies Mexico's crisis, it also, according to the government, embodies its solution. The city is the showcase for a radical policy to deploy the army. With police too frightened - and corrupt - to respond to all the violence, some 2,000 soldiers arrived in March 2008. It was, at first, a fiasco. The narcos escalated attacks on each other, the security forces and anybody else who stood in their way. Staff at the local paper, El Diario, tracked murder tolls with a blue marker on a news-room "board of death". Traffickers tried to intimidate the media by leaving a severed head at a journalists' monument. Shortly afterwards, El Diario's investigative reporter, Armando Rodríguez, was shot dead. "It just got worse and worse. It reached a level we had never seen before," says Rocío Gallegos, a news editor on the paper.In March this year, President Felipe Calderón went for broke: 10,000 soldiers and federal police officers saturated Juárez, part of a 45,000-strong taskforce. A fresh rotation entered the city earlier this month: a mile-long convoy of Humvees, trucks and hardware. And the army's presence has smothered violence in the city: murders fell from 234 in February to 77 in March and 85 in April. Crime has plunged 80%. The police, a disgraced and humiliated force which had been largely coopted by the narcos, are being rebuilt. Hundreds of officers have been purged and new cadets are being trained by military police."There is no quick fix, but I am sure we can succeed in the long term. The army cannot be infiltrated by narco-traffickers," says Julian Rivera Breton, an army general who is the new police chief. It is a hellish job. Narcos forced out Breton's predecessor by killing an officer every 48 hours until he quit. Police stations are fortresses with sentries, sandbags, machine-gun nests and black ribbons for fallen comrades. My dictaphone is banned for "security reasons" from the general's vicinity, but Breton is upbeat. "This level of co-ordination between the army, police and different levels of government is unprecedented. We have public confidence. This has started well and it must end well."The Obama administration, which has heaped praise on President Calderón's courage, said it will do its bit by stemming the "iron river" of guns flowing south across the border. An even larger favour to Mexico would be stemming US demand for cocaine and methamphetamines, an insatiable market that drives the economics, and atrocities, of narco-trafficking. Law enforcement officials recognise that as long as there is demand - and profits - drugs will always find a way in. The hope, from Mexico's viewpoint, is to redirect the flow."We're not going to stop drugs reaching the US, but we can make Mexico a difficult option and force traffickers to use other routes," says José Reyes Ferriz, the mayor of Juárez.Certainly, several drug lords have been captured in recent months and Mexico's government has indicated that the army will stay on the streets until 2013. "We are not on our knees; we are still walking," says Gallegos, the newspaper editor.Walking, or at least staggering, yes. But winning the war? Look behind the lower murder rates and official spin and the picture looks grim. Mexico is not defeating narco-traffickers. Stalemate seems the likeliest outcome. Janet Napolitano, the US secretary of homeland security, warned as much at a senate judiciary committee hearing earlier this month: "Yes, we have seen a reduction in violence, but how long can it be sustained?"A trade worth billions of dollars needs a corrupt nexus of business and politics. Saulo Reyes Gamboa, Juárez's former municipal police chief, was arrested in El Paso last year on suspicion of trying to smuggle a tonne of marijuana. He had interests in multiple companies and was a protege of the former mayor, Hectór Murguía Lardizábal. Result: one year later, there are no investigations into the companies and Murguía, who denies any wrongdoing, has shrugged off the scandal and is tipped to be the next governor.The current mayor, Reyes Ferriz, is considered honest but, interviewed behind his huge desk, he flounders when asked why no politicians or business leaders have been charged. "Ah." Long pause. "Yes. That's, er, an interesting question. I don't have, um, that information. I think you should ask the attorney general's office."The bleak realisation that narcos are here to stay is etched in the crumbling neglect of slums such as Colonia Diaz Ordaz. A collection of hillside shacks hemmed in by parched mountains and the US border fence, it feels claustrophobic. Secondary schools barely function, leading to a 50% drop-out rate. The only legitimate jobs are in sweatshops that pay $40 a week. Welfare and healthcare are poor or absent. "The state doesn't function here," says Teresa Almada Mireles, who runs a youth rehabilitation centre. "At the last count there were 3,000 gangs in Juárez. They fill a vacuum."Some traffickers no longer bother to cross the border: business is booming within Mexico. Growing numbers of crack addicts have pushed up the price for a gram of cocaine in Juárez to $20, the same as in El Paso. "Except that here the quality is rubbish - it's mixed with other stuff so dealers make even more money," says Joe Nevarez, 54, a wiry, intense former addict who runs a shelter, Alcance Victoria, for junkies. "Mexico used to be a bridge for drugs but now a lot of it stays. We're saturated."Another orange fireball of a sun sinks over the desert and Juárez's streets begin to empty. Jesus Arrieta, 80, a grubby Stetson on his head and a Kodak camera around his neck, limps home with his bad leg after a failed day trying to sell portraits to nonexistent tourists. He dreads the encounter awaiting him at home: his 29-year-old crack addict son demanding 100 pesos ($7.50) from him."Every night, the same. I can't stand it." Arrieta fidgets and rubs his eyes. "God forgive me, but they need to lock him up." He grabs my collar and twists it into a knot. "Lock him up so he can't get out, tight, like this." He loosens his grip and gulps some air. "My own son, God forgive me." The old man shuffles on towards home.