This year marked my tenth summer in the same fire tower, watching over a swath of the Gila National Forest in south-west New Mexico, where every year hundreds of lightning-caused wildfires erupt on the landscape. When people ask me what, precisely, I do there, the simplest answer I can offer is that I'm paid to watch mountains all day. If a wisp of smoke arises, I use my two-way radio to call a dispatcher and sound the alarm. Sometimes the fires are fought, sometimes they are allowed to burn, depending on a murky calculation of "values at risk" versus "benefit to forest resources". From the beginning of May to the middle of August this year, I spotted six fires, fewer than one for every 10 days I spent in my lookout tower. For most of the summer, then, my time was my own and so were the moods of the mountain. No television. No internet connection. No telephone. Five miles from the nearest road.Sheer bliss, in another words. For a little while.For much of this summer the mood of the mountain was severe. A vicious winter drought had seared the American south-west, and in May and June the wind blew fiercely, sometimes gusting above 60 miles an hour. Off to my west a hundred miles or so, on the other side of the state line, giant wildfires raged, filling my horizon with smoke. On certain days it appeared that the entire state of Arizona was engulfed in flames. The Wallow Fire, now on record as the largest wildfire in Arizona history, burned more than 800 square miles and crossed into New Mexico on its eastern front. The sunsets were apocalyptic.And then, as they do most years in July, the rains came and put an end to the burning. Instead of flames and smoke, the dangers turned to runoff and flooding, as thunderstorms dropped heavy rain on country where the grass and trees had burned away, exposing naked topsoil. Another danger arose in the form of opportunists and ideologues. Politicians arranged for public meetings to castigate the US Forest Service for mismanaging the forests. They joined with the logging and grazing interests to propose that chainsaws and cows could prevent large fires in the future, if only the loggers and ranchers were given a free hand to do as they pleased on public land owned by all Americans.The irony was delicious, for if you talk to scientists, they will tell you it is precisely logging and grazing – as well as a century of rabid fire suppression – that have brought us the spectacle of huge, unstoppable fires in the forests of the American southwest. As recently as the 19th century, the fire regime on these lands consisted of frequent (we're talking twice or more per decade) low-intensity surface fires moving mainly through grass, preserving the widely-spaced trees of the old-growth forest. Ponderosa pines, in particular, were perfectly adapted to withstand such fires. Their thick, fire-resistant bark, coupled with their evolutionary habit of dropping lower limbs as they grow, made them hardy survivors in a fire-prone ecosystem. Then the cutting and the grazing began. Second-growth forest grew back in denser stands, in part because voracious cattle had skinned away the grass, removing the fine fuels on which wildfire had previously fed. Fire suppression only enhanced the density of fuels, as tree and brush saplings that would have once been snuffed out by fires, or prevented from sprouting at all by the densely rooted grass, took hold and spread. This left us with fuel loads orders of magnitude beyond historical norms. Seared by drought, a sick and unnatural forest was perfectly primed to go up in a giant plume of smoke.There is a saying among some of my colleagues in the wildfire community: that during the 20th century, despite our phenomenal success in suppressing fires on public land, we were not so much putting out fires as putting them off. Not any longer. Especially amid the effects of climate change, the days of putting off fires are over. But if I've learned anything in my decade of quiet mountain-watching, it is that fire is as much a creative as a destructive force, and from amid the blackened stumps the forest will renew itself once more. What kind of forest we will have is uncertain. Will we follow the prescription of the ranchers and loggers and their minions in Congress, and turn loose the cows and the chainsaws, repeating the mistakes that brought us here in the first place? Or will we learn some humility, recognise that we live in a fire-adapted ecosystem, and allow the land to follow its own, sometimes fiery course to recovery?The answers to these questions will determine the character of the fires next time.