Being Juan MalkovichThere are multiple John Malkovichs in the multiplex this autumn: he plays an ousted CIA man in Burn After Reading, appears in Clint Eastwood's Changeling and has a cameo in The Mutant Chronicles. This week, it was announced that the busy actor is also returning to theatre, and will direct a play in Mexico City. The Good Canary, which opens next month, follows an author whose career is derailed as his wife succumbs to drug addiction. The play, written by the American Zach Helm, will be performed in Spanish. Diego Luna will play the lead role at the Insurgentes theatre. Last year, Malkovich directed a French-language production of Helm's play in Paris, and won the best director gong at the Molière awards. Corr blimey!Singer Andrea Corr, who shot to fame with her siblings in the Corrs, will make her West End stage debut next year. She will star alongside Niamh Cusack and Susan Lynch in a revival of Brian Friel's Dancing at Lughnasa at the Old Vic. The play, which follows five sisters in rural Ireland, will be directed by Anna Mackmin. The Old Vic's 2009 lineup also finds Kevin Spacey directing an in-the-round production of Complicit, a political drama by Joe Sutton, which will receive its world premiere at the theatre.BAM MendesMeanwhile, Sam Mendes will direct Old Vic revivals of two classic plays as part of the Bridge Project, a collaboration with Neal Street Productions and the Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM), designed - in Mendes's words - to "bring classics to a new audience". The Cherry Orchard (newly translated by Tom Stoppard) and The Winter's Tale will be performed in rep with a cast including Ethan Hawke and Simon Russell Beale.McAvoy's Apollo missionThe Apollo and the Duke of York's have also announced star draws to help them kick-start 2009. James McAvoy takes time out from his blossoming Hollywood career to star in Richard Greenberg's Three Days of Rain, which opens for previews at the Apollo from January 30 2009. He is joined by EastEnders' Nigel Harman in the story of childhood friends unlocking family secrets from the past. The Duke of York's is reviving Arthur Miller's A View from the Bridge with Ken Stott and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio. Stott, who became the face of Ian Rankin's Rebus on TV, recently starred in Yasmina Reza's God of Carnage. Mastrantonio is best known for playing Maid Marian in Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves, and earned a Tony nomination on Broadway for Man of La Mancha.Not many happy returnsThere was a bittersweet celebration for Avenue Q at the Noel Coward theatre last night. The feelgood musical, which follows the ups and downs of foul-mouthed puppets on a shabby New York street, celebrated its 1000th performance at the theatre. And as the cast joked after the final curtain, here's to the next 150! The gala show came days after the announcement that the musical will close on March 28 2009. It will be replaced by a West End transfer of Calendar Girls, penned by the film's original screenwriter Tim Firth. Calendar Girls enjoyed a sold-out run at the Chichester Festival theatre last month and stars Patricia Hodge and Gaynor Faye as Yorkshire villagers who strip off to raise money for charity. Come to the cabaretLiza Minnelli will take up a two-week residency at the Palace on Broadway in December, marking her first performances on the Great White Way in almost a decade. The show, Liza's at the Palace, will find Minnelli backed by a 12-piece orchestra and belting out several Kander and Ebb songs, such as New York, New York. Minnelli will be joined by a quartet of dancers for a high-kicking tribute to her godmother Kay Thompson. The routine will resurrect Thompson's celebrated cabaret act of the 1940s. Minnelli's mother, Judy Garland, appeared at the Palace herself in the 50s; Liza last appeared there in 1999, when she performed songs from Garland's films.Fasten your seatbeltsThe big Broadway opening of the week was the Barrymore theatre's Speed-the-Plow, which has enjoyed rave reviews to rival the Old Vic's recent production with Kevin Spacey and Jeff Goldblum. Neil Pepe directs this revival of David Mamet's scathing play about Hollywood, starring Entourage's Jeremy Piven in his Broadway debut. For Variety's David Rooney, Piven's "tightly wound physicality and easy command of rapid-fire, hectoring dialogue make him a natural fit for Mamet". New York Times critic Ben Brantley says the Barrymore theatre "should provide seat belts" as the play "pursues its corkscrew course at such velocity that your instinct is to check yourself for whiplash … Is cynicism supposed to be this energizing?"