The bride was young and blonde and wore Armani; the groom was a billionaire "reformed playboy" prince. The royal wedding in Monaco seemed certain to be a glittering state occasion that would refresh faith in the Grimaldi family, a clan that has sometimes seemed better at scandal than leadership.The gowns were pressed, the flowers were readied and the classic American band was all set to rock. But happy weddings do also require willing brides. So when the French press published allegations that princess-to-be Charlene Wittstock had attempted to flee Monaco three times before the wedding – finally stopped from going to her native South Africa, allegedly by officials who confiscated her passport – the apparent fairytale seemed to veer from its Cinderella narrative into Rapunzel territory.Denials of Wittstock's thwarted attempts at what some described as "escape" were issued by spokespeople for the Grimaldi family: they described the story as "ugly rumours" and "unfounded lies" designed to undermine the monarchy. But in many of the photos of the occasion that have been released to the public, it's impossible not to note the sombre expressions on the faces of the couple, who "looked painfully serious throughout the formalities".Even if the allegations made by the press are found to be true there's no question that in many respects the glitzy nuptials were far removed from the kind of forced marriage that prompted the law banning it in Britain in 2008. But marrying into a super-rich family should not be regarded as a fair exchange for a woman being treated like chattel.If the allegations of her attempted flight are true, Wittstock would be far from the first woman to have had an urge to cancel her wedding plans. But without the future of a royal principality riding on our decision – if, as heir to the throne, Prince Albert doesn't have so-called legitimate heir himself, there's a possibility that the sovereignty of the principality will revert back to France – most of us have the agency to do so without being stopped by the government.But despite some differences in scale, we can sympathise with the supposed plight of the now-Princess Charlene. Our more mundane concerns can still cause us to make the wrong decisions when it comes to wedding plans that we've come to regret. Fear of the ire of a mother-in-law, of the embarrassment of returning gifts or the prospect of paying a catering bill for a wedding meal that no one will eat has driven many a reluctant bride or groom down the aisle into the arms of the person destined to become their future ex-husband or wife. Too often, the public performance of love in the form of a wedding becomes a juggernaut that overwhelms the actual relationship about which the love is being performed.Under the right circumstances, marriage can be very joyful. But under the wrong ones, it can be a trap: one in which no one deserves to be caught, no matter how rich, how poor or how frequently screen-printed on tea towels they are. Which is why it would be unconscionable for any state to interfere in any individual's freedom to choose whom they do marry – or don't.• If you have a subject you would like to see covered by Comment is free, please visit our You tell us page