On one balmy night this August, when the audience packed into the 522-seat belle epoque Monte Carlo Garnier Opera House, it felt like history was in the making. Even for Monaco, it was an unprecedented royal flush: two Princes in the same room, one singing, the other dancing.Surrounded by two glittery giant jellyfish dangling from the ceiling, Prince (the rock star) launched into a mega-decibel guitar riff. Meanwhile, His Serene Highness, Prince Albert II, hidden away in his plush red velvet royal box, was on his feet, barely able to keep still, just like the rest of the fans. The magnificent five-tonne chandelier of Bohemian crystal had been upstaged by psychedelic strobes. The gilded walls, nymphs and mythological gods were bathed in a purple glow.Call it the New Era. When Prince Rainier died in 2005 he was deeply mourned, but a page had been turned. Once considered a quieter-than-the-grave tax haven for ostentatiously wealthy expatriates, there's a flipside to Monaco. These days, the principality's stuffy image is slowly morphing into a hip, and even affordable destination, attractive to a younger crowd.This is, in part, thanks to Prince Albert, who actively supports the thriving arts scene, from the Monte Carlo Jazz Festival, which celebrates its fourth anniversary in November, to major art exhibitions at the Grimaldi Forum and the principality's latest museum, NMNM (New National Monaco Museum). There's also a new wave of reasonably priced restaurants and bars with lunchtime specials and happy hours. Or you can go native, stopping off at the bakeries to pick up freshly-baked regional specialities to feast on down at the beach.The best time to visit is September and October, when the sea is still warm and silky, and the hot silver haze of summer evaporates into the pure dazzling light of a mild autumn. No need to hire a car when the 45-minute bus ride from Nice airport is €28.50 return, or only €2.60 round trip from the centre of Nice. Since the sovereign state of Monaco is only around two kilometres square, everything is within walking distance or easily reachable by bus. (Check out the lifts built into the rock that take you from sea level to the heights of Monte Carlo).The perks continue: spend three nights in a two or three-star hotel in Monaco, and you get a voucher giving you free entry to the museums. At the top of the kid-friendly list are the guided tours of the throne room and state apartments in the dusty-pink Prince's Palace and the Oceanography Museum, with its impressive collection of bizarre coral reef marine creatures and a shark lagoon.The latest buzz is down by the port, in the Condamine neighbourhood, where the native Monégasques (approximately 8,000 of them, or 19% of the population) hang out. If you want to splash out, stay at the cool, new, three-star Ni Hotel, a 17-room design haven with a flashy, pop art-inspired bar, rooftop lounge, gym and stylish, hi-tech rooms.On rue Grimaldi, the same lively street as the Ni Hotel, browse the boutiques and pop into Le Dressing, a treasure trove for secondhand designer finery, from Chanel jackets to YSL silk gowns (from €300). Don't miss a morning trip to the Condamine open-air market on the Place d'Armes for a rainbow of fresh produce, from vine peaches to courgettes with yellow blossoms (used for delicately-fried flower fritters). Most of the neighbourhood bakeries here carry the inexpensive local finger food, Barbagiuan (which means Uncle John) – a fried dumpling stuffed with Swiss chard and Parmesan cheese, tian, mixed vegetables and rice, or pissaladière, a flat onion tart. Try Maison Mullot (first stand on the right inside the covered market), for savoury and sweet goodies, including the traditional sweet pastry, fougasse Monégasque.Down at the harbour, where the tiny blue-painted wooden fishing boats still unload their catch of the day, there are art galleries and rows of new cafes. Diehard lap swimmers should take advantage of the inviting outdoor, Olympic-sized, saltwater pool. For a handful of euros you can spend the afternoon basking and dunking.Come sunset, the latest after-work hotspot at the port is La Brasserie de Monaco, a friendly bar with an outdoor terrace, which serves four blends of its own organic beer. Check out the tasty cheap snacks, such as petits farcis (Provencal stuffed vegetables) and socca (a paper-thin savoury pancake made of chickpea flour and olive oil). A few doors down is Le Black Legend, a disco-style lounge that will feature Motown hits and live funk groups when it opens on Halloween.Even up on the hill the atmosphere is changing. Opened in 2008, Moods, built right under the Café de Paris, is a popular music bar lounge. The drinks are very expensive – a beer starts at €8 – but the live rock, jazz or blues is free.It's a far cry from Vegas, but Monaco's casinos are all part of the fun. Though the formal dress code is still upheld at the legendary belle epoque-style gaming landmark (bring your passport and €10 for the entrance fee), there are three other casinos – the Cafe de Paris, the Sun Casino inside the Fairmont Hotel, and the Monte-Carlo Bay – where casual attire rules and no fee is required. Expect cutting-edge models of slot machines (there are no sirens or jangling coins here – the machine discreetly prints up a voucher of your winnings). One evening this August, a tourist wandered over to a hi-tech Star Wars slot machine at the Sun Casino and began to play, at 5 cents per hit. Fifteen euros later, the jackpot fell into his lap, more than €700,000.No visit is complete without a wander through the heights of Monaco-Ville, west of the harbour. The setting for the Prince's Palace and Saint Nicholas Cathedral, this area, known as Le Rocher, or the Rock, is covered with a medieval mini-maze of cobblestone streets. It's deliciously peaceful up there in the suspended exotic gardens of Saint-Martin, filled with rare succulents and towering yuccas; and the stunning panoramic view won't cost you a cent.Where to StayHotel de France (00 377 9330 2464; monte-carlo.mc/france) in the heart of the Condamine district has small but cheery doubles from €85 including breakfast. The Ni Hotel on rue Grimaldi (00 377 9797 5151; nihotel.com) has doubles from €150. A far better-value option is to stay just east of Monaco in Roquebrune Cap-Martin. The Hotel Victoria (00 33 4 9335 6590; hotel-victoria.fr) has lovely sea-facing rooms inspired by Jean Cocteau from €89. The Monaco bus stops in front of the hotel, or the principality is a nine-minute train ride away. Le Roquebrune (00 33 4 9335 0016; le-roquebrune.com) is a charming five-room B&B with private seaview terraces. Double rooms costs from €110.Where to Eat There are some stunning bakeries in Monte Carlo. Try Maison Mullot or La Roca in Marché de la Condamine for onion tarts, quiches and barbagiuans from €2.50. Tartine Monaco on route de la Piscine (00 377 9798 7070; tartinemonaco.com) is an attractive new bistro featuring fresh fish and organic salads; two-course weekday lunch €15.80. In Roquebrune, La Différance on Sentier des Douaniers is a cafe with a dreamy sea view offering a plat du jour with coffee for around €12. The best pizza is at Il Triangolo on avenue de la Madone, a few steps from Casino Square in Monaco.Where to drinkLa Brasserie de Monaco, on route de la Piscine, serves organic beer brewed on the premises. It's €2 a glass at happy hour (5pm-8pm). Wine O'Clock, on avenue Saint-Laurent, has a terrace and an impressive choice of top vintages from €4 a glass.For more information see visitmonaco.com