The new US owners of Cadbury's chocolate are working on a secret plan to shift key parts of the 186-year-old British business to Switzerland in a move likely to deprive the UK exchequer of millions of pounds of tax.Kraft, which took control of Cadbury in an £11bn takeover this year, intends to turn the firm into a subsidiary of a new Swiss company. The new structure would slash its bill for UK corporation tax. Last year, Cadbury handed over £200m to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.Kraft's plans, uncovered by the Guardian, are likely to fuel anger at the manoeuvres used by big corporations to avoid tax. A fast-growing group of activists, inspired by the UK Uncut group, plan to protest tomorrow in nine cities across the country against what they view as unfair tax avoidance by big companies on high streets.The activists insist a clampdown on tax avoidance would reduce the government's £83bn of public spending cuts. The protests will target fashion stores such as Topshop, Burton and Miss Selfridge, all owned by Sir Philip Green. The billionaire made corporate history five years ago when his Arcadia retail empire paid a £1.2bn dividend to his wife, Tina, who lives in Monaco.Green, who has claimed his personal tax affairs are "not relevant", has recently advised the coalition on efficiency savings. Other companies targeted include Boots, Barclays, Lloyds and HSBC.Kraft uses a Swiss ownership structure for its existing UK business. A spokesman said it was "integrating Cadbury into this model". He said "Switzerland is a tax efficient location", but insisted the decision to change Cadbury's legal structure is "about growing the top line of the company".The vast majority of the Cadbury workforce would be unaffected by the change.UK Uncut's protests were prompted by reports that UK tax authorities had dropped a bid to recoup £6bn in taxes from Vodafone, which are said to have stemmed from the firm allegedly using a Luxembourg offshoot. Vodafone has described the claims as "urban myth".Last month, the anti-poverty campaign group ActionAid accused the world's second biggest beer company, SABMiller, of avoiding millions of pounds in tax in India and Africa by routing profits through tax-haven subsidiaries. London-based SABMiller denied the allegations and said there were "sound commercial reasons for the location of its subsidiaries".