The director of an Oscar-tipped biopic which stars Nicole Kidman as Grace Kelly has attacked plans by Harvey Weinstein to edit the film as a "pile of shit".Speaking to French newspaper Liberation in comments translated by the Hollywood Reporter, Olivier Dahan stridently defended his right to release Grace of Monaco, which details a period in Kelly's marriage to Rainier III, prince of the tiny European state, in its original form. Weinstein, who is famed for his cutting room proclivities, recently delayed the film's debut in cinemas on the basis that it is not yet ready to be viewed.The film, about Kelly's intervention in a row between Rainier and France's president Charles De Gaulle, had been tipped for a tilt at the 2014 Oscars, but will now miss the deadline for the annual awards ceremony. Dahan said there was no need for a delay because his movie is already finished and does not need recutting."The film that I am in the process of finishing is complicated to finalise, although actually, for me, it is finished," Dahan told Liberation. "What's complicated at the moment is ensuring that you, the critics, can review my version of the film and not that of somebody else. It's not over yet. I haven't given up."Dahan said he was being blackmailed by Weinstein into signing off on a new edit which did not represent his original vision. "It's right to struggle, but when you confront an American distributor like Weinstein, not to name names, there is not much you can do," the director said. "Either you say 'Go figure it out with your pile of shit' or you brace yourself so the blackmail isn't as violent … If I don't sign, that's where the out-and-out blackmail starts, but I could go that far. There are two versions of the film for now: mine and his … which I find catastrophic."He added: "It's got hardly anything to do with the film. It's only about the money, the release strategy, millions of dollars and stuff like that. It's got nothing to do with cinema. I mean, of course it's about cinema, but the business side. They want a commercial film smelling of daisies, taking out anything that exceeds that which is too abrupt, everything that makes it cinematic and breathe with life. A lot of things are missing."Grace of Monaco, which also stars Frank Langella, Parker Posey, Derek Jacobi, Paz Vega and Tim Roth, is currently due for release in March 2014, having been delayed from November by The Weinstein Company, which is co-owned by Bob and Harvey Weinstein. Shot in France, Italy and Monaco last Autumn, the film focuses on a period in 1962 when De Gaulle established an economic blockade on the small principality over its status as a tax haven.Weinstein, a renowned Oscars campaigner who oversaw successful runs for The Artist and The King's Speech in recent years, has labelled the film a "fantastic, and very glamorous" movie that "could be bigger" than Marilyn Monroe biopic My Week with Marilyn. But he also told the Hollywood Reporter last month: "The score wasn't ready, a lot of things weren't ready."• More on Diana• More on Grace of Monaco• Alex von Tunzelmann: Princesses for grownups – Diana and Grace of Monaco• Grace of Monaco: watch Nicole Kidman as Grace Kelly in world exclusive trailer for new biopic