Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must pass over in silence. Wittgenstein's famous one-liner is acquiring an eerie new resonance in a most unlikely place – the courtroom. The ideal of the whole truth being placed on record is increasingly strained by strict injunctions which preclude not only knowledge of what has been said, but of the fact that a hearing ever took place. In recent days a corporation, which shall of course remain nameless, served the Guardian with an order. This not only barred us from publishing details of a document raising the possibility of serious wrongdoing on its part, but also prevented us from letting slip that any such injunction had been made.There is a powerful sense that this is part of a pattern, although obtaining watertight proof is impossible, since in many such cases there is also an order to seal the court files, which is where one would ordinarily look in order to undertake a tally of injunctions. One is left in the Carollesque absurdity of being unable to count the number of secret sessions because such sessions are not officially held to count. Occasional cases where injunctions have been revoked on appeal – such as that imposed on Private Eye by senior lawyer Michael Napier to conceal murky handling of a complaint against him – have shown how the public interest is ill-served by public ignorance.The underlying problem is the half-evolved state of the privacy law, which the courts are developing under Article 8 of the European convention on human rights. This covers the "right to respect for [one's] private and family life", and was originally intended to preclude Stasi-style policing more than anything else, although in 2004 Strasbourg ruled that it also afforded protection to Princess Caroline of Monaco to enjoy a private life without endless hounding by the paparazzi. Her plight deserved sympathy, but that is not true of those corporations (dubious candidates for "human" rights in any circumstances) who exploit the principle that she supposedly established in order to divert the harsh light of day away from any dealings they would prefer to keep under wraps.The growing band of Strasbourg judges who come from countries that lack strong free speech traditions is a concern, but it must be hoped that the court there will nonetheless soon use another case to clarify the many circumstances in which the public interest requires that the right to privacy be tempered by the right to free expression. But even before that happens, British judges should find the courage to make a stand. At the very moment when the government's control order regime for terror suspects is unravelling because of its reliance on secret evidence, they should surely be more mindful than ever that justice in the dark is rarely justice at all.