Money can't buy you taste. This universal law is amply confirmed by the news that a £700m "hyper yacht" called the Streets of Monaco is on the drawing board of Derby-based ship designers Yacht Island Design. Whether it will ever get off that drawing board and into the sea is yet to be decided.Aimed at the billionaire who, unable to get enough of being moored off the real Monaco, needs to sleep aboard a mock one, the 155-metre yacht offers all a bored tax exile could ever need.The mock facades of Monaco's landmark buildings "reflect the style and sophistication of the principality", according to the designer. Once you're done with the swimming pools and tennis courts – yes, that's plural – you could admire the mini waterfall or sit in the cafe with its underwater views. Or perhaps rest in your three-floor, 4,800sq ft apartment before enjoying the main deck's go-kart track – with tunnels – inspired by the Monaco grand prix circuit."We do see a lot of concepts for super-yachts being floated, but not all of them get built," says Andrew Johansson of SuperyachtDesign magazine. "This borders on the extreme, although we did see a design for a flying super-yacht last year, which surely will never get built. Streets of Monaco is a cool idea, though. The designers have done their homework."Johansson won't comment on how many of these yachts actually get commissioned – or who buys them beyond, that is, a certain football-loving Russian billionaire who is now on to his fifth yacht (and who, allegedly, lost one in a poker game) – but he says an even larger model is nearing completion. "It's nearly 200 metres in length, but we'd probably call it a vessel, not a super-yacht."And what marks out a "super yacht"? "They are typically 80-100 metres, but the super-yacht classification usually means anything longer than 30 metres." So, small enough to fit into the Streets of Monaco's master bedroom.And next up on the drawing board: "An 85-metre yacht, based around a Pacific Island theme."• Up to 16 guests can "stay" at the Monte Carlo Casino, Hotel de Paris, Cafe de Paris, La Rascasse or the Loews Hotel.• The 70-strong crew sleep below deck.• Fill her up here. Estimated running costs? "Tens of millions" each year. Top speed: 15 knots.• Go-cart track. Celebratory champagne spraying encouraged.• "Casino Square" features a fountain "in a tranquil garden setting".• Lower levels feature a "spa with manicure and hair salon, sauna/steam rooms and a relaxation lounge with pool and bar".• Private submarine can be "deployed from one of the submerged hulls".