

2.01am BST
02:01

I just caught myself wondering if New Zealand really needs a flag, or if New Zealand even exists at all. I’m in the eye of the koru and it’s time to wrap this up.So, the flag consideration panel has published its shortlist. What now?The public will be asked to rank the four designs in the first binding postal referendum this year, which will be held between 20 November and 11 December.This will determine a preferred alternative.It is statistically likely to be a silver fern design.The second binding postal referendum will be held in March next year. It will ask voters to choose between the fern (come on, let’s be real) and the current flag.If the outcome is the new (fern) flag, it will be adopted six months after the decision is announced.It will be interesting to see which version of events is confirmed.Guardian Australia will cover each stage of the process.In the meantime, a “hypnoflag” parody account has already been started on Twitter, and I am thinking about a message from a friend I received about 15 minutes ago, which said, “It is brave of you to run this live blog even though it should objectively be causing you permanent brain damage”.I AM THE ONE TRUE #HYPNOFLAGThanks for following along.

1.53am BST
01:53

Guardian writer Oliver Burkeman is one person who has been enthusiastically following the Flag Consideration Panel’s deliberations from the other side of the world.This was his pick. “This is the one that should win and I’ll be massively outraged for weeks on Twitter if it doesn’t (maybe),” he tweeted before the shortlist was announced.pffft. none of the best ones https://t.co/xGNW9QoM0wIf I've learned one thing today it's that we each carry a unique New Zealand flag design, in our heartsActually, yes! Make the new flag a mirror, like when Time magazine made YOU person of the year“He seems unusually concerned for someone who has zero connection to the story,” remarks my Guardian Australia colleague Claire Phipps.

1.48am BST
01:48

Before I wrap this up, let’s reminisce about the optimism we felt in the process’ earliest stages, when the new New Zealand flag could have been just about anything. Related: New Zealand's new flag: 15 quirky contenders 

1.44am BST
01:44

The official correspondence from the Flag Consideration Panel is fairly sunny in spite of the outpouring of bile aimed at them on Twitter. They made this nice graphic thanking every New Zealander for their contribution to the process. Is it a Magic Eye? Put your nose to your monitor! Then let us know what you see in the comments!This is how the #nzflag panel thanked every person who submitted one of the 10,292 alternative designs pic.twitter.com/r1W9JUj3PaBut they haven’t publicised much in the way of details about how they reached their decision of the final four, beyond the following metrics:In appealing for alternative flag designs, the panel asked New Zealanders to share what they “stand for”. The findings of that stage of the process are a fascinating insight into Aotearoa (please excuse this text rendering of a word cloud).Large sized words:Medium sized words:Smaller words:

1.25am BST
01:25

New Zealanders be like:I made a gif for you @Hypnoflag pic.twitter.com/ebQSH3DSdU

1.24am BST
01:24

No take is hotter than that of Guardian Australia’s comment editor, Adam Brereton, and he’s just filed:ah yes, new zealand. the country with a big decision ahead of it: which bad flag design will the rest of the world ignore from now onnew zealand: we must choose a new symbol for our nation, to represent our people rest of the world: hush now adults are talkingthe idea that you just summon a new symbol up out of a committee and suddenly everyone's into it is a bit oddimagine going through all this effort to create a new flag for a country that should have been a state of australia anywayi will do everything in my power to destroy new zealand's "like Australia, but nice and with better beer" imagenew zealand: you have made a powerful enemy this daynew zealanders do not @ me unless it's to admit you stuffed up by not being a part of the commonwealth

1.20am BST
01:20

As a New Zealand citizen I will be voting in the postal referendum in November or December. My own submission to the open gallery, way back in May, was rejected because it showed a person’s image and/or “is offensive or divisive”.Vote for my NZ flag design, showing Lorde with silver ferns for eyes, rugby ball for a mouth, wearing a Bain sweater pic.twitter.com/V515eexwHLIt was nonetheless subsequently held up by a comedian on national New Zealand television as an example of how stupid New Zealanders can be, which I suppose is fair enough."My big fear is, New Zealanders are going to choose the wrong flag" pic.twitter.com/0qm9k5mKQf

1.13am BST
01:13

The New Zealand government thinks this may inform your decision, too.How do you want New Zealand to be represented by arts graduates worldwide? Official images c/o the #nzflag panel pic.twitter.com/a2JEpVwd9X

1.11am BST
01:11

This may inform your decision.

1.09am BST
01:09

Fourth option for new NZ flag - second design on the shortlist from Kyle Lockwood @NZStuff pic.twitter.com/D99Bq2dpxgThe designer’s description: The silver fern: A New Zealand icon for over 160 years, worn proudly by many generations. The fern is an element of indigenous flora representing the growth of our nation. The multiple points of the fern leaf represent Aotearoa’s peaceful multicultural society, a single fern spreading upwards represents that we are all one people growing onward into the future. The bright blue represents our clear atmosphere and the Pacific Ocean, over which all New Zealanders, or their ancestors, crossed to get here. The Southern Cross represents our geographic location in the antipodes. It has been used as a navigational aid for centuries and it helped guide early settlers to our islands.This blogger’s take: nuhrghghhgrghhjhgfghhUpdated
at 1.09am BST
