Magnificent landscape. Decent people. Good food. It's just a pity about the daft flag and cringe-making anthem. And the name. New Zealand. To be christened in honour of a damp province at the bottom of Holland. The shame of it. Little wonder so many kiwis (ambitiously, we name ourselves after nocturnal, flightless birds) now prefer to call their home Aotearoa - a Maori word for "land of the long white cloud".But a fresh etymological row has shaken this Pacific paradise. The two main land masses, it's emerged, have no formal names. Don Grant, chairman of the New Zealand Geographic Board, says that "North Island and South Island are actually not official names under our legislation, despite their common long-term usage". He has launched a consultation to consider formalising alternative Maori names or even adopting new English ones.The most commonly used Maori names are Te Ika a Maui for the North Island and Te Wai Pounamu for the South Island. Te Ika-a-Maui means "the fish of Maui" (in a particularly successful fishing expedition, the puckish hero of Maori mythology hooked a big one, which transmogrified into an island). Te Wai Pounamu means "the waters of greenstone" (the island has lots of water and the precious stone pounamu).Leaving to one side the important debate in New Zealand about restoring Maori placenames - and let's not be distracted by the atypically tricky North Island landmark Taumatawhakatangihangakoauauotamateaturipukakapikimaungahoronukupokaiwhenuakitanatahu ("the summit of the hill, where Tamatea, the man with the big knees, who slid down, climbed up and swallowed mountains, and is known as the Land Eater, played his flute to his loved one") - the opportunity to rename the islands has prompted a veritable trickle of suggestions. One New Zealand newspaper, hilariously, suggested the islands be renamed "fush and chups" or "Kiri and Te Kanawa". To which might be added bach and crib (beach-house designations), or Hokey and Pokey, or jandals and gumboots. But the truth is that New Zealanders are unlikely to abandon the perfectly serviceable, if unadventurous, designations North and South Island.