Royal officials today insisted that Prince William's first official overseas tour, to New Zealand next month, was not an attempt to head off growing republican feeling in the country.The 27-year-old prince will open New Zealand's supreme court building in Wellington on 18 January during a five-day trip which will also include an unofficial visit to Australia.Royal officials denied suggestions over the weekend that the invitation meant the prince was supplanting his father in the line of succession. A senior official said: "It is inevitable as he gets older that the Queen will ask him to represent her. Her Majesty sees it as an opportunity for her grandsons to learn the ropes."The first half of the visit is at the invitation of New Zealand's government, whose prime minister, John Key, has said he sees the country becoming a republic within a decade as inevitable. The second half of the trip, to Sydney and Melbourne in Australia, is being made at the prince's own request. Whether he will meet the Australian prime minister, Kevin Rudd, is still being considered in Canberra.Palace sources expect the prince's first official visit to generate crowds. Although he visited New Zealand during the British and Irish Lions' rugby tour there in 2005, he has not been to Australia since he accompanied his parents on their tour in 1983. Prince Charles himself last visited the region in 2005.Officials at Clarence House said the prince's grandmother, who is also New Zealand's head of state, passed on the invitation for an official visit. "The Queen of New Zealand graciously passed on the invitation to him. I am not getting into the political whys and wherefores," an official said. "This is not about Prince William getting enmeshed in politics; it is about him going to open the supreme court building."We are planning for crowds, we would be stupid not to – there is going to be a lot of interest. I don't think it would be appropriate for us to comment on the actions or intentions of groups within the country."The itinerary includes a trip across Auckland harbour in a yacht with the New Zealand crew preparing for the Americas Cup, a visit to a nature reserve to see a real kiwi – a bird not a person – and a tour of a children's hospital. Key is holding a barbecue in the prince's honour. In Australia, there will be visits to see the governor general and state governors in New South Wales and Victoria, a meeting with Australian troops and a visit to an oceanographic survey ship in Sydney harbour.Clarence House staff said the prince would be taking a week of his annual RAF leave to undertake the visit, before starting the following week training as a helicopter search and rescue pilot. The New Zealand government is paying for its part of the trip and the Queen is underwriting the cost of the second half.A palace official said: "Prince William is looking forward to this immensely. He has been ticking off the days. He has heard his brother going on about his gap year [in Australia] for six years and it will be a fantastic opportunity for him."