Cushchine Cottage, KaikouraPosted by kevincoleCushchine Cottage is a small, family-friendly, beautiful, self-catering rental set within an animal farm park. It's an ideal base for all of Kaikoura's attractions (about a mile from the town centre) and includes free access to the Farm Park, and you can help out with their early morning feeding.The cottage has two bedrooms (sleeps up to seven), an equipped kitchen, lounge with wood burner, sofas and TV, free use of a gas barbecue and fabulous views of Mt Fyffe. Towels and bedding are included, and it only costs NZ$100-180 (£35-63) a night (depends on numbers and time of year).We spent two nights in a more expensive motel, before staying an extra night in the rental cottage. We enjoyed it so much, we chose cottages for the rest of our NZ trip!Ask them about a lovely walk to a nearby river, less than a mile away, with two huge natural swimming pools - it's a local secret!· 12 Kowhai Ford Road; +64 3 319 5033; www.cushchinecottage.co.nzWally's Backpackers, NapierPosted by hcacThis place was hard to find, at least late at night, but it is a clean, stylish and a welcoming hostel with very reasonable rates. Since they seem to screen his guests a bit, it's also quiet and better for the more mature budget traveller which is exactly what I needed. I can't thank them enough for a real bed, comforter, and my two best nights of sleep in weeks.· 7 Cathedral Lane, Napier; +64 6 833 7930; www.wallysbackpackers.co.nz/Frauenreisehaus women's hostel, ChristchurchPosted by bronsterThis is a friendly, relaxed and comfortable hostel exclusively for women. From the swinging chairs outside in the garden to the multitude of kitchen gadgets (and free coffee, tea and hot chocolate), this is a place to enjoy.· 272 Barbadoes Street, Christchurch; +64 3 3662585Kaikoura Food Company and Fudge Factory, KaikouraPosted by hcacDespite a sort of funny name, this place surprised me. Out of all the food I've eaten in New Zealand over a two month period, only this one has struck me as a place where they care about the food they make and its presentation and I made sure to let them know. I had their eggs benedict for a brunch time offering and it was outstanding. Two perfectly poached eggs on grilled ciabatta bread with wilted spinach and hollandaise.· 94 Beach Road, Kaikoura; +64 3 319 7160Fidel's Café, WellingtonPosted by explorer82It may be hidden up the far end of Cuba Street but don't let that put you off. Walk that little bit further because this place has some fantastic coffee and food, especially their iced chocolates and savoury muffins. It has a cool kitsch interior as well as outdoor seating so is a great place to hang out and relax. Check out the local clothing stores on the way down Cuba Street too, especially Frutti and Carly Harris.· 234 Cuba Street, Wellington; +64 4 801 6868; www.fidelscafe.comC'est la vie (Au Bout du Monde), AkaroaPosted by EledhwenThis quirky little restaurant in the centre of Akaroa is justly recommended in guidebooks. It has precisely two sittings of dinner a day - 6pm and 8.30pm, and woe betide you if you arrive early, you'll have to wait - the menu is written on a blackboard outside the door, and the walls are covered in thanks from satisfied customers. There isn't much room, so book in advance (however rumours of having to book six months in advance are exaggerated). Food is French-influenced but with local produce - the smoked salmon is divine. Prices are equivalent to bigger city restaurants (mains in the NZ$30-35 (£10.50-12) range) but it's well worth it!· 33 Rue Lavaud, Akaroa; +64 3 304 7314Amisfield Winery, Central OtagoPosted by RogerNBCentral Otago has more than its fair share of wineries where you can enjoy tastings and/or a great meal among some of New Zealand's finest scenery.One of my favourites is the Amisfield Winery, which is halfway between Queenstown and Arrowtown on the shores of Lake Hayes. It's a fantastic place for a relaxed lunch or dinner with a great outdoor terrace (weather permitting). If they've got any left, try their rose but I'm afraid I may have drunk it all on my last visit.· 10 Lake Hayes Road, RD 1, Queenstown; +64 3 442 0556; www.amisfield.co.nzHuka Jet, TaupoPosted by kamaThe Huka Jet is a 30-minute high-speed jet boating experience that shows you the spectacular Huka Falls and whizzes you past cliffs at 80km per hour. It does a 360 degree spin, and, at times, you get so close to the cliff walls that you can almost feel them graze your ears!Afterwards, lunch at the Huka Prawn Park right next to the Huka Jet is delicious.· Wairakei Park, Taupo; +64 7 374 8572; www.hukafallsjet.com/page/5-HomeDoubtful SoundPosted by simonplattMore remote, much bigger and far less crowded than the more well-known Milford Sound, Doubtful Sound is one of those rare places that justifies the word "awesome".Book an overnight tour on a three-masted boat and discover a place that is equal part-myth and geology. You can launch a kayak off the boat and explore one of the Sound's many creeks up close, as the cliffs tower above you and the water flows like molten glass beneath your oars.Then it's back on board for a hot shower, a glass of wine and the camaraderie of people who've shared something quite spellbinding.· Corner of Town Centre & Mokonui Streets, Te Anau; +64 3 249 7416; www.realjourneys.co.nz/Main/Doubtful/Kayak to Rangitoto IslandPosted by cparkyDon't just admire the stunning Rangitoto in the middle of the harbour - paddle there! A guided round trip takes six hours including a climb to the summit for great views of the city and harbour. For extra credibility try the evening option. It was amazing paddling back across the harbour in the dark, just a row of little lights bobbing across the silent water with the city around us. Fantastic.· 12 Tamaki Drive, Okahu Bay, Auckland; +64 9 529 2230; www.fergskayaks.co.nzThe Tongariro CrossingPosted by nilpferdThe crossing is a day-trip across the extinct volcano of Mt. Tongariro. It requires some effort, but the rewards are worth it once you reach the moon-landscape and startling colours of the upper crater. To the south lies the still active cone Ngauruhoe, and to the north lake Taupo, which is a caldera resulting from one of the largest ever supervolcanic eruptions. The descent through tussock and native bush rounds off the trip nicely.· www.tongarirocrossing.org.nzDrive the Milford Road from Te AnauPosted by PlisskenThe plane flight in from Queenstown is spectacular, but the drive from Te Anau is easily its equal. The books say allow two hours for the 120km drive but to be honest, give yourself three and enjoy the spectacular journey. The best place to view keas (alpine parrots) is at the entrance to the Homer Tunnel.Te Ngaere Bay, NorthlandPosted by explorer82When heading north out of Kerikeri most people will turn off to visit or camp at Matauri Bay. This place is fantastic for swimming, fishing, walking and diving amongst other activities. But make sure you follow the road around to the next bay for a visit. Te Ngaere Bay is a quieter and more secluded area which has lots to offer. There's easy access for boats so it's a great place to go fishing, kids will enjoy the rock pools for exploring and the beach is perfect for swimming. Allow a full day to properly enjoy the surroundings.GisbornePosted by oceaniadawnGisborne is on the east coast of the North Island and is a place few tourists venture to. I love it because the coastline is so beautiful.Ignore the main beach in town. Instead head north through the township and stop at Wainui beach or go over the hill to Makorori (where the surfers go).Both beaches are beautiful and are sandfly-free (really!). There are some fantastic restaurants in Gisborne, and one of the best bookshops in NZ (Muirs). The whole East Cape is beautiful, and worth a visit if you have the time.· gisbornenz.com/