Preamble Morning. Who says 50-over cricket has nothing new to offer? This fascinating competition will enter virgin territory today, when either South Africa and New Zealand will win a World Cup knockout game for the first time. The fact they have not done so before is pretty staggering, even if it is not quite the statgasm we might think. This is only the second World Cup to have quarter-finals, so there haven't been that many knockout games down the years: this is the 34th in total, of which six have been lost by New Zealand and four by South Africa. Since South Africa's readmission to international cricket, the two sides have strikingly similar records. They were semi-finalists in 1992, 1999 and 2007; they were quarter-finalists in 1996; and they failed to reach the knockout stages in 2003. Yet a more relevant comparison might be between South Africa and another New Zealand team: the rugby boys, who have also found umpteen weird and wonderful ways not to win a World Cup.If South Africa discover another today, in a match they should win, a popular C-word may well be trending on a social networking site near you. (Insert your own 'and chokers will be trending too' joke here.)The winners of this match will play either Sri Lanka or England in Colombo on Tuesday. This will be played before the India v Pakistan semi-final. Scandalous, clearly, but all part of the plan from cricket's governing body, the BCCI, to ensure that India win.An early email, from Guy Collier "So this isn't exactly to do with the cricket but stick with me and I will do my best to bring it around. I am currently running a social experiment to see what happens when we open up questions of identity and move away from the traditional tick box approach you see in the census form – and if one small boy, albeit one who is actually 6ft tall and 30, can run a census from his bedroom using just social media. And the power of OBO cricket."I am looking for any and all plugs to encourage people to state on Twitter #altcensus today I am.... I will gather all the statements to see how they compare to the national census. If anyone has any questions they can check www.alternativecensus.org.uk. So here is my tenuous cricket link: what box do half the England cricket team tick when asked about national identity...? Maybe if they took part in the Alternative Census we could find out!"The power of OBO cricket. Arf!South Africa at the World CupGroup stages: P42 W30 L11 T1 (Win percentage: 71)Knockout games: P4 W0 L3 T1 (Win percentage: 0)New Zealand at the World CupGroup stages: P61 W39 L22 (Win percentage: 64)Knockout games: P6 W0 L6 (Win percentage: 0)New Zealand have won the toss and will bat first. I think they had to do that to have a realistic chance of victory. That sets this game up beautifully. If they put 250 on the board, chase won't be the only CH-word we'll be mentioning as South Africa's batsmen go about their business.Both sides have picked three frontline spinners. Daniel Vettori returns to the side, even though he is not fully fit, and the left-armer Luke Woodcock also comes in, with James Franklin omitted. South Africa have Johan Botha, Imran Tahir and Robin Peterson, while the big three – Dale Steyn, Morne Morkel and AB de Villiers – return after sitting out the final group games against Bangladesh. Morne van Wyk misses out as a result.New Zealand Guptill, B McCullum (wk), Ryder, Taylor, Styris, Williamson, Vettori, N McCullum, Oram, Southee, Woodcock.South Africa Smith (c), Amla, Kallis, de Villiers (wk), Duminy, du Plessis, Botha, Peterson, Steyn, Morkel, Tahir.As these two are serial losers in the World Cup knockout stages, here is some encouragement for them from one of the most inspiring figures ever to bestride this earth. Ignore the bit at the top right of the video.Morning people Who are these weird "morning people" I keep seeing? They're a menace to society with their walking, talking and general 6am sentience. My alarm has been going off before 5.30 and 6 throughout this World Cup, and I've not felt so consistently violated since I inexplicably watched most of the first season of Gossip Girl in one hit. Why would anyone get up at such an hour, never mind seem so jaunty and busy? Yes we all admire your lust for life and the incontrovertibly superior energy content of your diet, but please don't rub in our face, at least not before midday.Thankfully the Guardian power-showers are one of the best things that have ever happened to anyone, ever, so I now feel vaguely human. But I still don't understand these strange "morning people". They're worse than the paediatricians. There's even a guide how to be a morning person. No thanks!1st over: New Zealand 2-0 (Guptill 1, B McCullum 1) South Africa open with a spinner, as usual. How odd it is to type that sentence. Today it's Robin Peterson rather than Johan Botha and his first over, played cagily, brings just a couple of singles. "Can today's match officially be termed a west London derby?" says Elliot Carr-Barnsley. "Also, cracking article by Selvey on Yardy's depression." It was. Selve is in storming form at the moment.2nd over: New Zealand 5-0 (Guptill 1, B McCullum 4) Dale Steyn's first ball is driven urgently through extra cover for three by Brendon McCullum. Those are the only runs from the over, although one delivery to Guptill bounces twice before reaching the keeper, a reflection of the pace of this pitch. New Zealand have beaten South Africa at the last two World Cups, famously so in 2003 when Stephen Fleming played an awesome innings; they are not the same side these days, but don't write them off, at least not until they collapse to 40 for seven. They certainly have a puncher's chance now that they are batting first. "Hold your horses Smyth, my boy," says Andrew Jobson. "In the (admittedly unlikely) event of the match being abandoned, the higher-ranked team (SA) progresses. So New Zealand would be knocked out, and SA could then get beaten in the semi by the winner of SL-Eng, preserving both teams' winless records."WICKET! New Zealand 5-1 (B McCullum ct and b Peterson 4) A sensational return catch from Robin Peterson gets rid of the dangerman Brendon McCullum. He danced down the track but was done by a bit of extra bounce and pushed the ball back to the left of Peterson, who dived and then extended a telescopic arm to take a wonderful catch. He took an unbelievable catch off his own bowling earlier in the tournament to dismiss Ian Bell, and this was comparable. Brilliant stuff.3rd over: New Zealand 6-1 (Guptill 1, Ryder 1) Robin Peterson is having quite a tournament. "This is it, isn't it?" says Duncan Bonnett. "I've spent the whole of last night and this morning not laughing at the Aussies in case it comes back to bite my boys as karmic revenge. We need to get into the Kiwi middle order quickly, or I'm afraid the ahem, nerves, will start to jangle out there. On paper, we're too strong for the Kiwis, but what if they pick scissors instead of rock?" Could make a 'Dale Stone' joke. Doesn't really work. Dale Stone!4th over: New Zealand 14-1 (Guptill 1, Ryder 8) An unusually sloppy over from Steyn includes a low full toss and a leg-side wide to Ryder, who then inside edges a hot inswinger to fine leg for four. These are very dangerous times for New Zealand, who could fold if they lose another one here. Ryder ends the over by clunking a pull over mid on for three. "Please can we have early mention for what I expect to be the star of today's game?" says Neil Withers. "I am of course referring to Daniel Vettori's amazing moustache – I saw it last night on TV and couldn't stop laughing! It's the finest display of slug-balancing since Baldrick."5th over: New Zealand 15-1 (Guptill 1, Ryder 9) The offspinner Johan Botha replaces Robin Peterson. As Mark Nicholas says on Sky, Graeme Smith is loving captaining a side with so many options. It's like going from the basic five channels to the full Sky+ experience, or so I'd imagine if I had Sky. Botha so nearly zips a quicker one through Ryder, who gets a very late inside edge. One from a very good over. South Africa have been seriously impressive thus far. "Morning people have just taken the next logical step from pretending they didn't want to come to the party you didn't invite them to," says Dan Smith. "They couldn't come to that party, or indeed any other event you wouldn't want them at, because they need to be up bright and early for a granola-fuelled jog to the office. I spit in their carrot juice."WICKET! New Zealand 16-2 (Guptill c Botha b Steyn 1) This is too easy for South Africa. Steyn dupes Guptill with a lovely slower ball, and he drives it high in the air to mid off, where Botha takes a nonchalant running catch.6th over: New Zealand 16-2 (Ryder 10, Taylor 0) In their last World Cup knockout game, the 2007 semi-final, South Africa lost the match inside 10 overs. They might have won this one by the 10th over. They have been outstanding. "You can rail against morning people all you want," says Peter Hanes, "but never forget that they're the ones that ensure that the supermarket is stocked with fish fingers by the time you get there."7th over: New Zealand 17-2 (Ryder 10, Taylor 1) One from another crafty Botha over. New Zealand are in all sorts of bother, already. "Yesterday's link to the freak yoga instructor and his rooster was bad enough, but linking to Nick Berry singing that execrable dirge is going too far," says Martin Sinclair. "I'd rather complete my census than sit through that twaddle!"8th over: New Zealand 24-2 (Ryder 16, Taylor 2) Morkel replaces Steyn, and Ryder flays a full delivery square on the off side for four. Good shot. "If you want to become a morning person it is simple - have a small child (yes yes I know, OBO readers, but even Millings has managed)," says Robin Hazlehurst. "You will get up at ungodly hours for several years and eventually get used to it. Option two, be a small child, they are certainly morning people. You were probably one too once, you just don't remember."9th over: New Zealand 27-2 (Ryder 17, Taylor 3) Crikey, Danny Morrison has entered the commentary box and is now using that soft, ticklish voice of his. I bet he whispers the sweetest nothings. Botha bowls a leg-side wide and then Ryder pushes a single to mid off. NZ bat a long way down – Oram is down to come in at No9 – so there's no need to panic just yet. But they need to find a bowler to target, and I'm not sure there are any. "I don't really get why anyone would want to get up early every day," says Guy Hornsby. "It's a necessity in order to pay the bills, to top up the supply of Liver Compromiser. The sort of people that do it are the preternaturally happy people – like children's TV presenters – that talk in awful lingo: work/life balance, working 'clever', maximising your potential, living life to the full. I just got a bit of sick in my mouth from that. There are so few jobs that would make you want to do that. Astronaut? Actor? International playboy? OBO writer? I bet Hugh Hefner doesn't get up in the morning. And yes, I'm hungover." I just typed 'children's TV presenter' into google, and look what was the second result.10th over: New Zealand 34-2 (Ryder 24, Taylor 3) Ryder spanks another square drive for four off Morkel, despite or perhaps because of the presence of Kallis at short point. It went through his legs in fact. Ryder then pulls through square leg for three. He's a dangerous customer, and he looks in the mood to give it some humpty. "I'm a Kiwi watching in Wellington," says Cat Doran. "Expecting an early night once we implode." Now that's what I call confidence.11th over: New Zealand 36-2 (Ryder 25, Taylor 4) "Any tips on getting my colleagues in Norway to embrace the majestic game that is cricket (even if it is the pyjama format)?" says Al Weeks. "I can't see why it's not a big hit here already, the climate is perfect for it and with the recent performance of minor nations they've probably got a chance of putting an ad hoc team together and giving England a close game." Show them lots of videos of Viv. He was even cooler than your average Scandinavian, so they'll surely recognise the swagger.12th over: New Zealand 47-2 (Ryder 33, Taylor 5) Peterson is back for Morkel, who took a little bit of abuse from Ryder. As does Peterson when a widish delivery is clattered through the covers for four. He gets four more to the same area off the last ball of the over, this time with a cut stroke. Ryder looks dangerous. "What a great start by the South Africans," says George Miller. "Peterson has really been a revelation for us in the WC. Although we are supposed to working on three papers (tomorrow, Sunday and Monday), production has pretty much ground to a halt."13th over: New Zealand 50-2 (Ryder 34, Taylor 7) Imran Tahir is going to bowl. He has stunning record in this tournament – 12 wickets at an average of 9.83 – and his second ball is a delicious googly that beats Ryder all ends up. Three from the over. "Rob old chap, am I the only one picking up a bit of, umm,

Kenneth Williams
 campness in your commentary this morning?" says Steve Hudson. "Lovely man paunch? Danny M's whispered sweet nothings? If you're building up to a frank admission of some sort, just let me tell you that the OBO crew will be very supportive. After all, there's no room for intolerance in the world of online bilge these days. We'll tolerate anything. Clearly."14th over: New Zealand 53-2 (Ryder 35, Taylor 9) Three singles from Peterson's over. "Oh come on all you townies, out here in the wilds of Oxonshire there is the dawn chorus (coming in strong at about 0500 currently but set to move earlier)," says Angus Doulton. "Exactly what is needed to fortify one for a morning's OBO humour. Actually even in the midst of town, you'd be surprised what a few blackbirds can do to support the critical first mug of tea." I wish I was in bed. Normally, if you wake up early by accident, you can spend an hour moseying around, then get an extra nap in and still be up for midday when the day formally begins.15th over: New Zealand 57-2 (Ryder 36, Taylor 12) There's more chance of Lord Henry Manners of Mannersville zestily picking his nose at the dinner table than there is of Ryder picking Tahir. He hasn't got a clue, but he's getting away with it for now. Taylor isn't entirely comfortable either and he gets a leading edge that falls safely on the off side."In the 6th over, when it was 16-2, you said that South Africa could have this game won by the 10th over," says Luke Dealtry. "It's now the 13th over and the Kiwis are 50-2. CHOKERS!" You said the word. You're not supposed to do that. If you say the C-word five times in a mirror, terrible things will happen.16th over: New Zealand 58-2 (Ryder 37, Taylor 12) The returning Morkel's first ball is belaboured towards backward point by Ryder, and Duminy saves four with a brilliant diving save. Just one from the over, but this has been a decent comeback from New Zealand. Their tactic should be to just stay in the game as long as possible and hope that the asphyxiating pressure does for South Africa later on. It goes against all logic, but I think New Zealand have got a real chance today. "A question for OBO readers," says Steve Kerr. "Does anyone know of a London pub showing the Crusaders/Sharks Super XV game live on Sunday? Obviously can't be arsed going to Twickenham and will donate independently here."17th over: New Zealand 61-2 (Ryder 39, Taylor 13) New Zealand must find a way to impose themselves on Tahir, which is easier typed from thousands of miles away than done. Just three from the over, which is again played with a respect that borders on fear. "How about a bit more commentary about the game," says Clinton Rowling. "Remember that thing people are logging on to the live feed to follow?? As much as I find your campness amusing and your amazement that people get up early slightly interesting I'm logged on to follow a quarter final game at the cricket World Cup...." Sure. Where do I send the editorial consultancy fee? And when do I come and tell you how to do your job?18th over: New Zealand 69-2 (Ryder 44, Taylor 14) Morkel hasn't been at his best today – too wide to Ryder in particular, and he clubs two more through the covers. Whatever you do, don't let him free those massive arms. Morkel gets a slower ball wrong later in the over and Ryder helps it around the corner for four to bring up a good fifty partnership. "In response to Guy Hornsby's comments in the 9th over, people who get up early every day are not preternaturally happy people," says Ewan Dunnett. "They are usually depressed and full of fear. So much so they can't sleep. Children's television presenters, much like many comedians, are full of inner demons." Children's TV presenters are a fascinating genre of human. Have you seen that lass on Dancing On Ice. I haven't, because I have never watched Dancing On Ice, ever, but my friends tell me she has a ceaseless jauntiness that borders on the disconcerting.19th over: New Zealand 75-2 (Ryder 47, Taylor 19) Botha replaces Tahir, and the hitherto strokeless Taylor plays a gorgeous extra-cover drive for four. That's his first boundary. This has been an extremely good partnership, not least because it would have been easy to wave the white one after that abysmal start. "If Steve Kerr wants to watch the Sharks/Crusaders game he should head to the Famous Three Kings just by West Ken tube," says John O'Mahony. "Probably the best sports-watching pub ever. They have about 50-odd screens and they all seem to be showing something different. Some of the tables even have their own TV. Not been there for a couple of years mind so might have gone downhill." Everything does. It says here.20th over: New Zealand 77-2 (Ryder 48, Taylor 20) Graeme Smith continues to shuffle his bowlers – he really is a kid in a sweet shop – with Kallis replacing Morkel. Taylor ducks under an existentialism-heavy bouncer, and there are just two from the over. "I don't even read the commentary here anymore, except maybe the bits in bold," says Niall Harden. "I'm here for the great life advice, withering sarcasm, Freudian misprints and unsettling videos. I don't even really understand rugby."21st over: New Zealand 80-2 (Ryder 49, Taylor 22) Three singles from Botha's over. South Africa could do with a wicket here. They might just, for the first time, be thinking dark thoughts. "I'm sensing," begins Jonathan Wood, "that Clinton isn't a morning person."22nd over: New Zealand 84-2 (Ryder 51, Taylor 24) Nobody really knows what a good score on is on what is a pretty slow pitch, but I reckon New Zealand would take 250. Taylor opens the face to glide Kallis to third man for a single. Then Ryder pushes a single to reach a really good half-century, defiant at first and controlled thereafter. He almost falls to the last delivery, however, gloving an attempted hook to third man for a single. "Dear Coronation Street, I like cookery programmes," says Scott Murray. "Please stop telling stories about people in Manchester and start doing recipes. Dear Brian Cox, I am frightened of the dark. Please stop talking about space."23rd over: New Zealand 87-2 (Ryder 53, Taylor 25) Botha has been pretty economical today. Just three singles from that over, so his figures are now 7-0-19-0. "Can anyone give me a good reason," begins Gary Naylor, "why SA deny themselves the services of the best fielder in the world in order to use him as a below average keeper?" Because fielding isn't quantified. Which is not to say you don't have a point.24th over: New Zealand 88-2 (Ryder 53, Taylor 25) One from Kallis's over. This is a good spell for South Africa, with the last five overs bringing only 12 runs. As Pat Symcox says on Sky, New Zealand's dot-ball ratio has been too high today. Yet, for all that, they are still in a perfectly acceptable position. "Just to clarify – having children doesn't mean you get up early; it just means your sleep is more fractured from 5-7am," says Kristian Petterson. "Oh, and that your significant other loathes you even more than ever as they deal with said offspring as you snore. Apparently."25th over: New Zealand 92-2 (Ryder 56, Taylor 26) This might be New Zealand's window of opportunity, with the offspinner JP Duminy coming into the attack. Ryder chips high over extra cover for a couple, and two singles complete the over. "I'm torn," says Jay Rose. "As an Australian, I desperately want to see the Kiwis win this one, but a hard-earned grudging respect for Graeme Smith makes me want to see him end his career with a WC trophy. Plus, I simply can't see NZ beating India, which is even more important."26th over: New Zealand 93-2 (Ryder 56, Taylor 27) This is a nice move from Smith. He could have let the game drift along for another five overs, but instead he has brought back Dale Steyn with a view to breaking this partnership. He doesn't do that, but it is a tight over that yields just one. New Zealand have scored only 18 off the last seven overs. Something will have to give pretty soon. "Obviously I would rather stay up until 3 am smoking and drinking with all you salt of the earth chaps," says Richard Hands, "but I have get up early because I live in Africa (where as often as not there's no electricity) and because my children have to be ready to leave for school at 6.30. Granola and carrot juice have nothing to do with it. In other news, the true delight of this WC for me has been the re-emergence and indeed pre-eminence of really good spin bowling. Just wish I could watch it."27th over: New Zealand 98-2 (Ryder 58, Taylor 29) Duminy's over is a better one for New Zealand, with five from it. "Answer to Naylor's question about South Africa's wicketkeeper," says Robin Hazlehurst. "Morne van Wyk's batting."28th over: New Zealand 104-2 (Ryder 64, Taylor 29) Ryder brings up the 100 with the first boundary for nine overs, a thumping off drive off Steyn. "How about more discussion of fish fingers and other important stuff," says Tony Tyler. "These days almost every entry seems to start with some rubbish about cricket. Anyone would think you're obsessed. (Please send the editorial consultancy fee to me.)"29th over: New Zealand 108-2 (Ryder 65, Taylor 32) Imran Tahir replaces JP Duminy and whistles through an over at a cost of four. "Beavering away on a preview as I am, I've only just caught up with your 11th over Norwegian reference," says Mike Selvey. "I'm currently reading a Henning Mankell 'Wallander' novel, which when set alongside The Killing and the Stieg Larsson trilogy means that I would no more report cricket in Scandinavia than I would Midsomer."30th over: New Zealand 116-2 (Ryder 71, Taylor 34) Another bowling change, the 11th of the innings, with Robin Peterson replacing Dale Steyn. Ryder greets him by charging down the wicket to the first ball and blasting it over mid off for a one-bounce four. The boundary from the first ball of an over helps relax the batsmen – like when you actually make people laugh during the first pint and can therefore sit and not worry about being you for the next 10 minutes or so – and they are happy to milk singles for the rest of the over, the last of which brings up a meticulous century partnership. "Dear Ron Jeremy," begins Dan Smith. "Enough of this grunting, when's that washing machine going to be fixed?"31st over: New Zealand 118-2 (Ryder 72, Taylor 35) Ryder slices Tahir over point. Just two from a good over. "There's not much interest in NZ /SA here in Dubai on a lovely weekend afternoon," says Bob Cochrane. "But I'm wondering what the town will be like come Wednesday, 1:00 pm local time, when India and Pakistan square off. My guess is that streets will be empty and a record number of workers will fall victim to a mysterious illness." The battle fever.32nd over: New Zealand 128-2 (Ryder 75, Taylor 42) Ross Taylor gets down one knee to slog sweep Peterson for a big six. "There we go boy!" says Mark Nicholas. This game is about to get interesting. Ten from the over. "This one," says Kristian Petterson, "goes out to all the people who've found themselves at the Guardian OBO by mistake..." That's hilarious. But clearly not true, because we love and respect all our readers equally here at the Guardian.WICKET! New Zealand 130-3 (Taylor c Kallis b Tahir 43) All that good work undone in an instant. Taylor slog sweeps straight to deep square leg, where Kallis takes a good catch. That was smart cricket from Tahir, who hurried Taylor by whipping through his over in no time. Taylor tried to delay him, but he was a little flustered and fell to the final delivery.33rd over: New Zealand 130-3 (Ryder 76, Styris 0) Apparently the auto-refresh again isn't working. Apologies for that. Still, hammering F5 is endearingly retro, right? Oh. "Isn't navel gazing the whole point of cricket?" says Myles Thomas. "Why else would anyone stand out in a field for a long period every weekend for a summer focussing on the off chance of a ball being hit close enough to catch?"34th over: New Zealand 135-3 (Ryder 80, Styris 1) Five from Peterson's over, and it's time for the mandatory ball change.35th over: New Zealand 139-3 (Ryder 82, Styris 3) Four singles from Botha's over. New Zealand have clearly put all their eggs in the basket marked 'overs 46-50'. It's a big risk, but an understandable one for such obvious underdogs. I still think their best tactic is to just stay in the game as long as possible. Even if South Africa are 185 for three in the 40th, chasing 250, New Zealand will be reasonably happy. "And to the fellow who loses sleep between five and seven because of a baby, try triplets, sunshine," says Mike Selvey. "You haven't even seen the shine off the new ball with one."36th over: New Zealand 147-3 (Ryder 82, Styris 11) Morkel returns to the attack, and his first is pushed supremely down the ground for four by Styris. That's a gorgeous stroke, and three balls later he drags a slower ball through midwicket for four more. Morkel has, by his very high standards, been poor today. "Agree with Lord Selvey, Norwegians won't get cricket," says Ben Dorning. "They like sport to be about man vs nature, not man against man. Otherwise they get all Scandinavian and cerebral about it – a friend was at a football match in Sweden recently when two groups of fans were singing different football chants at each other. He asked his Swedish friend what they were saying and apparently one group's chant was 'Push up more and stop sitting so deep' while the reply from the other group was 'Yes, but don't leave the centre backs exposed!'"37th over: New Zealand 153-3 (Ryder 83, Styris 16) Styris has started extremely well. He dances down the track to drive Botha's second ball emphatically over mid on for four and now has 16 from 14 balls. "This hitting this F5 has just got me into trouble," says Mark Taylor. "My manager, who can't see my screen but can see what I'm doing, has told to me that for the last ten minutes all she's seen me do is hit one key on my keyboard. Not sure I could explain that one?" Tell her it's 'X' and you're just a very very modern man.WICKET! New Zealand 153-4 (Styris b Morkel 16) I told you Styris looked good. That was one shot too many. He charged Morkel and tried a roundhouse slap over the off side, but the ball flew off the bottom edge and onto the stumps.38th over: New Zealand 154-4 (Ryder 83, Williamson 1) Just one from Morkel's over, and the wicket. "As a player for The Stockholm Academicals in the prestigious Swedish Premier (well, only) League, I'd like to formally invite Lord Selvey to report on one of our matches this summer," says Dan MacDonald. "I can personally vouch for his safety, although some of my shot selection will almost certainly be criminal."WICKET! New Zealand 156-5 (Ryder c sub (Ingram) b Tahir 83) New Zealand are starting to subside. Ryder top edges a sweep straight to deep square leg, and the substitute Colin Ingram takes an easy catch. Tahir charges around in celebration like a man who has cured baldness, banging his head back and forth in delight. There are few bowlers in world cricket who enjoy taking wickets as much as he does.39th over: New Zealand 157-5 (Williamson 3, N McCullum 0) Williamson cannot afford to hang around here. It's a big ask for a 20-year-old, but he needs to play himself in with singles, not dot balls. Just two runs from the over. "Apologies for attempting to use you like a local radio station," says Nick Williamson, "but if you were able to post a message about my JustGiving page I'd be very grateful indeed. I am a member of a team from Scottish Widows which is taking part in the Intelligent Sport UK Challenge in Exmoor from 16-19 June 2011. We are competing to raise funds on behalf of Children 1st (effectively the Scottish branch of the NSPCC), which is obviously a great cause. Even better is that Lloyds Banking Group (of which we are part) has pledged to match anything we manage to raise."40th over: New Zealand 164-5 (Williamson 10, N McCullum 0) Wiliamson edges Morkel just short of Smith at slip. He then works one nicely through midwicket for three in an over that brings seven. New Zealand are still just about in this game. "Mark Taylor can avoid his manager's glare by using the right mouse button to bring up a menu, and the left clicking refresh," says Paul Wakefield, who may or may not have thought this through.41st over: New Zealand 168-5 (Williamson 12, N McCullum 2) Four singles from Tahir's over. "Having met the erstwhile children's TV presenter Dave Benson Phillips, I can assure you that that lass on Dancing on Ice's jauntiness would pale into insignificance," says James Prout. "He is as jaunty and relentlessly happy at 6 in the morning off stage/camera as he is at 4 in the afternoon on stage/camera dropping parents into the gunk dunk. Yes the time I met him at that ungodly hour, I was hungover. My day was a long and tortuous one."42nd over: New Zealand 169-5 (Williamson 12, N McCullum 3) Nathan McCullum edges Steyn's second ball on the half volley to the keeper de Villiers. Only one run from an excellent over. "To be absolutely certain of an early start, make sure you acquire not only a small child, but at least one cat," says Richard O'Hagan. "If the child does not wake you at the crack of dawn, the cat almost certainly will. For guaranteed results, get more than one cat, that way you can be sure that if one of them isn't moaning about a lack of food or trying to show off a mouse, the other certainly will be. Or they'll be fighting with each other. I've even tried making mine watch Tom & Jerry and they still don't get it."43rd over: New Zealand 171-5 (Williamson 13, N McCullum 4) South Africa are squeezing this innings very impressively. Two from Peterson's over, which means the last six have brought only 18 runs and two wickets. "I had two root canals last Friday," chirps Michael Behl. "The pain wasn't too bad but on Wednesday night I was eating pasta sauce with bacon in it, I bit down on a piece of bacon and it hurt, like really, really hurt. I never thought bacon would ever cause me pain. Now I've been in pain since then and I have a final root canal booked for 3.45pm today. This pretty much ruins my Friday, the only thing I could hope for is South Africa losing, it would alleviate some of the inevitable pain." Root canals on consecutive Fridays? Dumb luck. That gives a whole new meaning to the Friday feeling.44th over: New Zealand 174-5 (Williamson 15, N McCullum 5) Still no sign of a Powerplay, or any power play. Three singles from Steyn's over. This is slipping away from New Zealand. "Robin Hazlehurst's advice in the 8th over," begins Steve Johnson. "Because it was very boring you won't recall that you posted my advice earlier this tournament regarding the positives of small children in overcoming the 'clean glasses' fixation. Are you starting to see a trend? Listen to the fans, Smyth. Listen to the fans. You know it makes sense… (I can't provide much advice on the 'finding the right woman' bit. Except these things take time, even if you're the most inept etc.)"45th over: New Zealand 187-5 (Williamson 23, N McCullum 6) New Zealand finally take the batting Powerplay, and Robin Peterson's ninth over disappears for 13. Williamson mows the second over ball over mid on for six, a fine shot, and then McCullum misses a huge swipe at a ball that races away for four byes. "SA choking again..." says Andre van der Walt. "Luckily they're choking NZ this time."WICKET! New Zealand 188-6 (N McCullum c Duminy b Steyn 6) This might be a blessing in disguise for New Zealand. Nathan McCullum's grim innings of 6 in 18 balls, in which the only thing he middled was fresh air, ends when he swipes a slower ball from Steyn up in the air and straight to point. Great work from Steyn, who is a master when it comes to death bowling. And new-ball bowling, and middle-overs bowling...46th over: New Zealand 189-6 (Williamson 24, Oram 0) Steyn has brilliant figures of 8-0-25-2. He is so good.47th over: New Zealand 196-6 (Williamson 26, Oram 6) Jacob Oram just need to score 40 not out off 15 balls. No pressure. He sweeps his second ball, from Tahir, behind square for four. "Can someone explain why Oram is batting below Nathan McCullum?" says Anand. "Wasn't Oram supposed to be one of the big hitters?" No and yes.48th over: New Zealand 203-6 (Williamson 32, Oram 7) No boundaries in that Steyn over, but New Zealand do manage to bust their lungs to the tune of seven runs. Williamson would have been miles out had Faf du Plessis hit the stumps from mid off.WICKET! New Zealand 204-7 (Oram b Morkel 7) Oram misses, Morkel hits, and New Zealand's hopes of 230 or more have now gone. That was an excellent first delivery back from Morkel, right on target and hitting the top of off stump when Oram missed a mighty hoick.WICKET! New Zealand 210-8 (Vettori b Morkel 6) Morne Morkel cleans Vettori up with a wonderful slower yorker. Seven balls remaining. There was an odd bit of commentary from Mark Nicholas, who screamed "EEEEEEEEE'S GOT 'IM!" but with the "EEEEE" sounding like something out of Bullseye.49th over: New Zealand 211-8 (Williamson 32, Woodcock 1) From the last 12 overs, New Zealand have scored 58 for the loss of five wickets. South Africa have been fantastic in the field.50th over: New Zealand 221-8 (Williamson 38, Woodcock 3) The last over of the innings from Steyn goes for 10, including a boundary over extra cover from Williamson and a wide off what should have been the last ball. Williamson's cameo of 38 from 41 balls has given New Zealand a chance, but South Africa were superb in the field and would probably reach their target of 222 nine times out of ten. Alan Gardner will type you through the first 10 overs of New Zealand reply in half an hour or so; you can email him on alan.gardner.casual@theguardian.com.INNINGS BREAKAfternoon, chooks. How are we? I was going to mock up a picture of Graeme Smith wearing a snood to display at the top of the page throughout the South Africa run chase but in the end I

couldn't be bothered
 didn't have time. Anyway, to those asking about the absence of scorecard and popup – we only get them for England games. You didn't think this was a proper operation, did you?Here's Ant Pease: "Short of turning up like The Dude from The Big Lebowski (or El Duderino if you're not into that whole brevity thing) complete with jazz woodbine, how can your email officially pronounce you to be more casual than Bull?" Haven't you seen Bully's new byline photo? He's a married man, now. The Dude abides no longer ...1st over: South Africa 8-0 (target: 222, Amla 7, Smith 1) South Africa can't mess this one up, can they? Anyway, we're about to get going again. Nathan McCullum is going to bowl the first over – a somewhat leftfield choice, even by this tournament's standards. He's also starting around the wicket, to the right-handed Amla ... who leans into a couple of lazily effective cover drives, taking a two and a four from the first three balls. Hang on, what's this ...WICKET! Amla c Vettori b N McCullum 7 (1st over: South Africa 8-1, target: 222) That's a very unfortunate way to go, as Amla is caught at slip after his edge rebounded up off wicketkeeper Brendon McCullum's boot! It looked like a bump-ball on first sight but the McCullums and Vettori both knew what had happened. Amla cut a ball that kept low, the shot deflecting on to the toe of McCullum's boot and popping straight up to Vettori.2nd over: South Africa 10-1 (target: 222, Smith 3, Kallis 0) "I generally dont like to do a Warnie, but I predict NZ will win this match by about 15 runs with Daniel Vettori scaring the SA with his moustache to get five wickets," prognosticates Pratik Dubey. Vettori, sadly, has got rid of his 'stache, but he opens at the other end – spinners at both ends! Smith almost runs himself out but just manages to beat the direct hit from long-leg.3rd over: South Africa 15-1 (target: 222, Smith 6, Kallis 2) It's an over of shoes (ones and twos, for those wanting in their cockney) from McCullum. The good news for South Africa is that New Zealand were 6-1 for one after three overs of their innings. They're miles ahead! "The run chase total is ominous," warns Ian Copestake. "In South Africa 222 is the number of Diabilto, the very small devil." Has anyone ever had to chase 666? Obviously you'd have no chance of getting it ...4th over: South Africa 18-1 (target: 222, Smith 6, Kallis 5) Here's a good link from Mo Holkar, who points out that Amla's dismissal is reminiscent of this David Gower number. You do see them ... I'm sure there's a more recent example lurking in among the shadowy recesses of my brain. Vettori rattles through six balls of left-arm darts.5th over: South Africa 20-1 (target: 222, Smith 7, Kallis 6) Brendon McCullum thinks he's got Kallis, strangled down the legside off his brother's bowling ... but it looks like it just clipped his pads. The good thing about there being two spinners on so early is that I'll get to hand back to Smyth asap; the bad: I have no time to get up to speed!6th over: South Africa 27-1 (target: 222, Smith 8, Kallis 12) The bear thumps a drive down the ground for four ... and then gets hit on his back pad after stomping down the track. New Zealand decide not to review it and although it was probably hitting leg the decision wouldn't have been overturned. "Anand here," writes Anand, helpfully, "writing from the Netherlands. Have you ever seen something as garish as McCullum's gloves? Looks like one of those traffic policemen. IF he were a bowler wearing an arm band like that, I am sure the batsmen would object. If SRT, the man who can detect miniscule movement in and around the sightscreen were to bat, he would object to the gloves ;)." They're not as bad as Kevin O'Brien's hairdo.7th over: South Africa 33-1 (target: 222, Smith 9, Kallis 17) Tim Southee comes on to give these opening exchanges a more traditional flavour. He's joint-fourth on the tournament wicket-takers list but it doesn't look like the pitch will be offering him much assistance today. Kallis pings one off his legs for four. "Don't know about chasing 666," says Vincent Barreto, "but Victoria beat Tasmania by an innings and 666 runs in Melbourne about 1922 … and Tasmania has devils!!!" Irony, eh? If I only I knew what it meant.8th over: South Africa 36-1 (target: 222, Smith 11, Kallis 18) Vettori (4-0-15-0) continues to keep a lid on things. A delivery that drifted across Smith but didn't turn appreciably snicks a thick-ish outside edge, with the ball running down towards third man for a couple. A first half-century of the tournament from Smith would go a long way to averting South Africa's need for the Heimlich manoeuvre at any stage today.9th over: South Africa 44-1 (target: 222, Smith 13, Kallis 24) A top edged hook from Kallis alls short of the man running in from long leg. Southee then strays on to Kallis's pads and he swats the ball away like (stretched simile alert!) a bear dismissing bees as he goes about collecting his honey. "As a mnemonic, I find irony to be very much like rain on your wedding day. I'm sure other examples also exist." Intriguing, Ant Pease. Tell us more.10th over: South Africa 50-1 (target: 222, Smith 18, Kallis 25) [Edges towards exit] So, Oram's coming on to chop down some trees/take a few Saffer wickets, just as Rob prepares to retake his sweaty seat. If someone could Photoshop a picture of Oram as a lumberjack and then send it in, you'd make me very happy. Oram is pretty accurate from the get-go but his last ball is wide and slashed through point for four by Smith. Right, now send your static and feedback to rob.smyth@theguardian.com. I need some lunch.11th over: South Africa 54-1 (target: 222, Smith 20, Kallis 27) Hello boys! Southee forces Kallis to take evasive action with a good bouncer in an over that includes four singles. South Africa are cruising and are going to have to work extremely hard to cock this up.12th over: South Africa 58-1 (target: 222, Smith 22, Kallis 29) Oram galumphs in for some more. It's all a bit futile, and not in the Nathan Barley sense. Four singles from the over. "Is there anything more disconcerting than filling in a hotel mini-bar form whilst very hungover and seeing that the purchase options include mouthwash and shoe polish," weeps Stephen Cottreell. "For one horrible moment I thought I'd bottomed out. Like Christopher sitting on Ade's dog in the Sopranos."13th over: South Africa 60-1 (target: 222, Smith 23, Kallis 30) Two more singles from Southee's over. This is easy for South Africa. Somewhere in a dark corner of my brain, Big Daddy is beating his chest, Tarzan-style, while a baying crowd chant "EASY! EASY! EASY!" I do miss Big Daddy. Look at the state of this. "I'm going to the cinema tomorrow to see Submarine," says Louise Wright, mistaking this for Twitter. "My dad is going with me. It's suddenly occurred to me that with it being a coming-of-age film, it might be full of sex scenes and thus be v embarrassing to watch when accompanied by a parent. Anyone seen it and know whether I've made a dreadful choice of film in that respect, please? If so, suggestions for avoidance tactics would be welcome." One of my best friends went to see American Pie with his ma. Imagine.14th over: South Africa 68-1 (target: 222, Smith 28, Kallis 33) The left-arm spinner Luke Woodcock, playing only his third ODI, comes on to bowl. His first ball is a nervous wide half-volley that Smith blitzes through extra cover for four, but the fourth is a brute that spits past Kallis's outside edge. Where did that come from?WICKET! South Africa 69-2 (Smith c sub (How) b Oram 28) Graeme Smith's poor tournament continues with a very soft dismissal. He reached well wide of off stump at a nothing delivery from Jacob Oram and sliced it straight to backward point, where the substitute Jamie How took a smart catch moving to his left.15th over: South Africa 69-2 (target: 222, Kallis 34, de Villiers 0) This is the big partnership, between arguably South Africa's two best batsmen. If New Zealand can winkle out one more then South Africa will be three down. "I saw Submarine last night," says Jos Roberts, mistaking this for Twitter. "Nothing really to make your parents uncomfortable, other than Paddy Considine with an amazing mullet! Pretty funny though."16th over: South Africa 72-2 (target: 222, Kallis 36, de Villiers 1) Three singles from Woodcock's over, which includes a couple of excellent stops from Guptill in the covers. "When I came of age," says Ian Copestake, "there was no sex involved."17th over: South Africa 74-2 (target: 222, Kallis 38, de Villiers 1) Kallis flicks Oram to leg for a couple, the only runs from that over. It's a fairly quiet spell in the match.18th over: South Africa 81-2 (target: 222, Kallis 39, de Villiers 7) Woodcock is having a bad time of it. His first ball is a full toss that de Villiers clips for four, and there are three more singles. South Africa need 131 from 32 overs. It should be a doddle. Should.19th over: South Africa 81-2 (target: 222, Kallis 39, de Villiers 7) Oram bowls a good maiden to de Villiers, so his figures are now 5-1-13-1. "I've learnt two valuable lessons today," says Lizzy Ammon. "1) Never bet on Graeme Smith 2) don't expect a four-year-old to prefer watching NZ vs SA to watching Star Wars. There was a physical wrestle for the remote. I didn't win."20th over: South Africa 87-2 (target: 222, Kallis 41, de Villiers 11) Vettori brings himself on for Woodcock, which has to be the right move. Five from the over, including a very tight two to third man from de Villiers. "When I first moved to the UK I had trouble grasping your concept of 'irony'," says Marie Meyer. "Then I went to Torquay for a weekend because I had heard it described as 'the English Riviera'. I get it now."21th over: South Africa 93-2 (target: 222, Kallis 42, de Villiers 16) That is an exquisite stroke from AB de Villiers, a square drive for four from a perfectly good delivery by Oram. Things may change, but for the moment this feels like a totally routine run chase. "Lizzy Ammon's four-year-old sounds like a Big Daddy in the making," says Ian Copestake. "All he needs to complete his fate is to be called Shirley."22nd over: South Africa 97-2 (target: 222, Kallis 45, de Villiers 17) Kallis charges Vettori but is beaten in the flight, and his drive lands just in front of the man running back from mid on. The next ball is fluller and quicker and zips past the outside edge. Very smart bowling from Vettori.23rd over: South Africa 103-2 (target: 222, Kallis 46, de Villiers 22) Another wonderfully timed drive from de Villiers, this time through the covers for four off Southee. He has a disgusting amount of ability. Kallis then survives a token run-out referral after a direct hit from mid on. "My old English teacher took his wife to see American Pie in the mistaken belief it was American Beauty," says Andrew Fraser. "He told us that he wasn't sure it was quite the classic others claimed it as…" When I was about 12 my Dad asked me to recommend some films that he could order from his book club thing. I knew he liked cop films, but I got 48 Hours mixed up with 9 1/2 Weeks. I wish I was making that up.24th over: South Africa 108-2 (target: 222, Kallis 47, de Villiers 25) Kallis is slow to set off for a leg bye towards square leg and would probably have been run out by a direct hit from the wicketkeeper Brendon McCullum. Five from Vettori's over. "There's a scene in Being There where Shirley MacLaine takes Peter Sellers' oft-stated line of 'I like to watch' very literally," says Matt Emerson. "I watched that with my Mum and my Nan when I was about 14...my face could have been used on a Pantone reference chart as a replacement for crimson..."WICKET! South Africa 108-3 (Kallis c Oram b Southee 47) A fantastic running catch from Jacob Oram gives New Zealand a sniff. Kallis clubbed a mighty pull towards deep midwicket, where Oram appeared from nowhere to take a two-handed catch above his head on the run. That's a brilliant piece of fielding, especially for such a giant man.25th over: South Africa 110-3 (target: 222, de Villiers 26, Duminy 1) Another quick wicket would make this really interesting, because South Africa have a relatively fragile lower order. "I have a picture of Giant Haystacks in my wallet that I have had for twenty years," says David Weston. "It is torn from a pub quiz sheet. The quiz was in the Johnson Arms public house in Dunkirk, Nottingham. I'll let you see it if you want." I like the fact that you don't feel the need to explain this behaviour. After all, keeping a picture of a huge hirsute wrestler in a wallet is precisely what all right-thinking people would do.26th over: South Africa 113-3 (target: 222, de Villiers 28, Duminy 2) Nathan McCullum replaces Vettori, who bowled better than figures of 7-0-29-0 suggest. Three from a quiet over. "My American inlaws, septuagenarians both, decided to go and see the film Quills (which, for the uninitiated, is about the Marquis de Sade)," says Richard O'Hagan. "I think they are still recovering from the experience." They are not the only ones.27th over: South Africa 120-3 (target: 222, de Villiers 34, Duminy 3) Duminy drags an attempted pull onto his body off the bowling of Southee; then de Villiers played a stunning on drive for four, through the legs of Duminy at the non-striker's end. He looks in fantastic nick. "The 48 Hours/9 1/2 weeks confusion is understandable," says Dan Smith. "9 1/2 weeks is a completely unrealistic period for a passionate love affair. While 'Gone in 60 Seconds' turns out to be a film about car theft."WICKET! South Africa 121-4 (Duminy b N McCullum 3) Now then. Duminy misses an angled-bat slap at a flighted delivery from McCullum that goes straight on to hit the off stump. That's a hideous shot. Every time you think the game is going away from New Zealand they take a wicket. If they get one more they will arguably be on top.WICKET! South Africa 121-5 (de Villiers run out 35) It's happening. South Africa are doing it again. I don't believe this. New Zealand have got the huge wicket of AB de Villiers, who was called through for a seriously dodgy single to midwicket and was just short of his ground when Brendon McCullum claimed the throw from Guptill and shattered the stumps. It went to the third umpire but New Zealand knew it was out. Before leaving the crease, de Villiers almost kicked off with a couple of New Zealand fielders, presumably because of an overzealous send-off. This is a remarkable turnaround, and that is such a big wicket because de Villiers was in sublime touch.28th over: South Africa 121-5 (target: 222, du Plessis 0, Botha 0) They couldn't. Could they? In fact, what happened with de Villiers was this: a number of New Zealand fielders, including the substitute Kyle Mills, were right in du Plessis's grille, pointing out that he had run out the best player, so de Villiers came over to support du Plessis. A couple of them will get done by the match referee. If they win, they will not care one jot about that. "Statistics question," says Andre Van der Walt. "Has anyone ever followed OBO when they had the option to watch a match?" That's not a statistics question. That's a just-how-badly-has-humanity-gone-wrong question.29th over: South Africa 122-5 (target: 222, du Plessis 1, Botha 0) Aggressive captaincy from Daniel Vettori, who brings himself back into the attack. He almost skids a couple of quicker ones through du Plessis, and there's just one from the over. "Those collars are starting to look a bit tight on the South African jerseys," says Mark O'Neil.30th over: South Africa 123-5 (target: 222, du Plessis 2, Botha 0) South Africa's lower order has some handy players, most notably Botha and Peterson, but it's nowhere near the McMillian-Pollock-Klusener vintage. One from McCullum's over. This game is wide open now, and in fact New Zealand are probably marginal favourites. "I still cringe at the memory of seeing Se7en with my mum when I was just 18," says Andrew Banks. "She overheard me saying I wanted to see it on the phone and decided to treat me despite my protestations that she wouldn't like it. Not sure she's recovered, and sticks almost entirely to Miss Marple nowadays..."31st over: South Africa 125-5 (target: 222, du Plessis 3, Botha 1) Woodcock replaces Vettori and has a biggish shout for LBW against du Plessis. It was going down leg. Just two from the over, and the requirement is now 97 from 114 balls. "Unless South Africa can call up a last minute replacement and get their young off-spinner Heimlich in at 8, you'd have to say it looks like they're doing it again," says Ant Pease. Honk!32nd over: South Africa 127-5 (target: 222, du Plessis 4, Botha 2) The South African batsmen are just regrouping for now. They look shell-shocked. The last five overs have brought seven runs and two wickets. "I often OBO whilst watching a game, sometimes even the same game," says Richard O'Hagan. "However, I am ferociously loyal and would never try and OBO/MBM several different sports at once *coughNAYLORcoughcoughcough*"WICKET! South Africa 128-6 (Botha b Oram 2) This is an astonishing collapse. Botha is bowled by a beautiful leg cutter from Oram that hits the top of off stump. That is a jaffa. South Africa have lost three wickets for eight in six overs, and if they lose this match they are never – ever – going to hear the end of it.33rd over: South Africa 128-6 (target: 222, du Plessis 5, Peterson 0) Even before that wicket, one of the South African backroom staff had his head in his hands. Then he started shaking his head sadly. He's completely given up! That's hilarious. He might as well be listening to this. "I saw Four Weddings and a Funeral with my parents when I was 15," says Paul Wakefield. "The loud sex scene left me utterly mortified, whilst my parents thought it hilarious." The scene, your mortification, or both?34th over: South Africa 129-6 (target: 222, du Plessis 6, Peterson 0) Is it still deja vu if it happens again and again? Nathan McCullum is in his element, racing through his overs in little more than a couple of minutes. Only one run from that, which makes it nine from the last seven.WICKET! South Africa 132-7 (Peterson c B McCullum b Oram 0) South Africa have completely gone. Peterson wafts hideously outside off stump and gets a thin inside edge to the keeper. South Africa have lost four wickets for 11 runs in eight never-to-be-forgotten overs.35th over: South Africa 141-7 (target: 222, du Plessis 13, Steyn 5) Steyn touches his first ball to the fine leg boundary and then du Plessis, who has to play his shots, slams a superb boundary through extra cover. South Africa will not believe this is happening to them again. It was supposed to be different this time. They had proved they were a different team by winning Test series in Australia, England and Pakistan. They had the variety in their attack, the experience in their top order. They won the group and got the easiest quarter-final draw. They started the quarter-final brilliantly, calmly controlling it for 75 overs. And then it happened. Like it always bloody happens.36th over: South Africa 142-7 (target: 222, du Plessis 13, Steyn 6) Steyn is a very tough man, an Australian in nature, and he is well capable of hanging around for 10 overs if du Plessis can do the bulk of the scoring. Steyn works the last ball of McCullum's over for a single, the only run from that over. "I'm contemplating making strangled and spluttering sounds at my South African mate after he took such pleasure in England losing to Ireland," says Mike McCarthy. "Contemplating it, because (a) we'll lose by 200 runs tomorrow and (b) he's a lot harder than me."37th over: South Africa 146-7 (target: 222, du Plessis 15, Steyn 7) Luke Woodcock comes back into the attack. His six remaining overs are so important, because he has been NZ's weakest bowler today, and he starts with a wide. Four from the over. New Zealand might have to think about using a sixth bowler, maybe Scott Styris or Jesse Ryder. "When I went travelling at 18, I stopped off at my great uncle and aunt in Canada," says Andrew Fraser. "Me and my friend convinced my great uncle to join his local video rental store and took out loads of films to while away the Canadian evenings. This seemingly foolproof plan collapsed as badly as the Saffers are when my great aunt joined us for American History... I still sweat when I think back to her reaction to the vigorous sex scene that starts the film. And not in a good way."WICKET! South Africa 146-8 (Steyn c Oram b N McCullum 8) What hell kinda shot is that? Steyn was inadvertently monopolising the strike, and the pressure – dot, dot, dot – got to him when he had a gruesome heave that flew off the edge. Oram, who couldn't stay out of this game if he tried, took a gleeful catch diving forward at backward point.38th over: South Africa 146-8 (target: 222, du Plessis 15, Morkel 0) Nathan McCullum finished with sensational figures of 10-1-24-3. South Africa were 120 for three after 27 overs, you know. I told you New Zealand just needed to stay in the game! And, while people will focus on South Africa, New Zealand have been wonderful. The moment they smelt weakness, they were all over South Africa like a cheap rash. "It's déjà vu all over again'," quotes Daniel Harris. "Berra explained that this quote originated when he witnessed Mickey Mantle and Roger Maris repeatedly hit back-to-back home runs in the Yankees' seasons in the early 1960s."39th over: South Africa 150-8 (target: 222, du Plessis 17, Morkel 1) South Africa have taken the batting Powerplay, a desperate move that presumably means du Plessis is going to go for it. Vettori counters by bringing himself back into the attack. du Plessis square drives for a couple and then drives a single down the ground. Here's a simple email from Rahul Nayyar, which will some up how plenty of folk are feeling: "Can't stop laughing." Then, just in case I miss that email, he follows up with "ROFL". You have to feel for South Africa, though. Of all their chokes, this is probably the worst.40th over: South Africa 156-8 (target: 222, du Plessis 22, Morkel 2) du Plessis smears an attempted yorker from Southee down the ground for four. This isn't quite over, not while he is there and not while New Zealand still have five fifth-bowler overs to bowl. South Africa need 66 from 10 overs with two wickets remaining.. As Mark Corrigan says at the start of season four of Peep Show, how the eff has it come to this? "When New Zealand were scoring slowly and losing wickets, you were full of praise for South Africa's skill and pressure," says Andy Fyfe. "Now it's all about how South Africa are throwing it away. Maybe some respect for NZ is in order? They've stuck with a plan (flawed as it may have been during their innings), backed themselves – a trait commentators are only too happy to recognise in Australia and England – and now the pressure they've applied is paying off. There are two teams playing this game..." Yep, it's a fair cop. Inevitably we focus on South Africa when something like this happens, but New Zealand have been great in the field – particularly Vettori as captain.41st over: South Africa 161-8 (target: 222, du Plessis 27, Morkel 2) du Plessis turned down a run off the last ball of the previous over, so that he could keep the strike, and he whips Vettori's third ball superbly past mid on for four. Five from the over, and Gary Naylor has just reminded me of this email, sent much earlier in this innings: "Re: 11th over: 'South Africa are cruising and are going to have to work extremely hard to cock this up'. You really are such an old hand at the OBO game aren't you? Like Glenn McGrath setting up a batsman with five short of a length before the toe-crusher."42nd over: South Africa 164-8 (need 58 from 48 balls; du Plessis 29, Morkel 3) Just three singles from Southee's over. That means that du Plessis keeps the strike, but the required rate has risen above seven an over. Meanwhile, Stephen Cottrell has a pop quiz for us, but you don't need to be a hotshot to get the right answer: "Which C was a 1990 album by the Beautiful South, following their 1989 debut, 'Welcome to the Beautiful South'?"WICKET! South Africa 172-9 (du Plessis c Southee b Oram 36) It's all over. du Plessis, dropped earlier in the over, rifles Oram low to cover, where Southee takes a good low catch on the edge of the circle. In the commentary box, Mark Nicholas actually starts singing "Oraaaaaaaaam!" Seriously, he started singing. Singing. But you can understand why, because Jacob Oram has had an incredible hour and a half in the field and with the ball.43rd over: South Africa 172-9 (need 50 from 42 balls; Morkel 4, Tahir 0) The No11, Imran Tahir, is about as good a batsman as me or you, so don't expect any miracles. This is a mind-blowing collapse. "Deja vu is illusory, which is presumably what SA are experiencing as they'll think it's all a bad dream," says John Starbuck. "What we have here is serial vu."WICKET! South Africa 172 all out (Morkel c sub b Woodcock 4). NEW ZEALAND WIN BY 49 RUNS Morne Morkel clouts Luke Woodcock to Jamie How at long off to spark delirious celebrations in Mirpur. New Zealand cannot believe they have won this game. Nobody can. It's one of the most amazing twists in World Cup history. South Africa were 108 for two and then 121 for three, but they fell apart in a fashion that was astonishing even by their standards. New Zealand were outplayed for 75 overs, yet they stayed in the game and then mauled South Africa when the pressure was on.It's a stunning performance from a team who always overachieve at World Cups, and who will now play in their sixth World Cup semi-final out of ten – even though this is the first knockout game they have ever won. But, really, today is all about South Africa. Graeme Smith walks onto the field wearing a million-yard stare. You would not believe the puss on him. After four years of almost ceaseless excellence from South Africa in all forms of the game, it is going to take them a long, long time to understand how and why this happened. They probably never will.Thanks for your emails. See you tomorrow for the other quarter-final; I forget who's playing.