Colleagues of a British medic who was killed when a helicopter crashed into a glacier in New Zealand have been left devastated by her death, her employer has said. Katharine Walker, 51, the head of radiotherapy at Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge, was one of six people who died when the sightseeing helicopter crashed into a crevasse on the Fox glacier on Saturday morning.Three other British tourists – Walker’s partner Andrew Virco, 50, Nigel Charlton, 66, and his wife, Cynthia, 70, from Hampshire – died along with two Australian holidaymakers and the Kiwi pilot. A spokesman for Cambridge University Hospitals, which runs Addenbrooke’s, said: “Everyone at the hospital is devastated by the news and our thoughts go out to Kath’s family at this very sad time. “Kath was a much respected member of staff who had worked at Addenbrooke’s for 23 years. We know many of our staff are going to be hit hard by this tragic news and we will be offering additional support for them.” Walker’s brother, Steve Marshall, told the Sunday Times that his sister and Virco were on a “trip of a lifetime” to celebrate their 50th birthdays, and they tried to take the helicopter trip on Friday but were prevented from doing so by bad weather. He described Walker as a sociable person and devoted mother to her 22-year-old daughter, Rebecca. He said Virco was a “wonderful person”. The Charltons’ family, said in a statement, released through the Foreign Office that the couple were embarked on what was to be “their last big adventure”.“Our family is deeply saddened by the tragic news,” they said.“Grandparents to three children, parents to my brother and I and loved by family and friends near and far.“They were very adventurous when it came to travel and this holiday was to be their last big adventure together.“We would wish to send our gratitude to the brave teams making the recovery efforts and understand the need to consider their own safety above all else.“We would also wish to send our condolences to the families of all those lost in this tragic accident.”As well as the British victims, Sovannmony Leang, 27, and Josephine Gibson, 29, both from New South Wales, Australia, and the helicopter pilot Mitchell Gameren, 28, from Queenstown, New Zealand, all died.Gameren’s younger sister Brooke wrote on Facebook: “I feel like I am in a dream and I’m just waiting for you to text me and tell me you’re fine.“Today we lost a champion. I lost my brother and best mate. I am so blessed to have a brother like you. You have been such a massive role model in my life … I miss you so much already.”The bodies of three of the victims have been recovered from the crash site and taken to a temporary mortuary facility nearby for formal identification. It may be Wednesday before the others are recovered because the weather is expected to worsen during Monday and Tuesday. The helicopter crashed at around 11am local time on Saturday. A picture released by police showed the crumpled remains stuck at the bottom of a wall of ice close to the top of the eight-mile (13km) glacier. Reports in New Zealand said Gameren was believed to be an experienced flier. Fox Glacier Heliservices, which organised the flight, said: “Fox Heliservices’ thoughts are with the families of the passengers and pilot. The pilot was a very valued member of our team. The New Zealand police and Civil Aviation Authority have taken over the investigation.” 