 7.04pm BST I'm afraid I've got to leave, right now. It's been fun. For long periods. Thanks as ever for the emails and stuff. Bye! 7.03pm BST JONATHAN TROTT HITS THE BALL WITH HIS BAT AND SCORES A RUN! Two runs, in fact. It really was sensational stuff. Earlier, Cook grabbed another four. England's captain scored 88 from 132 balls, at 0.67 runs per ball. The other two got 18 from 114 at 0.16 runs per ball. He's been playing one game, the others, another. And that's stumps. 6.59pm BST Southee bowls this one, and Trott, who scored his ninth run from the third ball of the 33rd over, makes absolutely no attempt to score a 10th. We will have one more over tonight. "The streaker was a bloke who'd come in a suit and just removed his jacket. And his shoes when halfway round his lap of the ground," reports Mike Selvey. Does that count as a streak? Is there a minimum amount of disrobing that must be done in order to qualify? That's just a man with no shoes jogging about a bit. 6.54pm BST There's more drama at this end than at Headingley. Daniel has left the building at some speed, so this is Simon taking over again briefly. You'll notice that England scored two runs in that over, and that Cook got them. Wagner bowled it. That's you up to date. 6.49pm BST Southee is back, now bowling down the hill. But Cook sees him coming, and waits for his first ball to arrive on his pads before dismissing it in short order, speeding over the rope for a boundary-four. The next ball, though is a beauty, straightening before making long bacon at his outside edge on its way past.Updated at 6.49pm BST 6.43pm BST Wagner into the attack, and after Cook times one to cover for a single, Trott attempts to reciprocate after the ball hits his pad and squirts to square-leg. He was plenty out with a hit, but the fielder - I saw not who - missed, and we're back to before. 6.40pm BST Guardian Exclusive: the Headingley press box was modelled on the Rubik's snake.Oh, and another maiden.Updated at 6.41pm BST 6.37pm BST Is this yet on the level of those unbearable evening sessions in the 2011 Sri Lanka series? It's getting there. But then Southee drops one right into Cook's slot outside off, and he steps into a drive - for four through the covers. Small pleasures. 6.32pm BST Williamson continues, bowling accurately though without much turn. Trott drops one into the covers for a single, and then Cook flicks one behind that McCullum almost turns into a chance, reading it and bending low in an effort to grab it but connecting with his boot first. Great effort.Updated at 6.33pm BST 6.29pm BST Beersnakes and the construction of are almost becoming interesting - this is some seriously turgid turge. The unwillingness to attack is most curious - if this were a boxing match, England would be warned for passivity, but that's not exactly the point - they've got their hobnails burrowed into the jugular against a demoralised and inferior team, a curious position from which to sing a lullaby. Then, suddenly, after 22 balls without, England score a run - two, noch! Take that. 6.24pm BST Things that are less pervious than Jonathan Trott: 6.23pm BST Southee is keeping it tight, but it's not strictly easy to comprehend what England are at here. With the weather decent tomorrow, but not on Tuesday, you might have thought that they might have thought that it'd be prudent to try and move the game on. Not so.Meanwhile, Michael Lee emails in with another Bouncer, dreamer of television's most fabled dream.Updated at 6.23pm BST 6.18pm BST Southee comes on for Bracewell. 6.17pm BST Marie Miller reckons England didn't enforce the follow-on because "Chappell is Australian and therefore Cook is keen to pass him" - referring to how many Test centuries he and Greg have. I cannot imagine that being so - Cook will pass him, and it's hardly a significant milestone, especially to a man who collects them like they're Garbage Pail Kids. 6.13pm BST I once visited a student house in Leeds, and walked into a bedroom to find Headingley sitting outside the window. There can be surer way to ensure a long academic career. Bracewell bundles in as best he can, Cook nurdling a single from the first ball, and the second, a bouncer is called wide. Imagine if bowling a bouncer actually meant bowling a bouncer.Not much happens. Updated at 6.14pm BST 6.05pm BST Poor old T.H.E. Compdog. However, h might yet save himself with some runs for Somerset, and the lack of a viable alternative. Bell is making nae runs at four, so seems unlikely they'll promote him; Root, on the other hand, is making them at five, and untested against the new ball in Tests, so seems unlikely they'll promote him; and Trott's been doing well enough at three so seems unlikely they'll promote him.In the meantime, a streaker is upon us, whom we're forbidden from enjoying. Funny, the stuff we are and aren't allowed to see. Take My Family, for example.Three from the over. Still, my beating heart.Updated at 6.06pm BST 5.59pm BST New Zealand are being gristled into the grind here, and are powerless to do anything about it. Cook, after batting like Sehwag for a short while, has become becalmed, and Trott, incongruous name and all, is minding his own business as only he can. He shoulders arms at the penultimate ball of the over, after Cook fiddled a single to leg, and then steps across and down the pitch to drive Bracewell to long-on for four. Incredible scenes.Updated at 6.01pm BST 5.55pm BST There has been a change in the typing box. In the meantime, England score nae runs, thanks in part to a brilliant diving stop by Wagner at backward-point. 5.53pm BST Trott continues on his unhurried way. That's 21 balls so far for his four runs. Still, he's looking less troubled by it than was Compton. And if anyone dare compare about their entertainment here, this is what fans got before the Coppa Italia footer final, currently being played – a six-month-old Korean novelty hit, performed behind barriers they could barely see through. No wonder they booed. 5.49pm BST England's lead is at 260, and they are in absolutely no hurry to increase it. Trott, chewing furiously, had to play all but one of Williamson's first five deliveries and hit them a combined, what, 10 feet, before he inside edges the last, gets away with it and runs a single. 5.45pm BST A lovely cover drive brings Cook another boundary. A few balls later New Zealand appeal loudly after the ball goes nowhere near Trott or anything he is wearing or holding. He is not out. 5.41pm BST Two off the over, flicked away by Trott off his pads. Just a reminder that play will continue until 7pm today, because it's sunny and everyone's having fun. 5.38pm BST Compton's innings was a horrorshow, really. Just awkward, like being in an audience watching a horribly unfunny comedian who knows none of his jokes are any good but still has to stand on a stage and say stuff. Anyway, another maiden, from Bracewell to Cook. 5.34pm BST That's yer over – four dot balls to Compton, then the wicket, then one defended away by Trott.Updated at 5.36pm BST 5.33pm BST The ball clips Compton's bat, and then his pad, and then loops into the air. Rutherford catches, the umpire is nonplussed for a while, everyone knows it was out, New Zealand review it and Compton is indeed out.Updated at 5.33pm BST 5.29pm BST Bracewell comes in, and bowls a maiden to Cook. England's lead is now 252. So, given Tuesday's weather forecast (apocalyptic) when to declare? Or just enjoy the batting practice?Updated at 5.36pm BST 5.24pm BST Southee does well to save a run with a dive to stop Cook's shot on the boundary rope. As a result Cook only gets three, and Compton gets another couple of chances to not score any runs, which he gleefully takes.Updated at 5.36pm BST 5.21pm BST Cook thwacks another boundary through point, bringing up his 50 in 63 balls, nine of them having gone for four. "I'm aware tis the English way to find something to crit at moments like this, so Compton's stickiness is always going to be the main subject of the day," writes Mark Turner, "but a word about Cook every so often would be appreciated, because he looks in superb fettle. Please?" He does indeed, but it's the contrast between the two of them that's really fascinating here.Cook has 53 and could actually lap Compo tonight.Updated at 5.24pm BST 5.17pm BST Williamson's third ball keeps low and straight, goes through McCullum's legs and trundles away for four. Then there's a lovely little sweep that goes for four, and a single off the last to keep the strike. Steve Davis then takes a while to decide whether Williamson had bowled five balls or six. "You just have a sensation, you know when you've come to the end of your over," says Michael Holding. Do you really? 5.13pm BST Drinks having been taken, Wagner bowls six times and Compton gets no runs. He does, though, give a glimpse of his mounting discomfort when he flings his bat at a very wide third delivery which he had no business going after. 5.06pm BST Surely if Cook has really changed his match tactics to give Compton the best possible opportunity to play himself back into form, he wouldn't then be spending this innings single-mindedly denying him any opportunity to play himself back into form. Anyway, Compton will have another chance to shine shortly, after Williamson bowled out a maiden to Cook, who has faced precisely twice as many balls as his fellow opener (56). 5.03pm BST A better over from Wagner. Cook gets a single from the last to keep up his strike-hogging. Lots of OBOers looking on the bright side of the follow-on decision, you charitable lot. Highlights include Cook "giving his stuttering lower order another opportunity to get into their groove", "keeping the foot on the fragile neck of NZ and giving Compton and maybe Bell a chance to knock up a useful innings or two" and "making hay for a few hours, get a lead of 350-400 and putting a demoralised NZ in again tonight". 4.59pm BST Williamson has a go at the bowling, and ironic cheers ring out as Compton works the second ball away for a couple, and then more cheers as he gives the fourth similar treatment. "The decision not to enforce the follow-on has to be a commercial one doesn't it?" suggests Sean Moore. "After the first-day wash-out, the powers that be couldn't risk New Zealand being bowled out again this afternoon/evening and missing out on a bumper bank holiday pay-day. Or am I missing something?" Commercial considerations trumping sporting ones? Impossible, surely. 4.55pm BST A four off Wagner's second ball moves England on to 50, of which Cook has been responsible for 86% at more than a run a ball, a loose delivery by Wagner for 8% and Compton for 6%, at 0.16 runs per ball. 4.52pm BST New Zealand aren't happy with the ball, and get a different one. @JonnyB on Twitter and John Tumbridge on email speculate that the follow-on decision was made to give Compton "one more opportunity to prove himself as a batter". Certainly if he plays himself back into form, given the state of play in the match and series, the decision will probably have been worthwhile. Whether that was actually the intention behind it, I really doubt. What if he'd got out cheaply (as he still might)? And the rest of England's batsmen too? 4.46pm BST The contrast between these batsmen is painful. One so smooth, finding gaps. For the other, nothing comes easily. An artist and a labourer. Anyway, that was a maiden. You don't need to be told who was on strike. Meanwhile, Trent Boult has injured his side and is unlikely to bowl again in this match. 4.41pm BST Cook is snarfing everything remotely wide, and when he edges a straight one it zips straight through the rather large gap between second slip and gully and away for four. He's now got 36 from 35 balls. Later, COMPTON GETS A RUN! "Always hear this trotted out, 'Modern captains tend not to enforce the follow-on.' What kind of explanation is that? We don't do it because it's not done? Call me a pedant, Mike Atherton and others, but sounds to me like a cricketing tautology." Certainly the fact that it tends not to be done doesn't change the fact that it's available, and the captain's decision needs to be explained. 4.36pm BST Cook is offered a couple of opportunities to score, and takes them both. Wagner has to change his line after those two, and change it he does – sending the following ball down the leg side for four byes. Cook grabs a single from the last to keep strike for a third over. Wagner's two overs have gone for 18 runs. "Are we sure that they knew follow on margin was 150 not 200 because of loss of first day's play," asks kbarnes. "I didn't." I guess we won't know for sure until the day is over and a microphone is thrust into someone's face. Surely, though. Surely. 4.32pm BST Mid-on does well to get some fingers to Cook's lovely shot off the first ball, from which England get two, and then Cook gets another three from the last. Compton has been on two runs for rather a long time. "Re Athers (1st over), the last time England had the chance to enforce, in Wellington, they did so," writes Mike Selvey. "There was bad weather around which did indeed finish off the game. But poor forecast here for Tuesday. This decision smacks rather more of expedience, knowing they aren't going to lose and are up in the series." 4.28pm BST Cook doubles England's tally by cutting Wagner's first ball of the innings for four, and then gets another boundary off the third, clipped off his legs through square leg. And so to the highest last-wicket totals. Looking at the 20 highest last-wicket partnerships over the last five years, England have conceded three of them (including the highest, 143 by West Indies last June. Today's effort by Boult and Wagner is No19). Pakistan conceded two, New Zealand one, South Africa four, West Indies two, India two and Sri Lanka four. So not really (though England did concede Nos 21 and 22 as well.Updated at 4.28pm BST 4.23pm BST Another maiden, this time from Southee to Compton. "I'm wondering if I am oversensitive about this, and therefore seeing something that isn't really there, but do England give up more runs for the last wicket than any other test side?" asks Jesse Linklater. "Both Wagner and Boult were described as legitimate 10th/11th batsmen, yet England gave up a 52 run partnership. It seems to happen a lot. Tell me it's only me." I will tell you, in just six balls time. 4.19pm BST Boult bowls a maiden over to Cook, who defends one, leaves four and is hit on the pad after being tied up by the other. 4.15pm BST Compton could have done without this. Feeling the pressure, perhaps, he flings his bat at a wide one from Southee and inside-edges it into the ground and horribly close to his stumps. He gets away with it. That was the first ball of the over. The last flies an inch or two past his edge. Uncomfortable. This is an opportunity for him, to lift the pressure or to be submerged beneath it. 4.09pm BST So England, with a lead of 180 and rain forecast for tomorrow, have chosen not to enforce the follow-on. Headingley is echoing to the sound of heads being scratched. "Modern captains tend not to enforce the follow-on," says Mike Atherton. Perhaps. Maybe England want the left-armers to give Swann some deeper, rougher rough to bowl at. Maybe Cook just fancies a knock. Seems to me a truly emphatic victory was there to be taken, and England have not even reached out their hand. Anyway, Trent Boult bowls fast and straight and both openers get a single.New Zealand all out for 174. 180 behind but England going to bat again. Cant think why. 3.52pm BST Well, New Zealand have accomplished what we thought was impossible, and rivaled the laughable, cowardly, lame, miserable, spineless collapse of the first test with another equally august. Well, done!England, though, did well to ride a ropey start, and bowled really well this afternoon. In particular, Finn can be pleased with his efforts, first locating and then sustaining his rhythm, after which Swann swanned in and through the middle order, with vicious, pecking, cackling aggression. If I were an Australian left-armer, I'd be bowling in my moccasins through the Ashes to restrict the rough, because their batsmen don't look equipped to handle him.Anyway, that's tea.Updated at 4.10pm BST 3.47pm BST Wagner charges again and misses. Anderson hits. England are not enforcing the following on. My face is doing a confused face. A confused face mixed with a vex-up face. 3.45pm BST Welcome to the game, Bozo! Wagner trots down the track and slices a short ball over cover. That's the fifty partnership, in 24 balls. New Zealand are hustlers. 3.44pm BST Jimmy Anderson comes on. 3.43pm BST As Boult charges Swann then retreats and dabs him for four, Janet Keyte emails in on the meaning of the meaning of life. Affronted, Boult whams Swann down the ground and over long-off for six, then another to long-on. But existential investigation stops for no rabbit, thus: "THE MEANING OF THE OBO - WHY 17?," she shrieks, "other, than, I suppose, to provoke this sort of response. Why not 42 ? which is favoured not only by Douglas Adams but also by Fred Hoyle. Or 19 ?? (see yesterday's thread on cricket-related songs).If ever you ask someone to come up with a random number, my scientific inquiry can reveal that it is always seventeen, and thus reflects the unpredictable nature of the universe. Consider humanity, for example. Updated at 3.43pm BST 3.39pm BST Broad is clearly fancying himself to polish this off, and is less than gruntled when Wagner edges him through behind for four. For reasons known best to whoever be the knowers of reason, England have over--populated the covers and under-populated the slips. The consequence of this is one more boundary-four, and Broad is gesticulating for a third man. He receives a third slip instead, which is a risk - both Boult and Wagner are known for their flowing drives, most particularly on the off-side. Accordingly, Wagner teases them by flinging bat at ball and connecting, sending the ball down to the fence at square-leg. Oooh, and there's another, this time through the covers. That's 19 from the over, plus one germinating temper. 3.33pm BST Boult's had as much as he can stands and he can't stands no more, clouting Swann from outside off to long-on, scoring a boundary six. Otherwise, nothing happens. 3.31pm BST Wagner adds four to the total via a thick outside edge, and Cook returns – he may, it is thought, have taken instruction on what to do. Well, says Rashi. Rashbam thinks he was checking on Anderson, who's off the field.Updated at 4.11pm BST 3.29pm BST Cook runs off, which suggets England will bat again. Curious behaviour, given the weather forecast. Then, Boult jabs at a short ball and Root gets a hand to it at short leg, but can't palm it up or snaffle it first up.Updated at 3.32pm BST 3.26pm BST McCullum looks back in disgust, as Broad bowls a perfect delivery - full, bouncy, and destined for the top of off. Deciding he'd best drive, when he'd best not, the ball gets predictably big on him, and he edges a straightforward catch behind. Updated at 3.27pm BST 3.23pm BST This is some risible risibility risibilising right here. 3.22pm BST Swann has driven a sponsored hobnail through his Headingley record. This latest wicket is off a delivery that's perhaps just short of a length and doesn't do a lot, but he comes forward, misses, and it strikes pad then bat, snaffled at silly point by Ronald Bell. 3.20pm BST Bracewell calls McCullum for a single, but his captain's having none of it. And... 3.19pm BST New Zealand are still a way from avoiding the follow-on, here - and the chances are that England will enforce it. The question is whether McCullum tries to whack them there - risky, because he's not facing Eddie Hemmings - or tries to shepherd the tail for as long as possible - risky, because they're the tail. While he thinks about it, Bracewell defends solidly and stolidly enough, and confidently gets himself back on strike to face Swann. 3.14pm BST And we are, you'll be ecstatic to discover, back, bad, bigger, better, faster and more. McCullum is playing Swann fairly confidently now, and making his disciples look a little silly. That's not to say Swann didn't remove them with good deliveries - verily he did - but they batted like they'd never seen off-spin before. They have seen off-spin before. 3.11pm BST Southee smears a smooth drive down the ground for four, then adds another couple two balls later. And then he gets out. And here's Daniel… 3.10pm BST A strange one, that. The original appeal wasn't exactly wholehearted, but Cook saw something in it, pushed ahead with the review and, after a lot of slow-motion replays, is repaid rather handsomely. 3.08pm BST Southee is not out here. Unless he's out. One or the other. It depends on whether the ball hit the pad before it hit the bat, or afterwards. 3.05pm BST I'm afraid Daniel's computer suffered some form of malfunction during that over from Swann. Anyway, 10 runs came off it. That's about all I can tell you. Daniel will be back again with full coverage of the 36th over. Fingers crossed. 3.00pm BST Broad starts well, his opening delivery forcing McCullum to play when he seemed fairly keen to avoid so doing. But his next ball, McCullum chooses to drive, Anderson diving at mid-off to prevent the boundary, reddening his hand in the process. Broad then beats McCullum, finding a little bit of extra pace, and bounce in particular, smacking him on the thigh. A strangulated appeal doth thus ensue.The clock at Headingley is made by Philip Stoner - presumably it perpetually shows tea-time, and is always several hours late. Updated at 3.02pm BST 2.55pm BST Stuart Broad is back into the attack. 2.53pm BST As the players swill, slurp and burp, Simon McMahon is indulging in "a minor existential crisis". Well, obviously - what else is to do? "What," he pinpoints, "is the meaning of the OBO?"Answer: 17. Updated at 2.54pm BST 2.49pm BST Cook intimates some short stuff by getting a short-leg in close to Southee, who takes four off the first ball when Finn drops short. But when the bouncer comes, he makes a right old performance of getting out of the way. Heads return to hands and hands to head when a yorker foxes him three balls later, allowing him to take two. That's drinks - the Old Mother Black Caps must be hoping for two large gins, two pints of cider, ice in the cider. 2.43pm BST "It is possible," wonders John Tumbridge, "that Boycott as the current Yorkshire president had had a glass of grape juice or two before partaking in the podcast, he wandered into the TMS commentary box before lunch yesterday and it was suggested by Aggers that the combination of long lunch followed by podcast may not be that a smart move."Eminently so, I'd say - I seem to recall reading as much. I'm not sure how a traditional song-and-dance man like Boycott could handle the additional joie de vivre of a couple of glasses of Personality Enhancer. Swann's latest over is total rubbish, he's useless, and McCullum rocks back when he pitches short, cutting hard to the cover boundary.  2.38pm BST Well, there's not much good to be said about the way New Zealand are batting here - apparently, none of them bothered to practice against spin this morning. On the other hand, England are bowling really well, which just goes to show what you can accomplish when you have bowlers. Which sounds a bizarre thing to say, until you remember Capel, Austin, Ilott, Ealham, Cowdrey, Watkinson and ilk.Southee gets off the mark first ball with an outside edge, Finn finding some bounce and making his man hop as he tries to hide behind thin air.  2.34pm BST Swann has three-fer in 12 balls, and is bowling beautifully. New Zealand, on the other hand, are nonsense. 2.32pm BST Swann's first ball to McCullum draws him forward, well away from his body, and he squirts the ball behind him to leg slip-ish, for a single. Next ball, England appeal - for lbw or a catch, they-re unfussed - and not out says the umpire. Review!Updated at 2.33pm BST 2.30pm BST This is another delicious delivery, and very similar to its wicket-taking predecessor. It drifts out, spins in out of the rough, teases open the gate and barrels through it, the bowling equivalent of knock down Ginger. Updated at 2.40pm BST 2.28pm BST "Come on, Dan'l," thunders John Starbuck. "Batters are made up of flour, eggs and water or milk. New Zealand's batsmen aren't that bad. I can't help thinking you're aiming to be a bit PC by not excluding women players. There are no women players in this match so the question doesn't arise."Not at all - it's a minor homage to SK Warne.  2.26pm BST Williamson does well to keep Gupthill out of the way for five balls, before he kepplers a single to deep square leg. 2.25pm BST New Zealand need someone to do something. That was a smart bowling change from Alastair Cook. 2.23pm BST Yet another first over wicket for Swann, and what a ball this is, which drifts in and out, pitches outside off, grips, spins, and nails Browlie through the gate.Updated at 2.41pm BST 2.20pm BST Immediately, Swann finds some drift and beats Williamson's outside-edge. Meanwhile, more from the Brad McMillan reality show: "One of the pleasures of having a 3 year old daughter is afternoon naps. When she sleeps, I sleep - simple. She always seems 'tired' at roughly 2pm on a Sunday, when my wife is at work and, blast, when I fancy a two-hour 'sofa-session.' Unfortunately, I also have an 11 year old upstairs, and I'm fairly sure he's plotting how to disable me as I type!" Updated at 2.20pm BST 2.18pm BST Swann to take over from Broad - can he take his first Headingley wicket?Updated at 2.30pm BST 2.17pm BST Finn has his top button done up. Me and him are done. And it doesnae say much for his team-mates either - what, exactly, are the Swann-Broad-Bresnan conduct police doing with their time? The batters nab another single each - they've looked a soupcon more comfortable, these last two overs - and I fancy we'll be seeing Anderson shortly.Updated at 2.18pm BST 2.13pm BST Sky show some tape to illustrate just how little naches Taylor gleaned from being hit on the forearm by Finn, and then point out how South Africa mithered him with the same line of attack, helpfully breaking the bone for him. And yet, he still doesn't wear a guard - what a gentleman! No doubt he also attained a third class degree.The batters are finding Broad easier to play than Finn, taking a single each from the first three balls, and then, from the final one, pitches full and watches Williamson attempt a drive, and miss by hectares.  2.07pm BST Steve Finn seems very likeable, despite the Watford thing, but his hair is veering dangerously close to Sco. T. Parker territory. Handy in guaranteeing military success, less so otherwise. Anyway, he's tearing in here, opening with a bouncer that Brownlie only just avoids and forcing him onto the back foot for the rest of the over, which is a maiden. 2.03pm BST Lazy journalism! Brad McMillan emails in to point out that I neglected to credit him when publishing his previous email. "Since my email publications are clearly anonymous," he hurrumphs, "I'd like to take this opportunity to confirm that Gary Naylor is, indeed, also Rob Smyth."That sounds like a film to me. Meanwhile, in cricket, Broad is bowling and Williamson is defending. He's a funny one, Broad - an obvious talent, but the sudden, unpredictable spates of wickets, followed by sustained, predictable spates of not-wickets, makes you wonder if he quite knows what it is that happens when things happen. 2.00pm BST The Black Caps might wish they were in The Mother Black Cap. 1.58pm BST Ooooh and aaaah, extra pace from Finn catches Taylor on the drive, and he drags on. Finn has all three wickets - what a bowlere he is going to be, what a bowler he already is (when it's working for him).Updated at 2.43pm BST 1.56pm BST Finn's first ball is short and wide, and Taylor wastes neither time nor energy in cutting it to the boundary fo fo.Updated at 1.56pm BST 1.54pm BST Athers is not happy with the lack of a third slip, though Botham points out that the last wicket was caught in the gully, which is in place. England cede a leg bye, and then Williamson allows the third delivery to bash his pad, which elicits a minor shout for leg-before, though the ball was missing the stumps by a distance greater than Tony Soprano's proximity to control of New Jersey. 1.50pm BST Finn takes a couple of balls to find his range and then extracts some pace and bounce - I could literally spend all day with Michael Holding making sweet love to the phrase on loop. Taylor does well to fend it off and finagle a single. Then, with his fifth ball, pitched just outside off, he raps Wiliamson on the body, which looks the opposite of fun. Meantime, the thirstiest members of the crowd are singing football songs. It can only be a matter of time before the zane of the beersnake is upon us. 1.45pm BST Up the hill it's FinnUpdated at 1.45pm BST 1.45pm BST Broad probes outside off-stump with his first two deliveries, then slants the third in a touch. His third ball gives Williamson the chance to score, though, further over still, and he steps to leg and turns the ball down towards the fence for two. In the commentary box, they're discussing - guess what! - the length at which Broad should bowl. 1.40pm BST Stuart Broad will start, bowling down the hill... 1.38pm BST Email! "You have to love Geoffrey Boycott. I caught up with yesterday's play by listening to the daily TMS podcast, and he bestowed us with this gem: 'Yorkshire have produced many great players over the years. Herbert Sutcliffe, Leonard Hutton, Michael Vaughan, myself...' It's funny because its true!"With added reflexive pronoun for added humility.  1.36pm BST New Zealand are in a bit of a hole here. England's score of 354 - ironically, the exact same number of days as there are in a non-leap lunar year - was only just about par. And with not long at all until lunch, the tourists looked set for a relaxing afternoon on a decent track, the ball doing less than Nick Compton James Anderson wanted it to. Then, the veneer slipped off the Duke, Steve Finn bowled his best spell in a while, and England were in. In five minutes, we'll get know what gets to happen next. 1.30pm BST Afternoon, everyone. Once upon a time, there was nothing more quintessentially, tediously, tautologically British than talking about the weather. But now, there's nothing more quintessentially, tediously, tautologically British than talking about talking about the weather, and soon enough, in these joyous days of avant-garde metahilarity, there'll be nothing more quintessentially, tediously, tautologically British than talking about talking about talking about the weather.Today, after much hankering, we have some nice weather. We also have some nice cricket. Accordingly: please draw your curtains, shut your doors, and put the telly on after the classic bulldog fashion, and settle down for an invigorating afternoon of heat and light avoidance.  1.02pm BST It is lunch. Go and have some lunch. Unless you're in New Zealand, in which case you may consider a bit of kip. 1.02pm BST Taylor has one ball to face and he survives it, though it's pretty darn fierce, and the session ends on a high for England. Finn has been the most dangerous bowler this morning by a distance. Daniel Harris will be here shortly to guide you through the afternoon session. 12.59pm BST That's changed the complexion of the session significantly. That's excellent bowling from Finn, working over the batsman in the first four balls of the over, getting some movement off the seam, tempting the batsman into a drive, and then finally he did, his miscued, and Bell collectyed at gully.Updated at 2.45pm BST 12.54pm BST Broad continues, the highlight of the over being a shot from Rutherford that rumbles towards the boundary where Bairstow receives a massive ovation for picking it up. And being from Yorkshire. Later, Williamson gets off the mark with a fine drive through mid-off for four. Updated at 12.56pm BST 12.49pm BST An excellent delivery, perhaps the best of the innings so far, from Finn, zips across a befuddled Rutherford, who nods his head appreciatively, but some way past the bat. 12.46pm BST Anderson is off, and Broad returns with a change of ends. Rutherford gets a single off the first, and that's yer lot, action-wise. 12.40pm BST And that's a wicket maiden. Finn can't get any more movement than Anderson, but it seems he can find a bit more pace. 12.37pm BST A wicket! An actual, real, proper wicket! A bit of extra bounce from Finn undoes Fulton and finds a leading edge, the ball flying 40 feet in the air before coming back to earth about 10 yards from where it started, where Finn is waiting for it. That's Fulton's best innings of the tour, statistically speaking, but having reached that mark he suddenly looked desperate to get out.Updated at 12.45pm BST 12.34pm BST Anderson, who is showing all external signs of developing a mighty funk about the lack of wickets New Zealand aren't handing to him, gets another go. Things just aren't going his way – still no swing, and when Fulton totally misjudges a shot and bottom-edges it towards the stumps, the ball obligingly bounces over them and disappears for four. "Impressive attempt at commentator's curse from TMS, talking about how New Zealand will be looking to make 500 odd runs quickly to get a winning position," notes Neil Parkes. "All out by tea for 160?" 12.29pm BST More lovely shotmaking, this time Fulton smacking a decent ball through midwicket for four. This is serene stuff. 12.25pm BST Anderson asks Umpire Erasmus to take another look at the ball, and this time it fails its statutory checks and is replaced. So that's a victory of sorts for England. It's the only one they celebrated that over, the most expensive of the day so far – don't be surprise if this ball is considered out of shape in a few overs' time – which saw a leg bye, a couple of twos, Rutherford thudding the ball through extra cover for an extremely handsome four and a bouncer that flew so high over Rutherford that a wide should have been called (but wasn't).Rutherford has just hit Jimmy on the rise through extra cover with as dismissive a shot as Ive seen all year.Updated at 12.26pm BST 12.18pm BST Broad is taken off, Finn is brought on, and Fulton smears his second ball through the covers for another four, and but for a diving stop by Root there would have been another boundary two balls later. "isn’t this the point where there’s a silly dropped catch which will be talked about in dull spells as Fulton and/or Rutherford go on to make hundreds?" asks Anthony in France. Even a chance of a catch would be nice, please. Don't care if it goes down, just want to be reassured that it's possible. 12.13pm BST Rutherford clearly admired Fulton's boundary in the previous over, because he perfectly replicated the shot at the earliest opportunity, driving the ball between the bowler and mid-off and admiring it as it trundles away to the boundary. And then another, a wider ball cut past gully and away! At which Anderson tells Marais Erasmus that he doesn't like this ball much, and would it be alright if he had another one instead? Erasmus shakes his head and gives him the ball back. If they can't get this ball to move, the Kiwis could have a nice afternoon here. 12.08pm BST Broad causes Fulton some discomfort, with a couple of balls unconvincingly defended by a combination of edges and pads. But in the middle of it all … a four! A straight ball sent between the bowler and mid on with no little style. "Just what are you expecting the Enterprise to do?" ponders John Starbuck, "Materialise a fielder on the boundary just in time to take a stunning catch? Fat chance of that with these batsmen." 12.04pm BST No runs at all from that one. Can we start looking for spaceship-shaped clouds yet? Are there any clouds yet? 12.01pm BST Another over illuminated by just a single single. The bowlers are shying at the stumps, the batsmen are stopping the ball from hitting them. 11.57am BST Rutherford's single from the first ball is all the run-scoring action there is in that over, Fulton thenceforth going defensive. Anderson is bowling well enough, but there seems little sign of an imminent England wicketfest. 11.52am BST The second boundary of the day is not long in coming, Fulton thwacking a straight delivery off his stumps and through mid-on. He gets another couple later on, and generally looks rather untroubled. 11.47am BST The first boundary of the day, and Rutherford knew very little about it, inside-edging the ball across the stumps and away to the rope. 11.43am BST During the innings break Atherton showed us examples from his Dunedin megawhack of how Rutherford profited from deliveries the gave him space outside off stump. Perhaps England were watching, because Broad gave him none there. The last two balls went for singles. 11.38am BST A decent first over, with the promised movement immediately apparent. Anderson finds Fulton's edge with his second ball – it went straight into the ground and had bounced four or five times before it was fielded at third slip. 11.25am BST That's a smart low catch from Boult, just getting his fingers under the ball after it caught Anderson's outside edge.Updated at 11.32am BST 11.22am BST Finn hits Boult's first ball of the over for two, the second for four, and then misses the third, which sends his off stump cartwheeling around Headingley.Proper tail end innings from Finn: Biff, Bash, Splat. 354-9Updated at 11.49am BST 11.18am BST Swann tries to leave the first ball, fails and gets a couple of runs for his troubles, and then survives another lbw appeal from the last. "King Egbert (as his name is now accepted to be) of Wessex was Alfred the Great's grandfather and the last of the Bretwaldas (pretty much the English equivalent of the Irish High Kings), becoming such a great ruler about 829. However, there may have been other Eg(g)bert kings as there were plenty of Saxon kingdoms in need of a ruler before then." Turns out the school is actually named after a King Ecgbert. Is that the same chap? Anyway, Jess Ennis went there too, so they must be doing something right. 11.14am BST There's a good appeal for lbw against Swann off the second ball, but the umpire is unimpressed. Turns out it would have clipped the top of leg stump. New Zealand have no remaining appeals, and given the umpire's decision it wouldn't have helped them on this occasion anyway. "I live in West Yorkshire about 30 miles away from Headingley and there are clouds about here, though in a mainly blue sky," writes John "Kettley" Starbuck. "At this time of the year, many arise from the contrails of aircraft going to and from Leeds-Bradford and Manchester Airports, so we can expect more later. But remember, you shouldn't allow clouds to get in your way." 11.11am BST That leaves Southee to steam in from the other end, and his first ball is horribly off-beam, handing England another free run. Obviously the over improves from there. I suppose it's reassuring for England to see a bit of movement early this morning – they'll surely be needing it soon enough.Boult already swinging the ball nicely. 14 overs old it is, and about right to get the shine back on. 11.09am BST Southee tempts Prior into a drive, clips an edge and the ball flies obligingly down the throat of Taylor at first slip. Not literally down his throat, though I suppose that would count as being caught if it came down to it. 11.04am BST Trent Boult has the ball for the first over of the day, and each batsman gets a single from it. As a special early-morning bonus, though, the third ball disappears past Swann and down the leg side for four byes.Updated at 11.11am BST 10.58am BST "I can never get my kings straight," writes Bob O'Hara. "Was King Eggbert before or after King Chickenbert?" Exceedingly droll. Anyway, the players are coming out. Jerusalem is blasting from the PA system. This is happening. 10.57am BST Consider Phil's question most emphatically answered. Get on yer bike, lad (and anyone else mulling over an impromptu visit to Headingley).Today is going to be hotter than yesterday. Get to Headingley and be part of the Test. Tickets available in all areas. Walk up easy. #EngvNZ 10.48am BST Sky are showing footage of Joe Root's visit to his old school. It is called King Eggbert School. Who is King Eggbert, and why have our beloved royals so harshly turned their back on his fabulous moniker? 10.47am BST Help an OBOer dept: "They're not responding on the phone at Headingley," writes Phil Smith. "Can anyone tell me if there's any seats there, or if there's any point turning up without a ticket today?" I don't know, Phil, but this tweet from Yorkshire this morning suggests they're encouraging people without tickets to turn up.Glorious Weather Update: Dry with long sunny periods and only a few patches of cloud. Max 18c Wind W 11mph. No chance of rain. Come along. 10.42am BST "We bowled pretty nicely in the first session and the last, in the middle session we went missing a little bit. Other than that, we were pretty good," says Mike Hesson, New Zealand's head coach. "I think it was definitely a new ball wicket yesterday. We've got to be really strong in our decision-making. If we can be clear, make good decisions, get through the new ball, it should be a good wicket."He does speak very quickly, does Mike Hesson. A tester for my touch-typing skills, that was.Updated at 10.42am BST 10.39am BST There's little chance of spotting an unlikely cloud formation today, because there aren't really any clouds. This is good news and bad news, depending on how you look at it. Anyway, this is what Jonny Bairstow had to say to Sky a few moments ago:"I think overall it was a pretty good day for us. It's obviously quite a good thing for us, that it was sunny and still swung, that means all our bowlers are still in the game.It was a great ovation [when Joe Root got his century], fantastic to spend some time out in the middle with Joe and to get the crowd behind us.At Headingley you've just got to take a little bit of time to get used to the pitch. They're all slightly different. Once you've played yourself in it becomes generally a good pitch in the afternoon. The key is to watch the ball as close as you can [insert sarky remark about obviousness of above statement here – ed]. With the consistent swing, that's something you've got to figure into your gameplan. It's somewhere you get value for your shots with the outfield being so quick." 10.27am BST So the key questions are: how many more runs will be added by England's tail, or what remains of it? How will New Zealand respond? And are there Klingons on the starboard bow? 10.18am BST I'll be absolutely straight up about this: It's taken me so long to set up this page that I've now got no time to put anything in it before pressing "launch". So here's what Mike Selvey wrote about Root for today's Big Paper:Then Root appeared, a slightly diffident figure, and the ground erupted. Standing ovations generally are for greater achievement than the ability to walk from a dressing room to the middle but this was special. Were this a T20 match they would be playing Mark Knopfler's theme music from Local Hero.With the acclaim comes expectation. A part of the move to sell tickets for the match, a struggle for Yorkshire, was predicated on the presence of Root in particular, for what would be his international debut on his home soil. McCullum heaped on the pressure: four slips, two gullies, and a volley of lip. Such things are sent to test temperament and technique in equal measure but in this Root was flawless. He plays late, drives with a bent front knee and a checked stroke, and pulls nicely. When Williamson was expected to fill in some overs until the new ball, Root responded by taking himself through the 70s to his highest Test score by clipping three successive boundaries, the third of them reverse swept. That takes nerve and youthful exuberance.Now the debate will crank up. This is England's last Test before the-series-that-cannot-be-named and while Ashley Giles takes the one-day side through the Champions Trophy, Andy Flower will be planning his strategies. Kevin Pietersen seems certain to return and the clamour for Root – always destined to open one day – to move up to partner Cook will intensify.Despite his steadfastness in India and twin centuries in New Zealand, Compton is not making the strongest of cases for himself and will have watched Root and Bairstow with mixed feelings. The figures are stacking up against him.There's more, if you'd like it, here.