Preamble Morning. This is, I think, our first ever women's cricket OBO, and we're only about a decade too late. Fashionably late. England have been brilliant for years now, managing the kind of sustained success usually beyond British sporting teams. They won the World Cup and the World T20 in 2009, held the Ashes from 2005 to 2010 and are big favourites to win this tournament after a staggering run of 29 wins in 31 games. Who says 20-over cricket is a lottery?They should beat New Zealand today, although it's no formality; if they do they will face West Indies or, more probably, Australia in the final on Sunday. They beat Australia in a dead rubber during the group stages, thanks mainly to a stunning innings from the little genius Sarah Taylor. She is the brightest star in a team full of them.England have won the toss and will bowl first. That's slightly counter-intuitive, given that England use their spinners to strangle teams, but the approach has served them extremely well in this tournament so far.England Edwards (c), Marsh, Taylor (wk), Greenway, Brindle, Wyatt, Gunn, Brunt, Hazell, Colvin, Shrubsole.New Zealand Bates (c), Satterthwaite, Devine, Mackay, McGlashan, Browne, Martin (wk), Bermingham, Doolan, Nielsen, Ruck.It's a sweltering day in Colombo – "stinking hot" says Nasser Hussain on Sky – and the pitch is, as you'd expect, a dry turner.For the first time since Boxing Day 2010 (can anyone remember what happened then? I've forgotten) I'm doing this OBO from home. It's important to stress that, if there are no updates for 10 minutes, we are having technical problems and I emphatically have not fallen asleep in a droolpool on the sofa.WICKET! New Zealand 0-1 (Bates run out 0) The New Zealand captain Suzie Bates is run out for a duck! She was getting twitchy after four dot balls from Katherine Brunt, and set off for a ludicrous single after a push into the covers. Amy Satterthwaite was having none of it – not interested! – and sent her back. Bates was miles short when Lydia Greenway threw in for Sarah Taylor to break the stumps. That's a huge breakthrough for England because Bates is probably New Zealand's most dangerous batsman.1st over: New Zealand 0-1 (Satterthwaite 0, Devine 0) This, it's fair to say, has been a good start for England.2nd over: New Zealand 4-1 (Satterthwaite 3, Devine 1) The offspinner Danni Hazell shares the new ball. Satterthwaite pulls New Zealand's first run off the 10th delivery and then clouts a slog-sweep just short of Greenway at deep midwicket.3rd over: New Zealand 7-1 (Satterthwaite 4, Devine 3) Brunt is one of world cricket's feistier new-ball bowlers, and she's tearing in here. There's a bit of swing too and her last delivery curves sweetly past Satterthwaite's booming drive. Still no boundaries for New Zealand."Is Sarah Taylor good enough to play in the County Championship?" wonders Sam Silverwood-Cope. "Would rules also allow it? If so would this be a good thing for women's cricket? I'd personally love to see it. Have a good day. Plus happy birthday to my twin brother Tom." I suspect she is, although it's hard to judge these things. I'm pretty sure Selve thinks she is good enough. I doubt the regulations allow it, though I don't actually know. You're welcome!4th over: New Zealand 12-1 (Satterthwaite 5, Devine 7) It's a like-for-like bowling change: offspinner for offspinner, Danni for Danni. This time it's Danni Wyatt. Sophie Devine rocks back to cut three through the covers and then fails to take advantage of a filthy full toss. Satterthwaite then survives a huge appeal for LBW; I don't think it straightened quite enough to the left-hander, although it was a very decent shout. Hawkeye showed it was just clipping the outside of leg stump, so you can't really argue with Marais Erasmus's decision. New Zealand are already under pressure here.5th over: New Zealand 16-1 (Satterthwaite 5, Devine 11) Devine edges Brunt low for four, New Zealand's first boundary. Brunt responds by ripping a short ball past Devine's attempted pull and spearing in an excellent yorker that is dug out. Outstanding bowling from Brunt; just four from the over, and they came off the edge."What's the pitch like today?" asks Indy Neogy. "Any thoughts what would be a good score from the England bowlers point of view?" It looks a good pitch, if a little slow and low. I don't think they would be too perturbed about chasing anything under 140. The only concern for England is that – as with the Australia Men's team the other day – the middle order hasn't had much of a hit because of the excellence of the top three.WICKET! New Zealand 17-2 (Devine c Brunt b Wyatt 11) Another one down. Devine slog-sweeps Wyatt straight to deep midwicket, where Brunt takes a calm low catch and celebrates by striking a Usain Bolt pose.6th over: New Zealand 22-2 (Satterthwaite 10, Mackay 0) Wyatt is teasing the batsmen by tossing it up, and Satterthwaite is beaten in the flight as she attempts a slog-sweep. The last ball is driven back through Wyatt for four.7th over: New Zealand 23-2 (Satterthwaite 10, Mackay 1) Anya Shrubsole, the right-arm seamer, replaces Brunt and zips a good delivery past Satterthwaite's attempted drive. A slower ball beats the outside edge next ball. Just one from the over. New Zealand are in trouble here; something will have to give pretty soon.8th over: New Zealand 25-2 (Satterthwaite 11, Mackay 2) Hazell returns to the attack. As so often in recent times, England are inflicting a slow death on their opponents. Just two singles from Hazell's over. New Zealand are really struggling to pierce the infield."Tenuously linking to women's cricket, I flicked over to nerdy BBC4 quiz show Only Connect this week, which included a team of cricket fans, one of whom was called Andrea Lowe," says David Hopkins. "Wasn't she an OBO regular back in the Booth days? I now fully expect to see Gary Naylor on Pointless and Mac Millings on The Cube." She was indeed. Possibly the first OBOette, from memory, though it was before my time.WICKET! New Zealand 30-3 (Mackay LBW b Shrubsole 2) New Zealand are in disarray. Mackay survived a biggish LBW shout earlier in the over but was given out when she pushed around a very full delivery from Shrubsole. There was a bit of doubt as to whether it was sneaking down leg side, but I suspect Hawkeye will show that was clipping.9th over: New Zealand 30-3 (Satterthwaite 16, McGlashan 0) Hawkeye shows that it was indeed clipping leg stump, so Bruce Oxenford's decision was fair enough. Even by England's standards this has been a seriously good performance.10th over: New Zealand 38-3 (Satterthwaite 22, McGlashan 2) Here's Laura Marsh to bowl her offspin. The fourth ball turns past McGlashan's outside edge and then Satterthwaite, beaten in the flight, slices an attempted slog-sweep to third man for four."Morning Rob!" says Ryan Dunne. " Like many, I'm delighted to find a new variation of MBM/OBO/HBH etc, but surely I can't be the only one disappointed that the Guardian didn't get one of its fine sportshacks to MBM last night's Presidential debate? Instead of 'WICKET!"' you could have had "ZINGER!" for especially witty comments by the candidates, "refresh the page if the response description didn't appear" , emailed in comments of romantic desperation (with e.g. a political twist!) from readers etc." We don't get to cover Real Life, Dunne, you know that. That exists in an entirely separate part of London to the airless sport bunker.WICKET! New Zealand 42-4 (McGlashan st Taylor b Colvin 3) Beautiful bowling from the left-arm spinner Holly Colvin. Throughout her first over she has been bowling really slowly, at snail's pace (or should that be Snape's pace). McGlashan was completely done in the flight as she came down the track, and the brilliant Sarah Taylor had the bails off in an instant.11th over: New Zealand 42-4 (Satterthwaite 24, Browne 0) "Anyone ever taken seriously (apart from Lord Selvey) the notion that Sarah Taylor should be in an England men's team?" says Ravi Nair. "She is surely good enough behind the stumps AND she can bat." She's good – she's a genius – but she's not that good. And her mate Matt Prior might have something to say about it. That stumping was pure class, mind.12th over: New Zealand 49-4 (Satterthwaite 26, Browne 5) It's been so refreshing to see England's phalanx of spinners flight the ball so often. There have been no darts today. That flight does allow Nicola Browne to clout Laura Marsh over midwicket for four. New Zealand need a few more of those.13th over: New Zealand 53-4 (Satterthwaite 28, Browne 7) New Zealand probably need 120 to have any chance of winning, although even then England would be strong favourites. Colvin's second over brings just four singles.14th over: New Zealand 57-4 (Satterthwaite 30, Browne 9)The ball is turning pretty sharply, aided of course by England flighting it so much. I won't say its ragging, lest someone put two and two together to make 74 and a helping of faux outrage. Nicola Browne looks in the mood for some bish-bosh, but she doesn't time a couple of big hits properly and there are just four singles from Marsh's over. New Zealand need at least 63 from six overs to give themselves a realistic chance. Quite the predicament they're in."I take offence at David Hopkins' assertion that Only Connect is nerdy," says Matt Dony. "It is one of the main reasons I have a tv license, and I'm in no way nerdy. Matt Dony (Bespectacled, re-training as an accountant, ex-Mensan, Scott Walker fan)." We should put an OBO team on there. Smyth, Bull, Selvey, maybe Naylor. What's the worst that could happen? Public humili-what?WICKET! New Zealand 57-5 (Satterthwaite c Gunn b Colvin 30) Satterthwaite dances down the track to Colvin and drives straight to long on, where Jenny Gunn takes a splendidly unobtrusive low catch. England are so good in the field.15th over: New Zealand 61-5 (Browne 10, Martin 2) Katey Martin is the new batsman/batswoman/batter. New Zealand are up a well-known creek, with paddles conspicuous by their absence.16th over: New Zealand 68-5 (Browne 13, Martin 6) A wide from Danni Hazell, only the third extra of the innings. Martin does well to get down on a nasty grubber. Maybe this pitch isn't as good as we thought. Seven from Hazell's over, none in boundaries; she ends with figures of 4-0-18-0.17th over: New Zealand 73-5 (Browne 15, Martin 9) New Zealand have struggled to hit boundaries: just five all innings, and at least two of these were off the edge. Colvin's final over goes for five, all in ones and twos. She ends with excellent figures of 4-0-15-2."Re: the third over, may I just say happy birthday to by twin brother Sam," says Tom Silverwood-Cope. Awww.18th over: New Zealand 83-5 (Browne 18, Martin 15) Anya Shrubsole starts her second spell with a front-foot no-ball. The resulting free hit is clubbed to long-on for just a single. Martin gets a boundary off the third legitimate deliver, walking across her stumps to ping a low full toss over short fine leg. That's an excellent stroke. Ten from the over, New Zealand's best of the innings.WICKET! New Zealand 83-6 (Browne c Greenway b Marsh 17) Browne smashes a full toss from Marsh to deep midwicket, where Greenway takes a very accomplished running catch above her head. She is the best fielder in the world, followed by daylight, and that was another example.WICKET! New Zealand 85-7 (Bermingham run out 1) More high-class fielding from England. The new batsman Erin Bermingham tries to steal a second to long leg, but she's beaten by a sharp throw from Wyatt and a clean take from Taylor.19th over: New Zealand 88-7 (Martin 18, Doolan 1)WICKET! New Zealand 91-8 (Martin st Taylor b Wyatt 19) Lovely bowling from Danni Wyatt, who pushes an arm ball straight past Martin's outside edge from around the wicket. Sarah Taylor does the rest.20th over: New Zealand 93-8 (Doolan 3, Nielsen 1) This has been an excellent performance from England, who need just 94 to make the final. See you in 10 minutes.INNINGS BREAK1st over: England 1-0 (target 94; Edwards 1, Marsh 0) There's a burgeoning sense that this could be a deceptively tricky target on a very dry pitch, with a few deliveries going through the top. New Zealand must take early wickets to get amongst the middle order, although they will be content with that first over from Nicola Browne – just one from it, with Charlotte Edwards twice beaten by lack of bounce outside off stump.2nd over: England 8-0 (target 94; Edwards 8, Marsh 0) Sian Ruck, the left-arm seamer, is going to share the new ball. That's a bit of a surprise; most assumed they would start with spin. Is it really 20 years since Dipak Patel opening the bowling in the World Cup? Crikey. Ruck is getting some nice inswing from around the wicket, but her fourth ball is too wide and Edwards cuts crisply for four. Laura Marsh hasn't faced a ball yet. Anyone out there? We haven't had a single sexist email today; it's quite refreshing.3rd over: England 12-0 (target 94; Edwards 12, Marsh 0) Edwards, on the pull, is beaten by a sharp bouncer from Browne. She responds with an imaginative lap over short fine leg for four.4th over: England 15-0 (target 94; Edwards 13, Marsh 2) Here comes the legspinner Erin Bermingham, the joint leading wicket-taker in the tournament before this game. Laura Marsh finally faces her first ball, surviving an optimistic LBW shout to a ball that pitched outside leg stump, and then she is beaten by a sharp lifter. Three singles from the over. This has been a decent start from New Zealand.5th over: England 22-0 (target 94; Edwards 14, Marsh 8) Marsh top edges a short ball from Browne not far short of deep square leg, and the ball spins past the fielder for four."4th over - 'his ball'?" says Simon Blackwell. "Isn't this a women's match?" Oof, sorry. Habit is a powerful thing. I've changed it now.6th over: England 26-0 (target 94; Edwards 16, Marsh 10) Marsh tries to fetch the legspinner Bermingham from well outside off stump and drags the ball this far wide of leg stump. Edwards survives a huge LBW shout next ball, with a bottom edge onto the pad saving her. Bermingham looks a really good legspinner.7th over: England 32-0 (target 94; Edwards 21, Marsh 11) New Zealand have a phalanx of spinners too, and here comes the offspinner Lucy Doolan. Edwards drives her first ball over mid-on, with one hand coming off the bat, but there's enough on it to clear the infield and it runs away for four. Six from the over; England need 62 from 78 balls. Should."Rob, you say you are working from home, have you done something wrong in the office?" says Rob Lee-Davey. "Is this part of some kind of reintegration process?" I didn't send those texts. They got nothin' on me.WICKET! England 32-1 (Marsh c Nielsen b Ruck 11) What a catch from Morna Nielsen! Marsh hammered the new bowler Ruck towards mid-off, where Nielsen swooped forward to take an outstanding two-handed catch a few inches off the floor. That brings Sarah Taylor, the world's best T20 batsman to the crease.8th over: England 34-1 (target 94; Edwards 22, Taylor 1) This is the key partnership, between the top two in the T20 batting rankings. If New Zealand can break it early they will still be in with a chance.9th over: England 40-1 (target 94; Edwards 27, Taylor 2) Taylor's record in Twenty20s this year is ridiculous – an average of 44 and a strike rate of 124. She gives Doolan the charge and hits a sweet lofted drive down the ground for four. That part of her game has development so much in the last few months. In fact it was Edwards who played that shot. So ignore all of the above. (Although Sarah Taylor is a superb straight hitter.)10th over: England 44-1 (target 94; Edwards 29, Taylor 4) Charlote Edwards survives a spandex-tight run-out referral after a dodgy single to midwicket off the new bowler, the left-arm spinner Nielsen. That could be a big moment in the game. Edwards would have been well out with a direct hit. Four from the over; England need 50 from the last ten.WICKET! England 53-2 (Edwards c Devine b Bermingham 33) This match is not over. New Zealand are into England's middle order after taking the vital wicket of Charlotte Edwards. She tried to cut Bermingham over backward point but didn't get enough of it and Sophie Devine took an excellent two-handed catch as she leapt backwards. It's been an eventful over, with five wides, a straight hit for four and now the wicket.11th over: England 55-2 (target 94; Taylor 5, Greenway 1) This is only Lydia Greenway's second innings of the tournament. She sweeps her first ball for a single.12th over: England 62-2 (target 94; Taylor 12, Greenway 1) Sarah Taylor hits the first six of the match, clouting a filthy full toss from Nielsen high over midwicket. New Zealand must get rid of Taylor in the next couple of overs if they are to have any chance.13th over: England 66-2 (target 94; Taylor 14, Greenway 3) New Zealand return to pace in the shape of Nicola Browne, whose final overs yields four singles. She ends with figures of 4-0-16-0. England are cruising now.14th over: England 72-2 (target 94; Taylor 17, Greenway 6) The offspinner Frances Mackay becomes the eighth slow bowler in this match. England are picking up singles far too easily against a deep-set field, with Greenway paddle-sweeping every delivery she faced in that over. Six singles from the over. England need 22 from 36 balls.15th over: England 74-2 (target 94; Taylor 18, Greenway 7) Taylor loops the new bowler Ruck this far short of Devine at backward point and is then beaten outside off. That's an excellent over from Ruck.16th over: England 82-2 (target 94; Taylor 19, Greenway 13) Sarah Taylor is stumped off a no-ball! Oh what a sorry shemozzle. Mackay beat Taylor completely with a ball speared towards the off side from around the wicket, but her back foot was over the return crease. Taylor can't take advantage of the consequent free hit. England are still cruising however, and Greenway continues her sweep-happy innings by cuffing a full toss round the corner for four.WICKET! England 93-3 (Greenway c Devine b Ruck 22) Greenway has played a sweep a ball; it's been an extraordinary innings. Now she's switched to the reverse sweep, and gets the seamer Ruck away for four, two and one. Then, with one needed, she falls to the reverse sweep, pinging it straight to point. She faced 19 deliveries for her 22 and I reckon she swept at least 13 of them.17.2 overs: England 94-3 (Taylor 21, Brindle 0). ENGLAND WIN BY SEVEN WICKETS The little genius hits the winning run, and England are into Sunday's final against New Zealand and West Indies. This means so much to them after the disappointment of 2010. Edwards screams with delight before walking on the field to embrace Taylor and Brindle. England weren't quite at their best today; they were, however, too good for New Zealand and ultimately this was a comfortable victory, by seven wickets and with 16 balls to spare. Thanks for your emails. See you tomorrow for Australia v West Indies.