A high-level meeting between American and North Korean diplomats, the first such encounter for more than two years, got underway in New York on Thursday amid hopes that stalled six-party talks on eliminating Pyongyang's nuclear weapons may resume this autumn – and stark warnings that time is running out for a deal.Both sides expressed caution, with US officials describing the exchanges as "exploratory". Speaking during an Asia visit earlier this week, secretary of state Hillary Clinton said there would be no softening of Washington's demand that North Korea abandon its nuclear weapons in return for normalised relations, energy assistance and security guarantees.North Korea's vice foreign minister Kim Kye-gwan said he was "optimistic" the six-party talks would be revived. "Now is the time for countries to reconcile," he said. In a move timed to coincide with the New York meeting, Pyongyang reiterated its call for a treaty formally ending the 1950-53 Korean war.The resumed bilateral dialogue takes place against a backdrop of growing concern in South Korea and Japan that if North Korea cannot be persuaded to abandon its enrichment and other nuclear weapons-related activities, it may soon enter a more technologically advanced phase of its nuclear programme – meaning bigger, better bombs and longer-range ballistic missiles."Right now, North Korea may well be at a critical transitional moment in the development of its nuclear arsenal," said Joel Wit and Jenny Town, writing in Foreign Policy. "Pyongyang has already completed the first phase of developing such an arsenal ... If [North Korea] is anything like other small nuclear powers, we can expect it to move on to building increasing numbers of more sophisticated nuclear weapons mounted on a variety of missile delivery systems."Reflecting this heightened sense of urgency, the US appears to be urging Seoul to move on from last year's sinking of a South Korean navy ship and a brief bombardment of its territory by the North. "The US has definitely put some pressure on the South Korean government about beginning talks with North Korea," Hong Hyeon-ik, an analyst at Seoul's Sejong Institute, told the Washington Post.John Kerry, chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee, suggested recently the current stalemate could not be allowed to continue. "Make no mistake: given North Korea's recent irresponsible conduct, staying in a diplomatic holding pattern invites a dangerous situation to get even worse," he said. But at the same time, other officials and analysts worry the US may concede too much in its effort to seal a deal.These concerns come in the context of broader anxiety that Washington's security guarantees for South Korea, dating back to the 1950s, are weakening as an overstretched, financially challenged US struggles to manage, or contain, the rise of an ever more militarily powerful and assertive China, North Korea's only important ally. To a greater or lesser degree, this anxiety about American commitment infects the region as a whole."Comments by influential South Koreans that their country should consider requesting the return of US nuclear weapons to their shores – or even acquire its own nuclear weapons – reflect persistent unease about how regional security developments are challenging US extended security guarantees developed during the cold war," said Richard Weitz, writing in The Diplomat."Although of less immediate concern to most South Koreans, the rising power of China has also been profoundly affecting regional security dynamics," Weitz said. "In particular, China's growing military power has resulted in many east Asian countries deepening their security ties with the US and building up their defences, including by acquiring ballistic missile defences. In response, the Chinese have tightened their ties with North Korea, which, despite the headaches it causes, is a reliable buffer state."In short, it's plain any US proposal for a deal with North Korea must meet two basic criteria. On the one hand, it must be tough enough to reassure Seoul and other nervous allies that the nuclear and missile threat has been lifted. On the other hand, it must not be so tough as to scare off North Korea, push Beijing and Pyongyang closer together, and feed the claims of Chinese government hawks that Washington is bent on the strategic and military "encirclement" of China.In some ways, the North-South standoff resembles a much larger potential confrontation, between the US and China, which flickers episodically across the region from Vietnam to the Philippines and the East China Sea. Just how fragile the security situation is becoming was illustrated last month when two Chinese fighters crossed the unofficial line dividing the Taiwan Strait in hot pursuit of an American spy plane. No shots were fired. Not this time anyway.