Very – Pyongyang and Washington have no diplomatic ties. It is only the second time a former US president has visited the country: Jimmy Carter flew there 15 years ago, when tensions were running high over the North's nuclear weapons programme. Madeleine Albright visited six years later as Clinton's secretary of state.South Korean media say the two sides will discuss the fate of two US reporters jailed for "grave crimes" after they were arrested on the Chinese-North Korean border. But Pyongyang's state news agency said the country's chief nuclear negotiator, Kim Kye-gwan, was among those greeting Clinton at the airport."He is coming with [Barack] Obama's message that he wants to improve relations," said Kim Myong-chol, executive director of the Centre for Korean-American Peace, who is close to Pyongyang. "If it was just over the two journalists, North Korea would not accept him."The US wants the release of the journalists and a commitment from North Korea that it will resume its disarmament process. North Korea wants an end to sanctions and more economic support. In the short term it is pressing for direct negotiations with the US. But Washington says bilateral talks can only take place in the context of the six-nation discussions rejected by South Korea.The US will also hope to get a better picture of the current situation in North Korea – particularly if Clinton has the chance to meet its leader, Kim Jong-il. Intelligence from the country has always been very limited and there has been widespread speculation about Kim's health and to what extent he is running affairs since he reportedly suffered a stroke last year.Carter's visit – at a time when the US was bracing for war with the North – led to a breakthrough deal that saw Pyongyang suspend its nuclear work. Clinton was president at the time."Clinton reached an agreement with North Korea before. He is businesslike and effective," said Kim Myong-chol."There is the possibility of a dramatic turnaround by North Korea that could lead to a new phase of negotiations," Yun Duk-min, of the Institute of Foreign Affairs and National Security in Seoul, told Reuters.But others warn that in the long term the visit could backfire – Pyongyang could take it as proof that increasing tensions on the peninsula is effective."It's just what they [North Korea's leaders] need ... It sends all the wrong signals," said BR Myers, an expert on the North's state ideology at Dongseo University in South Korea.He said it allowed the government to show its citizens that the nuclear weapons programme was making the world take it more seriously.