"Try to avoid politics" was the diplomatic advice to members of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra as they prepared for this week's landmark visit to North Korea. Not surprisingly, the musicians' reaction was to burst out laughing at the diplomat's remarks. For how can the first ever visit by a western orchestra to the last Stalinist country on the planet - and an orchestra, what's more, from a country with which North Korea considers inself at war - not be political in every way?"We're there to give a concert, that's all," was the New York Phil's conductor Lorin Maazel's on-message comment as the orchestra prepared to fly in to Pyongyang today. But tomorrow's event in the East Pyongyang Grand Theatre is hardly just another concert. And frankly no one believes it could be.As I wrote in the Guardian in December, when the visit was first announced, the New York Phil is not just another orchestra and so, in places like Pyongyang, it can never give just another concert. The Phil is, to some degree, an embodiment of American values and soft power, and it is well practiced in the role of cultural emissary, having spearheaded a number of Cold War cultural exchange visits to the Soviet Union and its satellites nearly half a century ago.The programme for Tuesday's Pyongyang concert has been the subject of intense negotiations between the NYPO's executive director Zarin Mehta (brother of the conductor Zubin Mehta) and Korean officials. The agreed running order is the Prelude to Act III of Wagner's Lohengrin (which, appropriately for this international getting-to-know-you event, leads straight into the tune better known as Here Comes the Bride), Gershwin's An American in Paris, and finally Dvorak's New World Symphony. As encores, and to prove all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds, the orchestra will play the Candide overture by Leonard Bernstein (who led the Phil on its historic 1959 trip to the USSR) and the Korean folksong Arirang. It will be streamed online from March 4 at the New York Philharmonic's website.I suppose you could argue that this is mostly an assertively Yankee programme and thus a fearless gesture against the tyranny under which North Koreans live. But a performance of the New World symphony in Pyongyang isn't half as provocative as Bernstein's defiant insistence, back in 1959, on programming music by Igor Stravinsky (then still largely banned in the USSR as a bourgeois decadent) and his invitation to the banned Nobel literature prize winner Boris Pasternak to attend the concert. If only someone had written a piece for this year's trip called American Seoul Music."I don't think we should get carried away with what listening to Dvorak is going to do in North Korea," the highly musical Condoleezza Rice observed in Washington last week. But then the secretary of state added, "I think it's a good thing." Contrary to some bloggers' views, that's surely right. The invitation to the New York Philharmonic is at some level an indication that North Korea is willing to engage peacefully with the world. In the end, there is only one outcome of that process - just as there was in the Soviet Union. North Korea may be a reluctant bride - but here she very hesitantly comes.