Yes, in October 2006, prompting international condemnation and stiff sanctions from the UN security council, which demanded that North Korea eliminate its nuclear weapons and banned the import and export of material for weapons of mass destruction or ballistic missiles. But the official news agency statement described this morning's test as "on a new higher level in terms of its explosive power and technology of its control" and said it had "helped satisfactorily settle the scientific and technological problems arising in further increasing the power of nuclear weapons and steadily developing nuclear technology".Seismological evidence may confirm the country's claims. The Japan Meteorological Agency measured activity at magnitude 5.3. The previous test measured magnitude 3.6, an official at the Korea Meteorological Administration in Seoul told the Associated Press. Russian estimates suggest the underground blast could have been 20 times as great as in 2006.Analysts had previously concluded that North Korea could not miniaturise its nuclear devices to mount on to a missile – but some are changing their views. Mohamed ElBaradei, head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said last month that it was a "matter of fact" that the country had nuclear weapons, urging people to "face reality". The US Forces Joint Command also listed North Korea as one of Asia's nuclear powers in a report late last year, although the US government said this did not reflect official policy. An American expert who visited Pyongyang this year said officials told him they had "weaponised" about 30kg of plutonium – enough to make four or five warheads – although he added that he had no way of establishing the truth of the claim. The country has hundreds of short- and medium-range missiles. A rocket launch in early April – which North Korea claimed was a satellite launch – suggests that its long-range missile technology has improved considerably in recent years, but is still wanting. In theory, the Taepodong-2 is capable of reaching Alaska; in practice, there is no sign it can go that far.Pyongyang has stepped up both its rhetoric and its actions in recent months, with many believing its aim has been to force the Obama administration to prioritise the relationship. Some observers hoped that April's rocket launch – despite repeated warnings from foreign governments – might be the culmination of these efforts. But when the UN security council criticised the launch, North Korea vowed to restart its nuclear programme, test a nuclear device and carry out long-range missile tests. Being recognised as a nuclear weapons state would give the country more leverage in international negotiations. On a practical note, it is also keen to develop its technology further. In a statement released by the official news agency KCNA, Pyongyang said the test was "part of the measures to bolster its nuclear deterrent for self-defence in every way as requested by its scientists and technicians"."North Korea's strategic objective has not changed. That objective is to win the attention of the Obama administration, to push the North Korea issue up the agenda," said Xu Guangyu, a researcher at the China Arms Control and Disarmament Association. Professor Han Seung Joo, a former South Korean foreign minister, added: "It's one way of breaking in the new US administration to the North Korean way of doing things. They want to change the game … If and when negotiations take place with the US, they want to make it into disarmament or arms control talks between nuclear weapons states, which assumes the US recognises or at least reckons North Korea as a weapons state."There are already demands for an emergency meeting of the UN security council. "This time we will likely get a stronger response than [to the] rocket launch since there is no ambiguity … but whether the council will have any tools to use is another question. Against North Korea, it seems highly unlikely," Tim Savage, deputy director of the Nautilus Institute, told Reuters.Analysts suggest a meeting is likely to result in the further toughening of existing sanctions rather than the introduction of new ones, particularly because Russia and China are unlikely to accept new measures. China is deeply concerned about maintaining the stability of its troubled neighbour and pushing ahead on stalled aid-for-disarmament discussions."China's goal is to ensure that the six-party talks process does not fall apart," said Xu Guangyu. "Stricter sanctions are not going to achieve that objective."One year after the last nuclear test, the then US president, George Bush, agreed to ease sanctions in exchange for the shutdown of the Yongbyon nuclear facility (now reopened).Shunji Hiraiwa, of Shizuoka Prefectural University in Japan, told Reuters: "The last time the United States changed its stance after North Korea conducted a nuclear test, so the North probably thought that unless they did so again, the United States wouldn't change. But I don't think this time the United States will alter its stance."