Male students in North Korea are required to get the same haircut as their leader Kim Jong-un, according to reports from Radio Free Asia and the Korea Times.The papers report the leader's shaved undercut and floppy curtains style was introduced as the sole hairstyle choice for male students in the capital Pyongyang about two weeks ago. The state-sanctioned guideline is now being rolled out across the country.There are 28 state-approved hair styles in North Korea – the Kim Jong-un look is for students specifically, say reports.According to local media, the style is commonly associated with Chinese smugglers, and there has been reservations about the new rule.One source told Radio Free Asia: "Our leader's haircut is very particular, if you will. It doesn't always go with everyone since everyone has different face and head shapes."However, there are conflicting reports over the haircut mandate, with the NK News website reporting that recent visitors to Pyongyang did not notice a change in hair styles.In 2005, North Korean state TV launched a five-part series entitled, Let us trim our hair in accordance with socialist lifestyle, according to the Daily Mail. The aim was to promote short back and sides for its male population. The Mail reports that articles appeared in North Korean press and radio urging tidy hairstyles and appropriate clothing.• Student paper in Leeds in crisisThe Leeds Student paper, the student-union-funded paper at the University of Leeds, has stopped printing due to funding issues. The paper claims the union is witholding funds needed to print the next issues. A petition has started to protect the future of the paper, currently at over 1200 signatures. Students are also asking for donations to help meet their costs. • Birmingham students back on campusAll charges against student protesters at the University of Birmingham have been dropped. 13 students faced police charges following a protest on 29 January, but were dropped after no evidence of damage or assault were found. Two students who have been suspended from campus since the protests were this week allowed back at university. • Assaulted Oxford student raises £2k for charityA student who posted a selfie of her injuries after she was assaulted in a nightclub in Oxford has raised over £2000 for the Oxford Sexual Abuse and Rape Crisis Centre. She says she was groped in the club, complained to the man and was then beaten. "He told me to 'smile', too," says in the Cherwell student paper.