A new demand from the hackers of Sony Pictures to stop showing The Interview has strengthened claims that North Korea is responsible for the cyber attack.The Guardians of Peace hackers posted the new demand along with more confidential files stolen from the computer network of Sony Pictures as part of the intrusion, which crippled company computers and reduced the movie studio to using pen, paper and fax machines.“We are sending you our warning again. Do carry out our demand if you want to escape us. And, stop immediately showing the movie of terrorism which can break the regional peace and cause the War!” the hackers identifying themselves as GOP said in a statement sent to the text and code-sharing site Github.“It seems that you think everything will be well, if you find out the attacker, while no reacting to our demand. You, Sony & FBI, cannot find us. The destiny of Sony is totally up to the wise reaction & measure of Sony,” the hackers added.North Korea has denied involvement in the hacking, which a spokesperson for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) regime described as a “righteous deed”.Along with the new threats the hackers posted links to download data stolen from Sony Pictures, which also contained malware obviously intended to compromise the computers of users who download the files.The hackers also denied sending threatening emails to Sony Pictures staff, including those who had left years ago but have been affected by the data leaks exposing their home addresses and personal details.Evidence of extortion prior to the disabling of Sony Pictures computers and the releasing of private data has been found inside the stolen data.Hackers calling themselves “God’sApslts” sent an email dated 21 November in broken english to Sony Pictures chief executive Michael Lyton, chairman Amy Pascal and other high-ranking executives demanding money to avoid the movie studio being “bombarded”.“We’ve got great damage by Sony Pictures. The compensation for it, monetary compensation we want. Pay the damage, or Sony Pictures will be bombarded as a whole. You know us very well. We never wait long,” the hackers demanded.The links between those going by the name God’sApslts and Guardians of Peace, who eventually carried out the attack on Sony Pictures, is unclear.Analysis by security firm Symantec of malware linked with the Sony attack and others on South Korea revealed that God’sApslts was named in one of the files with a similar demand to that made by Guardians of Peace in the initial attack on Sony Pictures.No subsequent demands for money have been discovered.It is still unclear exactly who is responsible for the attacks. A recent analysis of the data released after the hack appears to have originated from a hotel in Bangkok. Others have pointed to North Korean-linked groups operating out of China.North Korea certainly has the capability to carry out an attack of this nature.• Did North Korea’s notorious Unit 121 cyber army hack Sony Pictures?