A Japanese woman who was allegedly abducted by North Korean agents more than 30 years ago is alive and could soon be allowed to meet her family, her brother said yesterday. The unexpected move, reported by Japanese media yesterday, offers hope to the families of other Japanese nationals who were taken to North Korea in the 1970s and 80s to teach their language and customs to spies.Tokyo claims that 17 of its citizens were abducted at the height of the cold war as the communist state attempted to nurture a generation of agents who could operate inside Japan without attracting suspicion.In 2002, North Korea admitted abducting 13 Japanese citizens and allowed five to return home later that year. It said eight others had died, and claimed that the remaining four on Japan's list had never entered the country.The woman at the centre of the reports, Kyoko Matsumoto, was 29 when she went missing on her way to a knitting class near her home in Tottori, western Japan, in September 1977.Though Pyongyang denies knowledge of her, the Kyodo news agency reported that Matsumoto, now married, was living in North Korea and working alongside an unidentified Japanese couple who might also have been abducted.Her brother, Hajime, said a Chinese businessman with trading interests in North Korea gave him the information last month at a meeting in Tokyo arranged by a group campaigning for the return of the abductees.Hajime said a woman believed to be Kyoko Matsumoto had passed a message to the Chinese contact that included details only his sister could have known. "Say hello to Ina-chan for me," she reportedly said, an apparent reference to a woman with whom she worked before her abduction.The contact told Hajime that North Korean officials were planning to arrange the first meeting for 31 years between his sister, who is now 60, and her family in Japan. "It has become increasingly likely that Kyoko is still alive," Hajime told Kyodo. "It is hard to tell how reliable the information is, but I would go and meet her if asked."The Japanese government said it was taking the report seriously. "If the information is true ... then we will try and resolve this through diplomatic channels," the foreign minister, Hirofumi Nakasone, said in a television interview.Five of the abductees were allowed to return to Japan in October 2002 after a landmark summit in Pyongyang between the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, and the then Japanese prime minister, Junichiro Koizumi. They included Hitomi Soga, the wife of an American army deserter, Charles Jenkins, who joined her in Japan with their two daughters in 2004.The best-known of the abductees that Tokyo believes are still in North Korea is Megumi Yokota, who was 13 when she disappeared on her way home from school in Niigata, on the Japan Sea coast, in November 1977. North Korea said Yokota, who married a North Korean with whom she had a daughter, had taken her own life in 1994 while being treated in a psychiatric hospital for depression.Japan refuses to believe the claim. DNA tests on "remains" that North Korea said belonged to Yokota proved inconclusive.