The report is in, and the evidence points overwhelmingly to an attack by a North Korean torpedo as the cause of the massive explosion that sunk the South Korean vessel Cheonan on 26 March. The loss of 46 sailors when the ship sank in South Korean waters in the West (or Yellow) Sea caused much distress in South Korea, and immediately there were claims that Pyongyang was behind the attack. The government urged caution, reserving judgment until the remaining 58 crew members could be interviewed, the vessel had been raised, and the exact cause of the explosion that tore it apart had been established.This took time, especially as the government brought in foreign experts to take part in the investigation. During the investigation, the government indicated that there might have been a number of reasons for the explosion, such as an internal malfunction, that did not involve North Korea. A But as the end of the investigation drew near, such explanations slipped away, and leaks and hints pointed to a deliberate North Korean strike.The North kept silent at first, but as charges that it was involved grew louder, it issued a denial. Indeed, one of its regular apologists published an article in the Asia Times claiming that North Korea lacked the technology to mount such an attack and that the Cheonan was victim of a joint US-South Korean military exercise being conducted at the time. It was a scenario that was counter-productive, increasing the suspicion in many minds that the North was behind the attack. The North has now repeated its denial, insisting any attempt at retaliation would be an act of war. Since North Korea regularly rejects accusations and threatens to regard any action to restrict it as an act of war, this need not necessarily be taken at face value.Of course, tension could lead to some form of limited conflict. In the past, the demilitarised zone set up between North and South in the 1953 armistice agreement has seen deadly artillery duels between the two sides. The North over the years has mounted infiltration attempts against the South that have resulted in loss of life. In October 1983, 16 South Korean ministers and officials and one reporter died in Rangoon (Yangon) in a bomb attack on the then ROK president; three North Korean military officers were held responsible for the attack. In 1987, a Korean airliner exploded over the Andaman Sea, killing all 118 passengers and crew; again the attack was traced to North Korean agents. This incident led to the United States listing North Korea as a terrorist-sponsoring state.Neither are naval clashes in the West Sea between the two Koreas are no new development. Not only is there a disputed maritime boundary, dating back to the end of the Korean war in 1953, which the North has sometimes respected and sometimes ignored, but the area where the Cheonan sank has seen regular clashes between crab fishing fleets from the two countries. Chinese boats also fish these waters, and are regularly pursued by both Korean navies for illegal fishing. In exchanges of fire, the two navies have inflicted damage and a small number of sailors have been killed, but the attack on the Cheonan did not take place in a naval clash and it is hard to see what benefit it has for the North.Relations between the two Koreas have sharply deteriorated since South Korean President Lee Myung-bak's election in 2007. Lee rejected the "engagement policies" pursued by his predecessors, arguing that they had been expensive and brought no benefit to South Korea. This has led to a reduction in aid and restrictions on North-South contacts. Lee has also pursued a tougher line on the nuclear issue and human rights. While these may be galling for the North Koreans, killing 46 sailors does not seem the obvious way to effect a change of heart in Seoul.The dilemma is what to do next. Lee has promised "resolute countermeasures". Other international leaders have condemned the North and there is much talk of sanctions. But there is a need for care, and the options available are limited. North Korea is already subject to a sanctions regime and there are few options to add to it. China, the North's main international supporter, has been less than firm in its application of current sanctions and cautious in its response to the Cheonan report.Despite grievous provocations in the past, successive South Korean governments have ruled out military responses. Seoul is vulnerable to North Korean artillery, and there is always a risk that an attempted limited retaliation could get out of hand. Given that the signs are that North Korea is in the middle of some form of political upheaval arising from the illness that its leader, Kim Jong-il, suffered in 2008 and the related question of the succession, this might not be the best time to add to instability. International concern about the North's nuclear programmes remains high. In the end, one suspects that, after a period of international grandstanding, there will be little option but to seek to re-engage with North Korea as the only hope of modifying its behaviour.