North Korea has expelled an Australian man who was arrested last month while working as a Christian missionary.The North Korean state news agency KCNA reported on Monday that 75-year-old John Short had admitted to violating North Korean law and apologised. It said North Korea had decided to expel him partly in consideration of his age.Short was later picked up at Beijing airport by an Australian embassy vehicle and did not speak, according to journalists at the airport. The Australian government confirmed Short’s release, telling Guardian Australia it was made aware by the Swedish embassy in Pyongyang that Short was being deported from North Korea.“Clearly this is welcome news for Mr Short, his family and his supporters,” said a spokesman for the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. “Australian consular officials stand ready to provide assistance to Mr Short to ensure he can return to his home in Hong Kong as soon as possible.“Noting the lack of Australian diplomatic representation in the DPRK, we take this opportunity to thank the Swedish government for their tireless efforts on this difficult consular case in recent weeks.”Australia has no consular office in North Korea and is instead represented by the Swedish embassy.Short, a South Australian who lives in Hong Kong with his wife of 36 years, Karen, was arrested on 16 February in Pyongyang on suspicion of proselytising. He was said to be in possession of Christian pamphlets translated into Korean. It was his second trip to the country.In the apology published by KCNA, Short reportedly writes that he travelled to North Korea to distribute Bible tracts after seeing news reports which said there was no religious freedom in the country.“I violated the independent right and offended against the law of the DPRK. I knew that my actions would offend the independent right and would be against the law of the DPRK. I wanted more Korean people to be Christians therefore I secretly spread Bible tracts written by me,” the apology says.“I deeply apologise for what I have done by spreading my Bible tracts on February 16th, the birthday of His Excellency Kim Jong Il. The people of the DPRK regard February 16th as the greatest national holiday. I now realise the seriousness of my insult to the Korean people on February 16th because I made the Korean people angry and for this I truly apologise.”Short appeared to be facing a potentially lengthy incarceration. US missionary Kenneth Bae has been held for more than a year after being convicted of trying to overthrow the state and sentenced to 15 years’ hard labour.