After Israelis and Americans, Indians are probably among the least welcome people in Pakistan. Nevertheless, a fortnight ago I crossed over the border from Amritsar to Lahore for the first time to visit the land of (half) my ancestors. While angry rhetoric between the two nuclear-armed neighbours has calmed down significantly over the past decade, some flashpoints such as Kashmir and water disputes still remain, making the local politics still difficult.Pakistan is still on edge, this time primarily from terrorist bombings from Taliban elements that rock the nation almost daily. During my first full day in Karachi, three suicide attacks took place, one blowing up the anti-terrorism taskforce building.Last week, both British and American generals said we needed more troops in Afghanistan to turn the country around. But this ignores the deeper problem – to win in Afghanistan, first the battle for Pakistan must be won. And right now that's not looking too good.The pessimist's view is convincing: the Taliban have turned on their former masters; people are increasingly angry with US military incursions; the country's finances are very precarious; its politicians remain unpopular and are unlikely to resolve this mess. Furthermore, Afghan volatility is hurting Pakistan, as immigrants, guns and drugs flow over the borders with little to check them.The optimist's view is that Pakistan has been through much worse in its past and still managed to pull through. Already there are growing efforts to challenge each of these problems. When I told the rickshaw driver at the border I was of Indian origin, he only smiled and asked if I wouldn't mind giving him a souvenir from there. And he refused to take any money. Pakistan has a knack for surprises.Last year, a British born and trained journalist of Pakistani origin, Waseem Mahmood, got together a bunch of well-known Pakistani actors and singers to compose a song against terrorism titled Yeh Hum Naheen (This is not us). It quickly became a sensation and inspired a petition against terrorism launched earlier this year that enlisted the help of over 9,000 volunteers to gather over 60 million signatures from across the country. It is being entered into the Guinness Books of Records as the biggest petition ever.Such efforts usually pass under the notice of mainstream media across the world, because the only story out of Pakistan is usually a negative one involving terrorist camps. While there may be some truth to this, less attention is paid to how Pakistanis themselves are trying to deal with the issue.The government recently unveiled an ad campaign stating: "Terrorists are the enemies of Islam, Pakistan and our people." A media organisation – the Jang Group – has even launched it own anti-terrorism campaign. Nevertheless, Pakistanis feel helpless because they have little faith in their political leaders and the army has lost much credibility in recent years under General Musharraf. Locally organised lashkars (armies) and jirgas (gatherings) of tribal leaders against the Taliban have been viciously attacked. But, encouragingly, the debate in Pakistan on extremism and terrorism is rapidly following the trajectory of developments here in Britain.The first phase is denial. Both in the UK and Pakistan, Muslims blamed Americans for the existence of terrorism. If we pull out of Iraq and Afghanistan, everything will be fine, the thinking went.But this ignores a deeper problem: why are people choosing to blow up themselves and innocent people as a form of political protest? The existence of suicide terrorism is a problem in itself. Unsurprisingly, the first phase of Mahmood's campaign focuses on owning the issue: Terrorism is our problem and we have to deal with it. Similarly, in the UK, the discussion of terrorism among British Muslims has moved on from blaming others for the problem to owning the issue.And then what? "There's too many people sitting around producing reports on what the problem is, and not enough people trying to deal with the problem of terrorism," Mahmood says. Accordingly, they now focus on getting Pakistanis to talk about terrorism at home, at school and more openly.Talking about extremism out in the open in local communities is more difficult, but is the only way to start a system of detection and prevention. The YHN campaign is ahead of the curve because the rest of Pakistani society has not yet accepted that if you give an inch to religious terrorists they will take a mile. The Taliban have no qualms about blowing up innocent Muslims across Pakistan and trying to destabilise the country – their aims are political, not religious. Here lies the solution too. Pakistanis are intensely nationalist people, born out of the uncertain nature of the partition and always feeling threatened by their larger neighbour. But as the Taliban becomes a bigger threat to national security rather than India, public opinion will slowly but surely move against them.But as one prominent media executive said under the condition of anonymity, it may take a few more big blasts like the Marriott before Pakistanis realise the true nature of the Taliban. And then a new direction will surely have to be found. As the country's celebrated Urdu poet Faiz Ahmed Faiz once said, the danger is that Pakistan will continue as it has always done.