When Nixon went to China, it was said that only a man of his standing in America’s hawkish conservative community could have risked making that momentous journey. Narendra Modi’s visit to Pakistan on Saturday, hatched in secrecy and delivered as a surprise, has prompted his acolytes to make similar arguments.An Indian prime minister belonging to a Hindu-supremacist party, they say, has fostered peace simply by “dropping by” the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for a couple of hours on his way back from Afghanistan. If anything, the opposite is true. After his election to the prime minister’s office last May, Modi assiduously cultivated the image of a tough guy. He instructed India’s armed forces to respond forcefully to Pakistani provocations on the de facto border between the two nations in Kashmir. He abruptly cancelled talks between Indian and Pakistani diplomats over the latter’s meeting with Kashmiri separatists. His ministers repeatedly demanded action against Pakistani citizens accused of orchestrating the terrorist siege of Mumbai in 2008.His volte-face, given that it was he who encouraged the intensification of Indian suspicions and hostility toward Pakistan, seems whimsical rather than statesmanlike. There has been no demonstrable change in Pakistan’s behaviour to justify the enormous reward of a visit by India’s prime minister. The men behind the Mumbai massacre remain at large. Hafiz Saeed, a man carrying a $10mn US State Department bounty on his head for his role in the atrocity, continues openly to incite hatred against India. Dawood Ibrahim, the man behind the worst terrorist attack in India’s history, lives in palatial splendour in Karachi’s Clifton neighbourhood.By turning up in Pakistan with barely any notice – a few hours after announcing his trip on Twitter – Modi immediately undermined his parliamentary colleagues on an issue so vital to India’s national security that it ought be above partisan politics. More Pakistanis than Indians knew about Modi’s travel plans. This was all the more outrageous considering Modi’s record, in opposition, of tormenting any politician who made an overture to Pakistan.Modi’s visit to Pakistan is the first by an Indian prime minister in over a decade. To outsiders, it will seem bold. But to those familiar with the subcontinent’s history, it signals a continuity with – not a departure from – the futile pattern of India-Pakistan relations. Tensions are smoothed by unexpected diplomacy, there is much fanfare, personal relationships between leaders are applauded – and then it’s business as usual.Modi’s personal diplomacy is a nonstarter because Nawaz Sharif, Modi’s counterpart in Pakistan, is not the ultimate decision maker in his country. That job is held by the military and intelligence chiefs, and they draw their power and legitimacy by magnifying the “threat” from India. The last time Sharif hosted an Indian prime minister in Lahore, in 1999, his army, unbeknown to him, launched a war against India. Sharif was deposed from office and exiled to Saudi Arabia, and Pakistan was placed under military dictatorship for a decade. The truth is that, far from nurturing peace, India endangers democratic politicians in Pakistan merely by befriending them.Modi, by virtue of tolerating Hindu bigotry in India, has earned precious political capital. But even this is not enough to mend relations with Pakistan because Modi cannot give Pakistan’s generals what they seek: territorial concessions on Kashmir. The US has almost certainly cajoled Modi to improve relations with Pakistan. But it is the persecution of Muslim minorities in Modi’s India, not the propitiation of Muslim majoritarians in Pakistan, that should concern the world more.The animosity between Pakistan and India is a product of national ideologies that are irreconcilable: one regards itself as the authentic home of the subcontinent’s Muslims; the other sees itself, at least in theory, as the practitioner of a pluralistic secular nationalism that transcends religion. One nullifies the other.The two can exist in peace only if they exist in isolation from each other. This explains why the longest bouts of peace between the two nations occurred when they spurned each other. Like a divorced couple, India and Pakistan – especially Pakistan – need time apart to develop identities independent of each other. Sadly, to the detriment of their peoples, they have been in each other’s face ever since the British departed the subcontinent. Modi, like every Indian prime minister, refuses to learn this lesson. His “diplomacy” will do nothing to advance peace. Instead, it will embolden elements within Pakistan’s military-intelligence complex to act in ways that will be adversarial to Pakistan’s democracy – and India’s security.