The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and clarifications column, Friday 17 July 2009Assessing the outcome of the Pakistani army's anti-Taliban offensive in Buner and Swat, a leader comment cited the International Committee of the Red Cross as one of the authorities for saying that no large-scale human rights abuses were found to have been committed. The ICRC has not made any statement about its monitoring work, which is kept confidential. Careers have been made out of predicting the imminent breakup of Pakistan. But even for the resolute, the events of March and May were hard to take. Militants appeared to strike any target in the country with impunity, be it the visiting Sri Lankan cricket team or the offices of the Inter-Services Intelligence agency in Lahore. Many, too, doubted whether the army would have the political will - let alone the military resolve - to take the Taliban on in Buner and Swat. But it did, triggering the exodus of nearly 2 million refugees in the process. Now that the first refugees are starting to return after two months of sporadic fighting, it is time to assess the outcome.The worst has not happened. The army has avoided causing heavy civilian casualties, which were a feature of previous forays such as the one in Bajaur, and concentrated its fire on the militants themselves. Some civilians have been caught in the crossfire, but according to the International Committee of the Red Cross and Human Rights Watch there have been no large-scale violations of international law. Nor are army chiefs exaggerating the effect that their campaign has had on the Taliban. Military intelligence gave a sober assessment yesterday, admitting that a sizeable militant contingent was still left in the valley, about 40% of their original estimate of up to 5,000 fighters. But fighters have been ejected from the major population centres like Mingora. The army claims it has killed 1,700 fighters, but it has yet to reach their leaders, like Baitullah Mehsud, who remains at large.This is a mixed picture, which could change if a convoy of returning refugees was bombed, or the Taliban infiltrated town centres once again. But it is not the doomsday scenario being predicted two months ago. Swat is no longer a Taliban fortress and if resettlement is done with patience and care, and if civil militias weed the militants out, it will not be again. For this, credit is due to the army, which has restored the writ of the Pakistani state in Swat. What now has to happen here, as in Afghanistan, is that the provincial government has to re-emerge from its bunkers and fill the space liberated by combat.But they are not the only ones. With the exception of the US, the international community has yet to deliver on the $543m aid appeal the UN made in May. This aid is needed today even more than it was when the refugee exodus was on. Farmers who return to find their crops destroyed or shopkeepers who find their businesses looted will need food aid to survive. International donors need to keep alive to the fact that previous sweeps of this territory have all foundered at this very point.