Since the Pakistan election last month, Muddassir Rizvi has been persona non grata from a government perspective. As chief executive officer of the Free and Fair Elections (Fafen), a non-partisan organization, Rizvi successfully pressured the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) to release polling data and vote counts after the poll. But he has also attracted resentment from certain government authorities."We live in a country where there is minimal transparency," says Rizvi, 42, a former journalist. "Basic public information is not available. For example … the number of ballot papers used and returned last month from polling stations is critical [to know] because it will help to identify the scale of election rigging."Rizvi is demanding the ECP release details of the number of votes cast, together with all related documents – including election forms from more than 69,000 polling stations countrywide in 272 constituencies.When Fafen began its work in 2006, as a network of organisations based in Islamabad, its primary objective was to mobilise voters and observe the 2008 elections. "We resolved to stay independent of government control and began developing indigenous methodologies to monitor the election," says Rizvi.With 18,000 trained election observers in 2008 and 41,000 in 2013, Fafen is supported by donors include USAid, the Department for International Development, the European Union, and the Asia Foundation. Fafen has focused on voter mobilisation in 564 constituencies where women voters in previous elections were forced to stay away from polling stations. Other projects work more broadly on encouraging greater citizen engagement and public accountability."When institutions have the power to keep information hidden, they remain at an advantage. This means citizens don't understand the law or their rights," says Rizvi, who argues a climate of secrecy can provide ample opportunity for the manipulation of votes and voting records. In this context, he compares Fafen's work to that of accountants who ask for the original receipts when dealing with expenses claims.Recently, Fafen has itself been criticised for misrepresenting voter numbers; it originally reported a 100% voter turnout at 49 polling stations last month. Rizvi says errors have occurred where election commission representatives failed to disclose polling information to election monitors. "The ECP is now further pressurised to release the correct information on voter turnout. The sensitivity and mechanics of this information were kept away from the public eye. This mishap emphasises that disclosures need to be made."What does transparency mean to you?It's about citizens accessing any information that they need in order to make objective decisions, and judgements on the performance of elected representatives and public institutions.Why is access to information important in development?Objective information based on the needs of people is important. Decisions made by the state are not on the basis of objective information.What is the one piece of information you most want released?Aid agencies should make public financial information. For example, Fafen ensures that money received through international donors is spent on beneficiaries and not for fast cars and expensive lifestyles by its employees.