Two explosions ripped through a busy market in Pakistan's volatile northwestern city of Peshawar, killing at least 34 people and injuring nearly 100. Police said that the first blast was relatively small and drew rescue workers to the site before a larger explosion rocked the market area a few minutes later causing scores of casualties.Jamal Khan, a 22-year-old student who was rushing to the scene as the second blast occurred, said: "The explosion was so huge I will never forget it all my life. It was deafening, and then there was a cloud of dust and smoke. When the dust settled, I saw people crying for help and body parts scattered everywhere."No group claimed immediate responsibility for the bombing, but the Pakistani Taliban have pledged to carry out attacks in retaliation for the American special forces raid that killed Osama bin Laden in an army town outside Islamabad last month.Initial reports indicated the second blast in Peshawar was caused by explosives placed in a vehicle and detonated by remote control, said Dost Mohammed, a senior local police official. The source of the first explosion was unknown.The attack took place across the street from the offices of the top political agent to Khyber, part of Pakistan's volatile tribal region, and a short distance from army housing units. Peshawar borders the tribal region and has been repeatedly hit by bombings over the past few years.Doctor Mohammed Farooq said many of the victims were so badly burned they were difficult to identify and that the dead included at least one journalist. Four more journalists and at least 10 police officers were also injured, he said.The attack took place as the CIA director, Leon Panetta, and the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, visited the Pakistani capital, Islamabad, 95 miles to the east, to speak separately with senior Pakistani officials about sharing intelligence.Panetta's meetings were intended to focus on the size and scope of future American intelligence activities. The Bin Laden operation plunged an already strained relationship between the CIA and Pakistan's main intelligence agency, the ISI, to a new low. It has also threatened to undermine the co-operation between the two countries that is pivotal to the continued fight against al-Qaida and Taliban militants battling Nato forces in Afghanistan.In an attempt to rebuild their relationship, Washington and Islamabad have agreed to form a joint intelligence team to track down terrorists inside Pakistan, drawing in part from the records taken from Bin Laden's lair during the raid."We both want stability in Afghanistan and in Pakistan," said the Pakistani prime minister, Yousuf Raza, Gilani yesterday. "Our only aim is to support the peace process, which is Afghan led."