There is a cardboard memorial surrounded by flowers on the huge grassy roundabout where Lahore policemen were killed defending the Sri Lankan cricket team last week. There's only been a spattering of police to pay respects; all of them have to keep an eye on the roads out of and into Lahore, as well as an ongoing investigation into the Afghan refugee majority colonies where they'll be finding people with no documents, no paper trail, and no trace. Many in and outside of the city are flabbergasted at what they see as a security failure, but this extends much further than the police. And attacks in Lahore could get much worse.Pakistan's supreme court, widely seen as acting on President Zardari's directions, disqualified Punjab majority leader Nawaz Sharif and Chief Minister Shabaz Sharif, and declared governor's rule in the province, rendering Zardari's party colleague Governor Salmaan Taseer a miniature dictator. After governor's rule was declared, Taseer directed a massive shuffling of the police force and a change of the inspector general.The police were asked to play hard politics on behalf of Zardari and Taseer, and arrest PML-N workers. For the days between 27 February and the attack on 3 April, police barriers were set up all round Lahore, and the city began resembling what it was like when Musharraf declared an emergency last year. Which is to be expected, former President Musharraf was the one who appointed Taseer as governor in the first place. When Musharraf declared the state of emergency, on the first two occasions in November 2007, the country spiralled out of control; police officers were blown up outside Lahore's high court, and Benazir Bhutto was killed in Islamabad the following month. With the lawyer's "long march" protest, which is seeing activists nationwide gathering in the capital to protest, emergency couldn't have been declared when there were more citizens on the street. Many in Pakistan's major cities are bracing themselves for a return to that 2007 craziness.At this intersection of political infighting and terrorism, the people of Pakistan are presented at a crossroads. Pakistanis could choose to demonstrate against scrooge of religious militancy which has broadened into a culture war that includes girl's schools, cricketers, musicians, and teenage couples as its targets. Or the people could choose to demonstrate against the political infighting, which distracted the Lahore police from the attacks in the first place.Since the lifting of martial law, the outcome of People's party and Muslim League's governance has conformed to my low expectations. PML-N chair Nawaz Sharif has remained unable to restore the judiciary, an issue both he and Zardari took up when they were proslytising sacked Pakistan's chief justice Chaudhry Iftikhar in 2006 during protests to overthrow Musharraf. At present Zardari won't risk making any deals with the judiciary because he's wary about the deal he made with Musharraf to come to power coming under scrutiny. That, of course, is what Pakistanis want: it was never their intention for the least popular personality to become the president of the country. Many critics, however, think it will take more than simply disqualifying Zardari."The people of Pakistan still haven't drawn the lines of war yet," said Dr Shuja, head of the department of philosophy at Government College Lahore. "Those who sympathise with the gunmen who attacked the Sri Lankans could live in any mosque, any madrasa in the city, but most Pakistanis are in denial about the role of religion in such attacks. They'll have to acknowledge it." Shuja continued, "It's going to be a painful process, one that will take some time."But how long?The attack on cricket elucidates the Islamist's position on what is called Pakistan's second major religion, but that does not make people more trusting of the government. The knee-jerk reaction that blames the "agencies", or intelligence agencies of Pakistan, the US and India, is as strong as ever. But it's far-fetched: agencies don't send men who fumble grenades, or are incapable of hitting a bus with a rocket on a narrow road. Especially damning is the fact that all 12 gunmen escaped unwounded to Ferdoz market, nestled by Lahore's biggest market for electronics, Hafiz Center, at 10 in the morning. If such men were able to discharge so much ammunition at the cricketers and flee, imagine what trained mujahideen could do. Those who were recently fighting in Swat, Bajaur, or any area of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas could make short work of Lahore's colleges, government buildings or busy markets. There could be armed militia's forcing girls out of Lahore's schools, just like Swat's, in six months' time. With the "long march" coming up, there will be no shortage of targets for such gunmen in the nation's capital. Herein, it's up to Pakistanis to race against the clock.