Pakistani politicians will elect a new president early next month, the election commission said today.Members of the federal and provincial assemblies must select a successor to Pervez Musharraf, who resigned on Monday to avoid impeachment charges. The commission secretary, Kanwar Dilshad, said the vote would take place on September 6. Nomination papers would be accepted from August 26 and could be withdrawn until August 30, he said. He did not announce a final date for nominations. Wrangling over the presidency is adding to the pressure on the shaky coalition government, which pushed Musharraf from power.Benazir Bhutto's widower, Asif Ali Zardari, who heads the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) – the largest party in parliament – has emerged as a likely candidate for the role."The majority of the party thinks that Asif Zardari should be president," said Farzana Raja, a PPP spokeswoman. A decision on the party's candidate was expected today, she said. Under the constitution, a new president should be elected within 30 days of an incumbent's resignation.The coalition government's second-biggest party, that of the former prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, has threatened to quit the alliance, demanding that judges dismissed last year by Musharraf be restored to the bench.Sharif agreed today to a debate in parliament next week on the restoration of judges, while setting a new deadline of Wednesday for the demand to be met."This resolution should be tabled before parliament on Monday. On Wednesday, it should be passed and the judges restored," Sharif said. The PPP is reluctant to restore the judges because of concern the deposed chief justice might take up challenges to an amnesty from charges against Zardari and other party leaders last year, analysts said.But even if Sharif's party were to move to the opposition benches in parliament it would not force a parliamentary election, analysts said. The PPP is the biggest party in parliament and should be able to gather enough support to remain in government. The PPP and Sharif's party were bitter rivals during the 1990s when Bhutto and Sharif served two terms as prime minister. Thrown together by opposition to Musharraf, their differences are likely to loom larger now that he has gone, analysts said.