It was the year 1946. The man did not speak English, and yet sat attentively listening to a speech by the founder of Pakistan, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, with great enthusiasm. The listener shouted, clapped, and supported Jinnah's every utterance."Why?" asked another man. "Why do you support Jinnah when you don't understand what he's talking about?" The listener responded: "Because I know Jinnah is on my side. He speaks for me."So what did Jinnah create for the average Pakistani? Last week, I visited Pakistan for the first time for a national conference of students from across Pakistan. The student leaders I met, the next generation of Pakistani politicians, unlike Jinnah's listener, understood English and listened attentively to what Maajid Nawaz and I said. Surrounded by the thoughts and candid reflections of students and professors, I realised that Pakistan was in a deep identity crisis. What was Pakistan? If British Pakistanis complain about identity and belonging in Britain, as they do, life in Pakistan did not offer much solace.What was Pakistan? A so-called Islamic state? Well, that's not what Jinnah imagined and self-proclaimed Islamist parties have repeatedly lost elections. A secular state? The Urdu translation of the word "secular", ladiniyyat, "non-religion", makes the word appear anti-religious in its connotations, yet Pakistan is intensely religious. So what is Pakistan? And why was it created? Where was the sense in leaving behind the majority of Muslims in India, and breaking away to form an independent state for Muslims? And to then have it further divided from Bangladesh in 1971?Where is Pakistan heading? Punjabi, Sindhi, Pahari and similar terms resonated more with some students than did "Pakistan". Students I met from Balochistan condemned Pakistan and wanted to break away. In their communities, it was not "Pakistan zindabad", "long live Pakistan" that was the slogan in public meetings, but "Pakistan murdabad", or "death to Pakistan".These were sensitive issues, but despite the appearance of fragility I think it is healthy that student leaders were able to discuss these matters openly, unlike in most Arab countries. Issues relating to Kurds in Syria, for example, are matters of arrest and torture. Questioning the wisdom of creating Arab states, or the utility of their rulers, is a matter of political unrest. In contrast, the healthy and robust Pakistani media and civil society make a daily meal of undermining President Asif Ali Zardari and his government .Away from students, campuses and debates surrounding identity and terrorism, life in Pakistan was different from what I'd expected. I imagined that a nation that prides itself on possessing a nuclear bomb, would at least have the infrastructure with which to deliver clean drinking water and regular electricity supply to its people. But no. In major cities with tens of millions of inhabitants, power cuts are still a daily occurrence. For four days in Karachi last week, people had no clean drinking water. Load shedding, or electricity blackouts, also last for days. With heat levels at 45 degrees, the stench, paralysis, misery and anger run deep. How do the children and elderly cope? And yet life goes on.I saw young, tired men with donkeys and pull-carts at traffic lights besides Toyota jeeps driven by overweight men. There were elderly, hunch-backed beggars pleading for pennies from aspiring pop stars with high-end Rolex watches and rich parents. The rich in Pakistan are very rich, with mansions in Surrey and flats in Mayfair. President Zardari himself knows this first hand.I saw prostitutes enticing clients in Lahore's vast red light district, a stone's throw away from those who preach it is haram (forbidden), but failed to provide an alternative to these poor women. Iqbal Hussain, a Pakistani artist and son of and brother to industry women, raises these difficult questions in his paintings of women and their lives in this underworld, ignored publicly, yet cherished privately, by Pakistan's elite.I met elite society in Lahore, who could not believe that I could be a Muslim and a liberal. For me, there are no contradictions and yet, for them, they felt the need to declare their atheism with pride, expecting me to admire their freedom. I do. But I don't share their convictions, and lament how religious extremists have successfully chased decent people away from Islam. And how the attraction of the west has been reduced to professing atheism.I judge nations by their bookshops. When I was living in Saudi Arabia, I was always frustrated by how the narrow-minded authorities banned books and filtered my choice to dull subjects, and filled bookshops with gadgets rather than books. In contrast, Pakistan is a free country with bookshops that store everything from Lady Windermere's Fan to the Kama Sutra. That confident, boisterous attitude to books and unbridled discussions leaves Pakistan in a better position than other Muslim-majority countries.At shrines of prominent Muslim saints, especially the much-loved Bulleh Shah, I saw ordinary people visit, sing freely, dance and play centuries-old musical instruments. Where is this joy in Britain's Islamic communities? In Pakistan's shrines, I witnessed an Islam of the soul – an inner joy that allowed people to let their hair down, away from the ritual-obsessed, but vacuous clerics. Late into the night, I watched the merriment of their divine dances.And by day I was back to addressing young professionals and students on getting away from blaming India and the west for their problems. Without doubt, they appreciated a new message that Islam and secularism were not polar opposites, that the west was not a monolith, and Pakistan can find a place in the modern world free from terror and extremism. And they rightly complained about the violation of Pakistan's sovereignty by US drone attacks, the corruption of their ruling class and the dangerous emergence of dynastic politics.Unlike Jinnah's audiences, the young Pakistani students understood English and grasped what was said. But do they believe that ordinary westerners are on their side? That we in the west will respect and extend friendships to people across the world as equals, as humans? And stop launching ideological wars? I am not sure, and nor are ordinary Pakistanis. After all, Barack Obama warned Pakistan that war was on the table. We do not win hearts and minds by threatening war.