Nawaz Sharif, who is set to become Pakistan's next prime minister, has a huge opportunity to reshape the face of Pakistani politics. When the results of Saturday's poll are confirmed, his party will have enough seats to govern without a major coalition deal.Defying predictions that his party would bleed votes to Imran Khan's Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) swept all aside in the Punjab, the most populous province. The centre-right party pushed the centre-left Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) all the way back to its traditional base in Sindh.Factor in the other changes of the guard that are due this year – the election of a president, the appointment of a new army chief of staff and a new chief justice – and Mr Sharif has the opportunity of establishing a firm basis for a full term, which the outgoing PPP president never had. If power does not go to his head, Mr Sharif could use it wisely.Governing Pakistan is never easy. The majoritarian vote in Punjab was strong enough to deliver a central government, but that rule did not apply to Sindh, which the PPP kept, or in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province, where Mr Khan's party got enough seats to contend for the control of the regional government.Mr Khan's anti-corruption drive may have electrified the media but it did not turn out to be a national phenomenon. The provincial breakdown of the vote poses the same challenge to Mr Sharif. Unless his government can deliver services to the nation that the PML-N showed it could deliver in Punjab, the new prime minister's honeymoon will be a short one.For Mr Sharif, it will be a case of third time lucky. Much of that luck will depend on whether he has absorbed the political lessons of his first two stormy periods in office. Unlike Asif Zardari, Mr Sharif does not have the political gifts needed to keep coalitions together.And yet with Sindh, and the Senate (until 2015), in the hands of the opposition, he will need to govern with a measure of consultation; he cannot change the constitution.In its fraught relationship with the US, Pakistan's actions are often at variance with its rhetoric. On Monday Mr Sharif said that the CIA drone programme was a challenge to Pakistan's sovereignty.Which it is, until you scrape away the surface, and see how the Inter-Services Intelligence is not beyond using the CIA as cover for its own dark deeds. The PML-N's resounding victory tapped anti-American populism. Mr Sharif must now navigate a strategic relationship that makes different demands.The Taliban, similarly, may give Mr Sharif a few months of peace but, because its agenda and that of Pakistan are mutually irreconcilable, they may well turn their guns on the Punjab. Mr Sharif has to prove that a civilian-led government is up to these challenges.