Staff absenteeism at health centres across Africa and South Asia is notoriously high. Our baseline measurement at clinics in rural Punjab, Pakistan found doctors to be absent 58% of the time. As so often is the case with service delivery in developing countries – and with economic development in general – links along the chain are opportunities for the process to break down. All of these links depend on humans. We wondered if measurable personality traits affect how public servants perform, and how understanding this relationship might help improve service delivery.Several studies, in particular those led by Nobel laureate James Heckman, have shown that five personality traits – openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness and neuroticism – are robust predictors of behaviour. Another study shows that the personality types who take a government job changes depending on the wage. Motivated by their methodology, we decided to test if the five personality traits – along with a sixth, public sector motivation – affect how public servants perform.We applied personality tests to three tiers of public servants (doctors, inspectors and senior officials) across the 36 districts of Punjab. Notably, the senior officials are responsible for public healthcare affecting millions of people. In random districts, we replaced the paper-based system with smartphones that fed attendance data straight up the chain. We conducted unannounced visits to health facilities and developed a way of measuring collusion between inspectors and clinic doctors. Finally, we created an index of traits that could be desirable in a civil servant, such as emotional stability, conscientiousness and agreeableness.Three major results emerged from the experiment. First, a high score on our index predicts that doctors will show up to work and negatively predicts that they will collude with inspectors to falsify reports. Second, smartphone monitoring has the largest impact on inspectors who have a high index score. Third, senior health officials with high index scores are more likely than others to respond to a report of an underperforming clinic. All of these effects are large and statistically significant.In short, our study suggests that strategically placing officials who show the right combination of personality traits, and combining this placement with smart policies, can greatly improve outcomes for the public, at a relatively low cost.But if such results are replicated in a variety of contexts and turned into policy, will we end up in a brave new world where people are tested and directed to the positions deemed desirable? We think not. To understand why, it is important to take a step back.Despite how we tend to see our own personalities, traits are not static. For one thing, they change over our lifetimes. Psychologist Brent Roberts has shown that the trait conscientiousness takes gradual steps up throughout the lifetime – including a considerable jump between 45 and 55. Secondly, there is evidence that certain traits can be manipulated. James Heckman and coauthors showed this using long-range data from the Perry Preschool Programme that gave added emotional and social support to disadvantaged children. Heckman’s recent study shows that treatment children, now in their 40s, show greater success on a variety of socioeconomic measures – evidence that altered personality traits made the difference.Whether traits can be manipulated once individuals mature, however, remains an open question. Experiments could determine if training programmes can be used to alter civil servant traits in a beneficial way. More broadly, adding social supports early in life could have benefits for individuals and societies down the road.Guiding people into certain positions at certain ages may have benefits too. Based on estimates from our study, if the government of Punjab (population 100 million) replaced the bottom 25% of doctors with average doctors in terms of conscientiousness, for example, 9,500 more patients would be seen every month. While the estimates underlying this are admittedly rough, and while we are not advocating firing any doctors, it suggests that taking personality measurement seriously could open new doors that would greatly improve the provision of services.To return to the short term, however, our study may have a more practical use for development practitioners. Generally, practitioners and researchers tend to focus on reforms that strengthen incentives. Our findings give us confidence that changing the composition of the workforce by attracting better people, promoting better people, and/or better tailoring their individual incentives can improve health service delivery.Our study gives a sense of how things get accomplished in settings where existing incentive schemes should lead to nothing getting done. In our setting, there is little chance of being fired for being absent, yet doctors are still present 42% of the time. This is a depressingly low number, but it is not zero as would be predicted considering only the incentives. After all, why would one go to work when they do not need to do so to get paid?Given these realities, new policies and new information can be intelligently targeted at civil servants who are identified by personality tests as more intrinsically motivated. Such policies might provide useful complements to more traditional strategies – such as increasing worker monitoring or performance incentives – and provide the basis for additional, cost-effective policies for better public health.Arman Rezaee is a PhD candidate at the University of California San Diego and Michael Callen is an assistant professor of public policy at the Harvard Kennedy School. Follow @arezaee and @EPoDHarvard on Twitter. Read more stories like this:• The toughest job in Nigerian healthcare• Task shifting explained: a viable solution to health worker shortage?• Power to the people: how open data is improving health service deliveryJoin our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow @GuardianGDP on Twitter.