India and Pakistan are on divergent paths in the news today. While India looks to the future after yesterday's launch of its first unmanned moon mission, next door in Pakistan things seem to be spiralling downwards."Pakistan stares into the abyss", the Independent splashes on its front page. Pressure on the army from the US to step up operations against Taliban militants in the lawless mountain region on the Afghan border has led to 200,000 people fleeing their villages, with 20,000 crossing over into Afghanistan.The deaths caused by the fighting are seen as "collateral damage", the paper says, in Pakistan's internal war on terror. According to a leaked letter from the former prime minister and main opposition party leader, Nawaz Sharif, Pakistan is going though "the worst crisis of its history".The situation in Pakistan is closely entwined with its economy, which is on the brink of collapse. The Pakistani government has been forced to ask the International Monetary Fund for an emergency $5bn bail-out after exhausting other sources, including its allies. The Guardian calculates Pakistan has seven weeks left before its foreign reserves run out and it cannot pay its debts - bankruptcy, in effect.Power cuts, rising food prices and the falling value of the rupee have led to a sense of emergency.The security issue does not look like calming any time soon, with a policy to further involve tribal militias - known as lashkars - in the offensive in the mountains."Pakistan plans to arm tens of thousands of anti-Taliban tribal fighters in its western border region," says the Washington Post, "in hopes, shared by the US military, that the nascent militias can replicate the tribal 'awakening' movement that proved decisive in the battle against al-Qaida in Iraq." According to the Post, the lashkars will receive Chinese-made assault rifles and other small arms. Asif Ali Zardari, the Pakistani president, has already arranged their purchase, Pakistani officials have said.While the move has been welcomed by the US, relations between Islamabad and Washington could turn decidedly sour after news today of a missile attack by a US military drone on a suspected militant stronghold in the region, killing nine people at a religious school. The US claims the school belonged to a pro-Taliban cleric. A few hours before the attack, the Pakistani parliament passed a unanimous resolution against American military incursions on Pakistani soil.There's no doubt the threat posed by insurgents is real, as the bombing of the Marriott hotel in Islamabad demonstrated last month. But the economic situation and Pakistan's internal security are closely linked. In the Independent, Imran Khan, the former cricketer and now an opposition leader, said he saw "no solution in sight" either for the economic or security situation.The Pakistani foreign minister, Shah Mahmood Qureshi, has warned that the west would suffer if Pakistan did not receive financial help. "You have to wake up and realise that Pakistan is a victim," he told the BBC. "Pakistan has stood by you ... if you don't stand by Pakistan you will let yourselves down."* Based on an extract from the Wrap, theguardian.com's digest of the day's news