'I bet you didn't think there were places like this in Pakistan?" my cousin asked, waving the first glowstick I had seen in a decade. I had come on a family holiday to introduce my fiance to Pakistan, and somehow we had ended up at an all-night rave in a farmhouse outside Lahore. Only gun-toting guards and sleepy drivers waiting for their teenage charges gave away the party.I had been worried about how my English boyfriend would cope with his first visit to the subcontinent and the huge number of relatives he needed to meet before our wedding in August. He was more worried about being a tourist in what the Economist has decreed the "most dangerous country in the world", and the fact that my mum had (half-jokingly) refused to pay any ransom if he was kidnapped.It's true Pakistan isn't trouble-free. During celebrations for the Prophet's birthday, fears of sectarian violence kept us indoors. Just a few days after we visited the beautiful Mughal city of Lahore, a suicide bomber killed at least 13 people. A week later a six-year-old British boy was kidnapped. And everyone in sprawling, turbulent Karachi, where we were based, seemed to have a story to tell about being mugged at gunpoint.But despite my cousins warning that everyone would assume my fiance was "from the CIA or Blackwater", his presence only sparked a flood of people wanting to practise their English. On a trip to the India/Pakistan border to watch a flag-lowering ceremony he ended up the main attraction with crowds of local men desperate to take photographs of this exotic visitor.In between all the sight-seeing visits there was lots and lots of shopping. My fiance sent some desperate texts when he was led off to buy his wedding outfit, a sherwani (collarless coat) over baggy trousers. "Help!" came his message. "They're trying to buy me a turban and a coat covered in diamanté." Meanwhile, I fretted over sari designs.Finally my cousins showed us the side of Pakistan that is missed by the headlines of terrorist training camps and religious extremists: the constant round of parties, dances – and, of course, glowsticks.