Crunchy leaves, shiny penny loafers, dirty pencil shavings, cached lunch money, trendy backpacks, butterfly tummies, and the bright yellow school bus – it must be back to school season. The anticipation of meeting a new teacher is remembered ephemerally as one of the joys of school days. Children in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan on the border with Afghanistan are not making these memories. Three million school aged children, two million of which are girls, are not enrolled in basic education. The plight of these children was highlighted by the tragic shooting of child education activist; Malala Yousafzai aged 15, on 9 October 2012 as she rode home on a bus after taking an exam in Khyber Pakhunkhwa's Swat valley.Around half of the total population of Khyber Pakhtunkwa is illiterate and less than 30% of females are literate. The weak and outdated Khyber Pakhunkhwa public education system has been impacted by successive crises but the local government is committed to turning it around. The Khyber Pakhtunkwa government has set several priorities to increase the number of children enrolling in and successfully completing quality primary and secondary education, including: improved and more equitable access to education, improving the quality of learning in schools, improving the curriculum, improving textbooks and learning materials, improved infrastructure, and improved governance and management.Adam Smith International is serving as DfID's managing organisation for a five-year Khyber Pakhtunkhwa education sector programme to assist the provincial government with its ambitious plan. The programme could be given up to £123m in an education service delivery grant, from DfID and AusAid, if it meets its performance milestones. So far two tranches of capital have been issued as a result of the local government meeting its targets. As part of the programme, Adam Smith International is assisting the local government to establish sound public financial management to receive and disburse this funding appropriately. The province's senior leadership meets with the Adam Smith International team regularly to review and analyse data and take stock of progress.Key outcomes for the Adam Smith International managed programme so far include: 1500 lesson plans have been developed which, for the first time, are aligned with the current curriculum and textbooks. Primary school teachers are being trained in how to use lesson plans. A confidential corporal punishment hotline has been set up for students or parents to report physical punishment. The local government has distributed a cash stipend to girls across the province for attending school. UK Secretary of State, Justine Greening, said: "I saw for myself the transformational education programme DfID is helping to fund in Pakistan. I met girls with big ideas about what jobs they would like to do when they became older – teachers, doctors, scientists. I remember when I was growing up in Rotherham in the 1980's, I had ideas – I wasn't sure what they'd amount to, but I knew education was my first step. They knew it too and who knows what they can achieve with the opportunity."Malala Yousafzai's nomination for the Nobel Peace Prize in 2013 is raising awareness among parents and communities of the benefits of educational opportunities in Khyber Pakhtunkwa. The DfID-funded programme is helping to improve community engagement with education providers. There is also huge potential for the private sector including not-for-profit organisations in Khyber Pakhunkhwa to widen access and enrollment in education, especially for girls and young women, and to develop opportunities for innovative approaches, such as, skills training. As the seasons change from winter to spring, there is hope that when autumn approaches this year more children in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa will experience homework, bouncing erasers, desktops with chairs connected and the joy of school days.Content on this page is produced and controlled by Adam Smith International