Press freedom no longer exists in Pakistan. Journalism is under constant threat with both broadcast and newspaper journalists being intimidated into silence.The treatment of the popular Urdu-language channel, Geo News, is but the latest example of the way in which the authorities are seeking to close off any hint of criticism.On 24 April, I reported that Geo News was under threat of closure by the government. Now it has come to pass. As Jon Boone reported on Friday, Pakistan's media regulator, PEMRA, ordered Geo News off the air by suspending its licence for 15 days. The channel was also ordered to pay £60,000 for defaming the head of the military's Inter-Services Intelligence directorate (ISI), General Zaheer-ul-Islam.It concerned a Geo broadcast on 19 April following the attempted murder of the channel's best-known journalist, Hamid Mir. His brother appeared on screen and accused the ISI of responsibility for the shooting, in which Mir was severely wounded.Pakistan's defence ministry was quick to accuse Geo of "false, malicious and irresponsible reporting" that is "a continuation of the policy of the Geo Network for maligning state institutions."PEMRA was asked by the ministry to find a way of closing down Geo News, which is an affiliate of CNN.The Karachi-based news channel has millions of Urdu-language viewers around the world. And Mir hosts one of its most popular programmes, Capital Talk.According to the London-based Pakistan Journalists' Association UK Geo News and its owner, the Jang group, have suffered from an "organised campaign of harassment and intimidation".Reporters and editors have been beaten up, its offices have been attacked and its newspaper vans have been hijacked and set alight.Last week, I reported on the beating up of the editor of the Daily Jang, Zafar Aaheer.However, these incidents must be seen in a wider context. Journalists across Pakistan face both physical and verbal threats on a daily basis. And the intimidation comes from a variety of sources.As Amnesty International has pointed out, Pakistani journalists face threats from the ISI, the Pakistani Taliban, Al-Qaida-linked groups, ethnic Baluch rebels, Lashkar-e-Jhangvi militants and the Muttahida Qaumi Movement.In January, three employees of Express News TV in Karachi were killed in a shooting attack by a Taliban group, Tehreek-i-Taliban. In claiming responsibility for the attack, the group said there would be more attacks against media outlets it regards as "propagandist."Earlier in the month, Shan Dahar, a reporter for Abb Takk Television, was shot in the back while filming at a pharmacy in Larkana. He was working on a report about the unauthorised sale of pharmaceutical drugs in the area.