 1.51pm BST Essentially we have an unofficial quarter final stage to this tournament now, as the winner of Pakistan v the West Indies on Tuesday will go through. As for Bangladesh they're out.Also out are Australia, who are about to go and give India some batting practice. We'll have the OBO for that coming straight outta

Compton
 Sydney. Thanks for reading, bye! 1.47pm BST 

In a surprise move, Pakistan have called up Jade Dernbach to bowl the final over and Bangladesh have won.
Umar Gul will bowl the final over and Mortaza is showing greater competence with the bat than he did today with the ball. He glides first a full one, then a short one, calmly down to third man for four runs. A dot, a scrambled single and Mahmadullah will face the final ball of the game. It's hit down the ground for one and that's that.Updated at 1.50pm BST 1.43pm BST Mortaza again goes over mid-off and gets four with a nice clean hit off of Tanvir. By this point though the required rate is up to 42.00 and, given this isn't England's death bowling attack, nothing that matters is going to happen for the rest of this game. Tanvir, like Shakib and Razzak earlier, is bowling very wide around the wicket and must be close to being no-balled for it. 62 needed from the last over: are you on the edge of your seats? 1.39pm BST The aforementioned Daniel Harris has the MBM for Fulham v Everton. You can switch over to that now; this was done so long ago it's now burnt to an inedible crisp.Umar Gul is flicked away for Mahmudullah, whose name I've been spelling wrong all along, but the relentless Shehzad makes a great stop sliding along the boundary. Ziaur is out first ball and poor old Mortaza walks out to be greeted with a bouncer. He gets his own back, sort of, by belting four over cover."I remember series in the 70s when crowds would cheer even good throw ins from opposing teams," writes Zia Faruqui. "The current silence at opposition runs or wickets is shameful."There has been absolutely nothing for the home crowd to cheer, Zia. This has been as miserable a tournament as the 1999 World Cup was for England. 1.36pm BST Another short one, a clueless non-shot sees the bat wafted at the ball and a thin edge through to the keeper. 1.31pm BST 91 needed then at 22.75 an over. Ajmal comes around the wicket and finds the top edge as Nasir looks to run it to third man. It's not quite the shot he was trying to play but it gets four to the right region anyhow. Mahmadullah gets in on the free-hitting act, slogging a sweep from outside off stump for a flat six over mid-wicket. Nasir goes from the final ball. 1.31pm BST Another stumping. He walks down, looks to smash it over cover, misses the quicker ball and is stumped. 1.27pm BST Nasir brings out a faint, dusty, faded reminder of his potential as he steps down the track to an over-pitched Afridi delivery and drives it sweetly over mid-off for six. They get a single at the end of the over and look, they've got their hundred.  1.25pm BST This is getting close to a pride-salvaging innings from Shakib as he turns a length ball from Gul to square leg for four. He then slaps it to long off for four more with what looks to me like a leading edge off of a horizontal bat. I imagine Gul will being pitching it a bit further up now. He should be out next ball, going for a slog sweep and looping it up to Malik at long leg, but he's dropped an absolute dolly. This is wandering into the territory marked "excrutiating". Finally he goes and no one in the ground makes a noise. 1.24pm BST With the required run rate up around 20, Shakib looks to cross-bat a back-of-a-length ball again but skews it up to extra cover on the edge of the circle. 1.17pm BST Afridi is close to yorking Nasir, the batsman just jabbing the edge of his bat down on it at the last moment. Even on the odd occasion that the batsmen can get a clean hit on the ball, they haven't got the placement to beat the fielders. 1.14pm BST I've just realised that all these spurious stats they're throwing at us are based only on international T20s since 2012, which makes them even more meaningless. Ajmal returns to the attack, which is always a joy to watch, unless you happen to be at the other end facing him. This is setting up nicely for an Ajmal v Narine/Badree bowl-off on Tuesday. 1.10pm BST Shakib is so close to being stumped here. He has a wild swing and misses it, coming down the track, but swung so hard that the bat came back around and landed inside the crease. That's mighty lucky. As per tradition, the next ball is swung high over square leg for the first six of the innings... as is the next one! Finally a bit of life from Bangladesh.Meanwhile on the TV, Saeed Ajaml is having his fielding critiqued by Jonty Rhodes, which seems a little bit harsh. That's like having my OBO reviewed by Rob Smyth.  1.05pm BST Can Bangladesh get that required run rate back below 14 in this Afridi over? Nasir gives it a go, trying to whack the leather off it and clearing cover, but it's not a convincing shot and lands short of the fielder who restricts him to one. Two from the over, which is incredible given the match situation. Bangladesh have given up and their fans deserve better. 1.03pm BST After a first-ball wicket, Nasir Hossain strides to the middle looking like he has the weight of the world on his shoulders and a run of recent scores of 16, 14, and 15. I don't think Nasser Hussain would have the willpower to put something substantial together in this situation. He gets a couple to bring up a sad, sorry team 50. 12.59pm BST This is pathetic. The captain plays down the wrong line to a straight, flat one and is hit in front. 12.57pm BST "Fancy a go, Shahid?"Sure, why not?"Afridi's first ball brings a wicket, which in turn brings captain Mushfiqur to the crease. Looking at the replay I'm not convinced Shamsur got anything on that ball, but at least it brings the end of this formality that little bit forward, right?Updated at 12.58pm BST 12.55pm BST It's a straight one from Afridi, which you'd expect. Shamsur doesn't expect this and looks to cut it. He gets a very thin edge through to Akmal who takes a good catch. Wow. 12.53pm BST Fancy some more spin? Pakistan do as Zulfiqar, one of 9,342 slow bowlers in today's lineup, gets a game of "Knock Over Some Batsmen". Shamsur goes after him, top edging a big slog sweep, but it lands safely wide of the fielder Ajmal. Not a lot of turn here for Zulfiqar, who's probably pitching it a bit too full up to give the ball time to move. Again it's just four from the over. 12.50pm BST 36 isn't a great return from the powerplay. It's a dreadful return when you need 11.5 runs per over as Bangladesh now do. There's no real rush for Pakistan to take the wickets either now, as this win makes it a straight shoot-out between them and the West Indies for the semi-final slot behind India; net run rate doesn't come into it. 12.48pm BST I can imagine the mood in our Australian office isn't great right now, as the fact that they'll be OBOing a dead rubber with their team eliminated, becomes ever clearer. Anamul isn't giving up the ghost just get as he plonks Ajmal into the fence at cow corner for an ugly, one-bounce four. That's as good as it gets though and the inevitability of the result is illuminated by Ajmal's lack of celebration at the wicket; it really was a very good catch too. We're checking for a stumping now... there was downward movement of the foot after the bails came off but I reckon the toe was already touching the ground. 12.45pm BST Tossed up and the batsman gets a leading edge, Ajmal takes a low return catch. 12.42pm BST More pace, which is a surprise, in the form of Umar Gul, although he's too canny for the out-of-nick Tamim. Shakib has been promoted to number three. In fact it was the inside edge, then the pad that it took from the batsman on to the stumps. Gul sends down a poor full toss outside off stump, but Shakib can only push it to the fielder. No runs from the first four balls but they scamper a single from the fifth to get Anamul – the closest Bangladesh have to a form player – on strike. According to the broadcaster, his strong zone is the short ball drifting towards leg. I imagine that's most people's strong zone. 12.39pm BST Tamim was halfway down the track by the time that hit the stumps. He ran down, Gul smartly dragged it back and immediately the batsman knew he was in trouble. It took the outside edge and flicked back into off stump. 12.36pm BST Run-out chance here as Tamim is struggling to make his ground from the non-striker's end, but the throw from silly point is wide. A slow, short, wide one from Tanvir is left alone by Tamim, which I guess shows the difference in form between now and a couple of years ago for the batsman – when he was thrashing England all over the place a couple of years ago there's no way he'd have missed out there. He doesn't miss out here as the fourth ball strays towards leg and is helped on its way to the fence with a lovely swivel pull. A couple of singles, a couple of twos here and there and it's ten from the over. 12.31pm BST Hafeez draws a leading edge from Anamul but there's no carry on this pitch and it's perfectly safe. Anamul steps down the track and, although the ball holds up a little in the pitch, he reads it perfectly and smacks four over mid-on. I reckon that's landed on the rope and Bangladesh have been done out of two runs here... nope maybe not, it was a fraction inside looking at the replays. 12.28pm BST Pace from the other end though and Anamul gets a boundary off of Tanvir's first ball, deflecting it to third man. Incidentally if Pakistan win then Australia will have emulated England and gone out at the group stage. I'm a little surprised Tanvir is opening the bowling; with the number of spinners at his disposal it might have been an idea for Hafeez to open with spin at both ends and just let that required run rate climb, escalating the pressure. Tamim hooks wildly into no man's land at square leg and gets a couple. 12.24pm BST Hafeez opens the bowling, as is normal and as you'd expect with spin proving by far and away the most effective style of bowling so far. Tamil gets four, cutting him through point. 12.13pm BST Oh for... Maqsood launches it down the throat of Nasir Hossain at long off and the fielder shells an absolute sitter on the rope. The last ball is a single to mid-on and Pakistan get 190, which is remarkable on this dead pitch where the ball wasn't coming off the bat particularly cleanly. Ahmed Shehzad's unbeaten 111 from just 62 balls has almost certainly put this game beyond Bangladesh. Afridi and Ajmal could defend this in their sleep. 12.08pm BST "I know," thinks Al-Amin, "I'll bowl short and wide outside off stump." His first ball with that theory is slashed for four over third man by Afridi, then overthrows give them a couple more. This is a sorry, sorry finish from Bangladesh. Afridi gets a couple more to square leg, then holes out to long on, cross batting a slow, short ball. 12.05pm BST That was actually a remarkably good death over from Shakib, going for just five. Less good from Mortaza, whose length ball is whacked for six over mid-on. He has Shehzad caught in the deep by Tamim on the next ball... oh no it's a no-ball! So a free hit and, as the batsmen crossed, Afridi is on strike for it. Exactly zero people are surprised as Afridi belts it – his second ball in the innings –right over extra cover for six, bringing up the bowler's fifty. Ouch. Afridi is caught off the next ball, only for Anamul Haque to fall over the boundary, again at extra cover, after taking the catch and giving up the third six of the over. The final ball is full, wide and carved past third man for four. 24 from a dreadful, Dernbach-esque over. Mortaza finishes with eye-watering figures of 4-0-63-0. 11.58am BST Right can Shehzad emulate Alex Hales and become the second batsman to score a hundred at this tournament? He gets a single from Shakib to equal his own record, before Malik has to use his full reach to squirt a single to point. Shehzad works it to mid-on and wants two, but they can only manage a single. The wicket of Malik brings Afridi to the crease and it feels a little unfair that the crowd are getting a little more excited about watching this bowling all-rounder than Shehzad getting his country's first ever century.And Shehzad pushes a single through cover to reach his hundred, which is met with a smattering of applause. Come on now, crowd, you can do better than that. This century deserves far better than that. 11.56am BST Malik misreads this one entirely, running down the pitch and going through with the shot far too early, giving the captain and 'keeper the easiest of stumpings. 11.53am BST With the spin options wearing thin, Al-Amin is back on. The three seamers have economies in double figures (Ziaur's is 22.00 from one over), whereas the worst of any spinner is Mahmadullah's 8.00. There's a rather loud swear from Shehzad as a slow leg cutter beats his hard slash outside off stump. A couple chipped to mid-on and a single take him to within one of his own Pakistani T20 record of 98. 11.47am BST Shehzad is getting silly now. He has essentially just sat down and tried to play the scoop to fine leg. Unsurprisingly, he misses that one. He misses the next one too, which Mortaza sends miles down the leg side for five unwanted wides. Creamed over cover after that for a one-bounce four; is there any player who veers so wildly between such beauty and such ugliness in their strokes as Shehzad? Heaven knows what that next shot was as he ran down the pitch and used the full face to chip it just over the bowler for a single. This is fantastic nonsense. Four more as a poor bouncer is pulled nicely behind square. That's 16 from the over and Shehzad in touching distance of Pakistan's first ever T20 hundred.Updated at 11.52am BST 11.42am BST "Who knew, Bangladesh don't do British summer time," my colleague Daniel Harris has just said. OK, OK, I'm an idiot. 11.41am BST With control needed once again, Bangladesh turn back to Shakib. Shehzad, with his marvellous Commander Riker beard, goes inside out over extra cover with a wonderful drive for a couple, then whacks a hideous one straight up in the air that fortunately for him drops into no-man's land as Nasir Hossain goes off for treatment. Just seven off the over, which Bangladesh will reluctantly take right now. I imagine the wicket of Shehzad would have been preferable though.It’s almost as if Bangladesh don’t want to be a tiny piece of an unlikely jigsaw of results necessary to get Australia into the #WT20 finals 11.35am BST Malik is an excellent runner between wickets and he has to be here, getting back for a second as a throw from square of the wicket results in a direct hit. So quick is Malik though, that they don't even need to refer it upstairs. Finally Mahmadullah goes for a boundary as he sends down a full toss and Malik welts it for a boundary through mid-on. A second in as many balls follows with a crunching off drive that goes through the fielder Nasir Hossain on the sweep. 11.31am BST Since Shehzad brought up his fifty in the tenth over, he's faced just six balls and added six more to his score. With the seventh ball he doubles that number of runs, hitting a length ball from the seamer Ziaur over mid-on for six more. Another four comes from the second ball, run nicely down to third man and Bangladesh may be regretting not having another spinner in the ranks here. A single to gully brings up the hundred for Pakistan and a big hoik from outside off to mid-wicket brings up the 106 from the next ball. Four more timed beautifully through point makes it 22 from the over. Ah. 11.24am BST Mahmadullah is the most economical bowler in the tournament so far and he's in for his second over. He looks happy to concede singles to cover here with Pakistan coming under increasing pressure from the dearth of boundaries. The run rate is 7.30, which would give Pakistan a very chaseable 146. Mahmadullah sends down a poor full toss, but again they can only get a single.28 balls since the ball last went over the rope now... 11.20am BST We've not seen many bowlers bowl through in this tournament so far, but Razzak is going to. The fielders are surrounding new batsman Malik and unsurprisingly Shane Warne approves of this aggressive captaincy. The pressure is well and truly on and some good fielding on the rope at third man means it's now 22 balls since the last boundary. 11.16am BST Mahmadullah becomes the third spinner introduced to the attack. As captaincy decisions go, it's not the hardest, but it's certainly the right one given he removes Umar Akmal for nothing at all. It was an appalling shot mind, as Shane Warne says. Earlier in the over, Shehzad brought up his 50 almost unnoticed, but he's playing a lone hand here. After that great start Pakistan are having a bit of a wobblen and their set batsman is almost run out here going for a second to mid-on, but the fielding is pretty ordinary. 11.13am BST Oh dear. An ugly shot, looking to slash it through cover I think, catches a huge edge and loops up to Tamim at short third man. Pakistan in trouble here now their form batsman has gone. 11.10am BST Good move to keep Razzak on I reckon given the control he offers and Shehzad's aggressive mood. Hafeez has struggled a little against him and no sooner does he try to attack him than the left-armer gets him. 11.09am BST That's a beauty from Razzak, turning it past Hafeez's outside edge as the batsman stepped forward and looked to turn him to mid-on. Mushfiqur does the rest. 11.05am BST I would imagine Pakistan will attack now as Al-Amin comes back on. He starts with a good ball, full outside off stump, which tangles Shehzad up as he looks to scoop. A more old-fashioned shot, an inside-out drive over cover, is more successful and it lands on the rope, bringing six runs and taking him to 44. Pakistan have apparently won every game where Shehzad has scored more than 40, although that stat is probably more relevant to superstition than anything else. He's almost swept one on to his stumps here, looking to play the kind of shot that was so successful for AB de Villiers last night. The over mirrors Al-Amin's first, going as it does for 11. 11.00am BST A man who knows a thing or two about good spin bowling, Shane Warne, is in the commentary box. I'm struggling to fathom why Abdur Razzak was dropped by Bangladesh in the first couple of games as Hafeez – an excellent player of spin – is cautious against him here. He's lucky that these two are good runners between the wicket, as dropping it into the gap is about all they're able to do at the moment. 10.57am BST Spin is, emphatically, the way to go it seems. The first three overs of seam went for 34 runs; the two of spin since then just 12. Hafeez, mindful of the way the wicket-taking delivery gripped the pitch, is watchful against Shakib, who, like Razzak, is bowling from so wide around the crease that he's risking being no-balled. Just four from that over and Bangladesh have come back very well in the powerplay.Updated at 10.59am BST 10.54am BST Razzak, back into the side today, comes into the attack and his flatter brand of left-arm spin is effective early on. As I said may happen, the ball sticks in the pitch and Kamran knew he was in trouble with his pre-meditated lap scoop thing straight away. Captain Hafeez comes in and gets his first run with a sharp single to mid-on. That's a great over from Razzak, who is bowling from very wide around the stumps. Four runs and a wicket. 10.51am BST Oh what a catch this is! Akmal fluffs a scoop and top edges it to short fine leg, where Ziaur takes a marvellous catch leaping backwards. Like watching Paul Collingwood, that one. 10.49am BST It's fair to say that seam isn't working, so Bangladesh turn to their star all-rounder Shakib and his left-arm darts. He induces a big top edge from the sweeping Kamran Akmal, but with no fielder at deep square leg the ball trickles sadly for four. Akmal tries to slog an ugly leg side wide but misses it and gets a few byes. The final ball brings a shout for LBW from the wicketkeeper but it's come off the gloves. Great start this for Pakistan but it's very much buffet bowling. 10.45am BST Ugh, a disgusting slog from Shehzad over mid-wicket brings four, as does a much nicer flick over fine leg. Mortaza is bowling these on a good length and it's difficult to work out what his idea length would be. He tries a fuller, slower ball and Shehzad makes it three boundaries in three with an inside-out cover drive. A rare dot ball follows before Shehzad dances down the track and lofts a straight drive for six to make it 18 from the over."An hour early isn't embarassing," writes Gary Naylor. "I once turned up a whole day early for a ferry to Bergen and had to invest in a Whitley Bay BandB." 10.40am BST Al-Amin Hossain is, as usual, the other opening bowler, which means seam from both ends. The pitch looks so slow that it might be difficult to get the ball away to the fence here, as it could well stick in the pitch. The batsmen are happy to get on to the front foot, work the ball into the gaps here and run the singles quickly. Al-Amin strays on to Shehzad's pads with a full one and fine leg is up, so the batsman easily flicks it over him for four.The risk on these pitches is that if you drop short the batsman will have all the time in the world to flay it wherever and Al-Amin over-compensates with the penultimate ball, which is driven back past him for four more. 10.36am BST Mashrafe Mortaza, who has spearheaded Bangladesh's attack since 1904, is opening the bowling to the out-of-form Shehzad under the watchful eyes of Richard Kettleborough and Ian Gould. Pakistan get off the mark thanks to a misfield at square leg; Bangladesh's fielding hasn't been good so far in this tournament and that's an ominous portent. There's absolutely nothing on offer for the bowlers on what looks to be a featherbed and, after a couple of leaves, I can't imagine that Akmal will need long to get his eye in here. Oh I say that and he's beaten all ends up here by one angled in, the crooked bat wafting miles from both body and ball and it passes low over the stumps. Wide filth for the final ball though and it's cut hard to the point boundary. 10.29am BST Which means we'll begin in a couple of minutes. What do we reckon a good score for Pakistan will be? They're capable of getting 180+, especially if Umar Akmal continues the form he showed against Australia, although I doubt they'll need that many. Anything over 160 should be defended comfortably enough. 10.19am BST "Hi Dan," begins this email from Zeeshan Ahmad. "Any news on the Pakistan flag being allowed inside the stadium? Last I heard they had been banned by the Bangladesh Cricket Board authorities."I'd not heard about this, but there appears to be something to it. Specifically, Bangladeshis are banned from carrying the flags of any other nation into the ground, so it's not a Pakistan-specific thing. 10.06am BST They're both in the bowling department too: Sohail Tanvir comes in for Bilawal Bhatti for Pakistan, while for Bangladesh, Abdur Razzak replaces Sohag Gazi.Updated at 10.06am BST 10.05am BST Bangladesh: Tamim Iqbal, Anamul Haque, Shamsur Rahman, Shakib Al Hasan, Mushfiqur Rahim*†, Nasir Hossain, Mahmudullah, Ziaur Rahman, Mashrafe Mortaza, Abdur Razzak, Al-Amin HossainPakistan: Kamran Akmal†, Ahmed Shehzad, Mohammad Hafeez*, Umar Akmal, Shoaib Malik, Sohaib Maqsood, Shahid Afridi, Sohail Tanvir, Umar Gul, Zulfiqar Babar, Saeed Ajmal 10.02am BST Pakistan have won that and will have a bat. 9.46am BST Perhaps surprisingly, Bangladesh can still qualify for the semi-finals. Beat Pakistan today and Australia on Tuesday and they'll have four points; if Pakistan beat the West Indies in the following game, then both of those teams will have the same and it all comes down to net run rate.The bad news is that Bangladesh's is now a miserable -2.204, largely thanks to that enormous 73-run defeat by the Windies – the second-highest in this competition overall and the highest in the main pool stage – and their chances of overhauling the West Indies' +1.223 are slightly on the slim side. Still, hope there! 9.24am BST I'm going to sheepishly get a coffee. You guys can get an extra hour's kip, I guess. 9.17am BST Bangladesh doesn't appear to have adjusted its clocks, unlike here, which means I'm an hour early. 9.07am BST Morning folks. Apologies but we don't have long to go until this one starts as it took me a while to get into the building this morning, so let's get on with it.Bangladesh been pretty dismal in hosting their own tournament. Never mind the lights going out regularly in Chittagong, nor the bizarre decision to hold day-night games in locations that become drenched with dew at night making bowling and catching near-impossible; they've been close to inept when it comes to actually playing

cricket
 T20. It's three defeats in a row now, narrowly to lil' ol' Hong Kong then utter spankings by the West Indies and India. Captain Mushfiqur Rahim has urged players to play their natural game, but if this is that then things do not bode well for Bangladeshi cricket.You'd say that their best chance of a win comes in today's game against Pakistan, although Bangladesh have never beaten these opponents in this format. Still, Mohammed Hafeez's side were equally inept against India – indeed they posted a lower total – but, as shown with their win over Australia, are as erratic as ever. You'd make Pakistan the heavy, heavy favourites today, but a defeat would send them out. Win on the other hand, and it's an effective quarter-final with the West Indies for them in Mirpur on Tuesday.Much credit has to be given to the Bangladesh fans for pushing the big button marked "atmosphere" in this tournament so far in spite of their team's and the organisers' attempts to quash a potentially wonderful tournament. The team owes them a performance and today, against their Asian rivals, might be the day to pull it out the bag.Play begins at 09.30am GMT. 9.07am BST Dan will be along from around 10am. 