Ten days after the government of Pakistan agreed to the imposition of sharia law in Swat, Taliban fighters spilled out of the valley into the neighbouring district of Buner, just 60 miles from the capital, Islamabad. For the 650,000 inhabitants of Buner, the Taliban are not just the law. They man the roadblocks, order NGOs to leave their offices and loot them. Meanwhile local police cower in their barracks. For Buner's residents, the Pakistani state - already a weak concept in the North-West Frontier Province - has just become a virtual one.If the US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, reacted with horror and hyperbole (she said Pakistan represented a mortal threat to world security), the response in Islamabad was positively lethargic. It dispatched only six platoons of paramilitaries - not even army soldiers - to retrieve control of bridges and government offices. The prime minister, Yousaf Raza Gilani, said Ms Clinton should understand that local customs are the guarantors of peace in Swat, but also hinted that the peace deal was conditional. Which of them is reading the situation correctly?The physical proximity of the Taliban to Islamabad is misleading. They may have come down from the higher mountains and be threatening the plains. But the Taliban presence in Buner is more of a worry to Mardan, the second largest city in the NWFP, than it is to the Punjab. And it is one thing for men to be told to keep their women indoors in the NWFP and quite another for the same thing to happen in the urban belt running from Islamabad to Lahore, where the very thought is laughable. There would be bloodshed if they tried imposing sharia on Karachi. To the question: will Pakistan fall to the Taliban?, the answer is that parts of the country have already fallen to them. But that does not mean Pakistan as a whole is in danger, even though there are fault lines running through the country, and through the Punjab itself, which militants are exploiting.Relations between the US and Pakistan are at an impasse. Neither can abandon the other, but neither can deliver what the other really wants. Pakistan's army has neither the power nor the will to destroy the Taliban. For those generals who even today are reluctant to cut their ties with the Taliban, the army has swapped a policy of "gaining strategic depth" in Afghanistan for one which seeks strategic depth in their own country. On the other hand, there was genuine revulsion when a video of a woman being flogged by the Taliban was released. Which means there are red lines that the Taliban have yet to cross. Unbelievably, many in the military are still waiting for that to happen.