Coalition-partner courting went late into the night and will continue today. With even the small party that won significant victories over Islamists being considered a potential coalition member, it's difficult to keep tabs on whose mercedes has drawn up outside which politician's villa to discuss the coalition. We'll keep trying. Scroll down and refresh for updates.9:45amMusharraf had been praised for a dignified acceptance yesterday of his party's trouncing. This morning he's a little less humble. His spokesman confirms that he intends to serve out his five year term as head of state and will not step down.A job for Musharraf may be the first impasse Sharif and Zardari encounter when they meet shortly (they are due to meet now but repeated reports of this have proved hasty). Sharif wants to reinstate the judiciary that Musharraf sacked and have them decide on his fate - namely deciding whether the manner in which he secured his re-election as president last autumn was legal. Zardari, by contrast, has more time for the president. Zardari and Musharraf met last night. If the two victorious politicians do have their meeting this morning, we'll see if the Musharraf problem is a deal breaker. 10amThe British papers are full of advice for Pakistan's politicians. The Times' foreign editor's verdict is that "Musharraf is finished, he should copy Castro and quit". She thinks that Zardari should be cautious of Sharif, who may still be sympathetic to Islamist parties.The Guardian's editorial thinks that if Zardari follows the advice of America to give Musharraf a role, it could risk splitting the PPP. 10:30amThe Dawn's blog puts psephology to one side. "The news of the MMA's spectacular fall from grace will be especially appreciated by music and dance lovers across the North West Frontier Province". The MMA had banned music and dance... the Awami National Party now in power will reverse this. 11:05amGeorge Bush has spoken. And he's pleased. Asked at a news conference in Accra, Ghana what he thought of developments in Pakistan he said, "there were elections held that have been judged as being fair, and the people have spoken. I view that as a significant victory."11:15amAnd not ten minutes later bouquets of congratulations arrive from the East - well, comments posted on a Chinese government website actually, but warm wishes nonetheless. Pakistan is a long time China ally. China invests and ehem, trades in arms with Pakistan... in return Pakistan has backed China's fight against Muslims in its western Xinjiang region, some of whom are thought to be trained in lawless areas of Pakistan. The PPP-led coalition, if and when it is formed, will be needed by Beijing to keep an eye on this. 11:45amFor all the breeziness of Bush this morning - he said "it's now time for the newly elected folks to show up and form their government," teeth maestro  reports the US Embassy in Islamabad has just hosted a meeting between Zardari and representatives of Musharraf's PML-Q. An unsubstantiated line to emerge from the same source is that the Americans are irked by Sharif's PML-N for their bullish opposition to Musharraf. The source / rumour merchant says America is "working to put them in opposition". 12:15pmSharif wants the judges reinstated to decide on Musharraf, we don't yet know what Zardari would do. Well, one of the detained judges - Aitzaz Ahsan - cooped up in his Lahore home for three months, has just said that unless he and his colleagues are reinstated before March 9, they will march on Islamabad. 1pmThe EU election monitors have just delivered their verdict at a press conference in Pakistan. They say the elections were "better than expected" but "there was not a level playing field. It was a field that benefited the ruling party". 1:20pmSo a former Pakistani cabinet minister has blamed the PML-Q's removal from power on public anger over food and energy shortages. He stopped short of a Marie Antoinette 'let them eat cake'... but the political gauchness is still striking.