A section of the press, while dwelling on the dastardly attack on the Sri Lankan cricket team, has attempted to depict Pakistan as a "failing state". This biased and far-fetched narrative has often been resurrected after every terrorist incident in Pakistan. Such conjectures are doing more harm than good in our joint fight against extremism and terrorism and the cause of democracy in Pakistan.It would be an extreme travesty of facts if one is made to believe that institutions in Pakistan are not working. Terrorism is a phenomenon which can occur anytime, anywhere. But by making an incident, however unfortunate it may be, look like failure of a sovereign state is not only unfair but also an attempt to malign Pakistan.It is time that the media came out of the denial mode about the reality of today's Pakistan. The fact is that despite all challenges, the government institutions in Pakistan have been working efficiently and with great professionalism and resilience. We owe it to our security institutions that hundreds of terrorists were apprehended or killed during the past seven years. Similarly over 2,000 Pakistani military and paramilitary personnel laid down their lives while confronting extremists and terrorists.One is surprised to see the ease and naiveté with which some analysts have ignored the efforts of the government of Pakistan in tackling the colossal challenge of terrorism not of Pakistan's making. Let the international community know that it owes its safety and security to the sincere, determined and incessant efforts of Pakistan to fight this scourge.Instead of appreciating Pakistan's sterling role in counter-terrorism efforts, for which Pakistan has been paying a heavy price in terms of men and material more than any other country in the world, it is unfortunate to listen to a crescendo of doomsday prophecies churned out by experts on terrorism. Sadly, very little has appeared in the media about helping the democratic government in Pakistan in its efforts to tackle the menace of violent extremism. The uncanny remarks about the alleged "deficit of will" to fight terrorism can only encourage the extremists and terrorists to continue with their nefarious activities. In fact, such comments may provide oxygen to terrorists to thrive on media coverage they receive and create an illusion of their victory.There should be no doubt about the sincerity and determination of the government of Pakistan and its military and paramilitary institutions in taking on the challenge of terrorism. What Pakistan needs is realistic reporting without indulging in cut-and-paste jobs on irrelevant issues while commenting on a particular incident.Last but not the least, it was not bad security which caused 9/11 in the US or 7/7 in Britain. No sporting activity or international event was stopped during the years when the IRA was constantly indulging in subversive activities, including the one in which then prime minister Baroness Margaret Thatcher narrowly escaped the attack.