A couple from Lancashire and their daughter were shot dead in Pakistan yesterday in a family dispute over their son's arranged marriage.Mohammad Yousaf, 51, his wife Parviaz, 49, and daughter Tania, 21, were killed at a cemetery in a village near Gujrat in north-east Pakistan.The killings followed a row over the relationship between a son of the Yousafs and a local woman, according to a family friend. Mohammed Iqbal said the family was killed while paying their respects during a visit to a cemetery.Two of the alleged gunmen were arrested and police were hunting two more suspects in connection with the attack, which left another woman dead.Iqbal, who sits on Pendle borough council and Lancashire county council, said: "They were leaving the graveyard of someone that had passed away. It was a family dispute that obviously went horribly wrong. Mr Yousaf's son was married to a girl from Pakistan and there have been some problems with the marriage and that's the dispute that's happened."Two of the Yousafs' sons had returned early to Lancashire from Pakistan but had flown back after being told of the deaths."They went for a wedding and a holiday and they are now having to bury members of their family," Iqbal said.He said he had known Yousaf, a taxi driver for 20 years, and the whole family were devastated.Lancashire police said officers were providing support to family members in Nelson and working with Pakistani authorities.The family, who had lived in the UK for more than 30 years, had gone to Pakistan for their son's wedding.A spokesman said: "Lancashire police have been informed of an incident in Pakistan which occurred in the early hours of 20 May. Three members of a family from Nelson who were visiting the country for a wedding were killed in a shooting incident."The circumstances surrounding the deaths are unclear at this time but police in Lancashire are liaising with the authorities in Pakistan to ascertain exactly what has happened."Officers are speaking with family members in Nelson and they are being offered support at this difficult time."The Foreign Office said it was investigating reports of the shooting.A spokesman for the British high commission in Islamabad said: "We can confirm the death of three British nationals in Pakistan on 20 May. We have offered consular assistance to the family and we are in touch with the local authorities."Tributes were paid to Tania on a Facebook page set up in her memory.Steph Roden, wrote: "It's awful that could happen to anyone. She was so innocent and quiet at school. God bless to all the family."Lisa Dickens said: "My thoughts are with the family at this awful time."Tania, who had lived in Pakistan recently, worked for Liberata, which provides services on behalf of Pendle council in Lancashire.Her manager, Wendy Smith, told the Burnley Citizen: "Tania was a hard working and conscientious member of the team who was always happy and one of the nicest people we have ever met." "She had a lovely sense of humour and was always a team player. We are extremely shocked by this and our deepest sympathies go out to the family. She will be very sadly missed."A family friend and North West MEP, Sajjad Karim, told the paper that he would discuss the matter at a government level."The thing that is particularly concerning is the level of violence in Pakistan and how it is impacting on British Pakistanis," he said. "Just a few weeks ago a man from Bolton was killed in Pakistan. There is a need perhaps to discuss this on a governmental level to see what support we can give to people who go over there to make sure they are provided with adequate security measures."Neighbours described the Yousafs as a friendly and popular family."They always use to say hello. It is awful news," Megan Wallwork told the Burnley Citizen: "They were very nice people who have lived here for a few years and have always made an effort. They were friendly with everyone on the street."