"We want to reshape the country's image, develop a progressive brand and outlook," claimed 29-year-old Zahraa Saifullah, CEO and publisher of Hello! Pakistan at the glitzy launch of her magazine earlier this year. According to the hype, Hello! Pakistan will be a "socially responsible and culturally aware family read". A franchise of the international celebrity magazine (and the first of its kind to be launched in Pakistan) Hello! is seldom associated with such lofty ambitions as the rebranding of a nation of 180 million people. In fact in the 100-odd countries in which it is distributed, Hello! is famous for its gushing interviews and forgiving photographs celebrating the lives of the rich and famous.Yet that Hello! has a market at all in Pakistan is probably surprising to readers in the west where the country is known more for its appetite for jihad than its appetite for glamour. In Pakistan itself reaction to the magazine's arrival reflect the deep divisions within society. Response has ranged from unease and hostility in some quarters, to glee in others. While the liberal fringe is troubled by the magazine's unapologetic celebration of flamboyant consumerism in a society beset by grinding poverty and deep inequalities, religious and social conservatives fulminate at the promotion of western values which they deem anti-Islamic and by extension, anti-state. Meanwhile, the tiny elite that is equally at home on the streets of New York and London as in the bazaars of Lahore and Karachi, is thrilled at the prospect of sharing editorial space with the likes of Sean Penn and Angelina Jolie.Alive to the controversy surrounding the publication of her magazine, Saifullah has tried to counter criticism by espousing virtuous goals. Hence the tall claims, which sit so oddly with the magazine's ethos elsewhere. While Hello! UK is perfectly content devoting lavish double-page spreads to reality TV contestants, Hello! Pakistan, Saifullah insists, will be "achievement oriented"; promoting those who "are doing and have done great things".Worthy though these claims are, in reality they are often incompatible with the unashamed pursuit of glitz. Those who do"great things", whether it be rehabilitation of rape victims or eradication of malaria, are often neither glamorous nor famous. Some candidates, of course, conveniently tick both boxes. The Oscar-winning film director, Sharmeen Obaid Chinoy, is one such celebrity. Well spoken, photogenic and socially responsible (her documentary was about female victims of acid attacks), she featured in the very first issue. But state-sponsored Islamisation over three successive decades has all but decimated the arts, sports and fashion, fields that traditionally produce celebrities in other countries. Pakistan has neither a thriving film industry like India, nor a vibrant sports scene like Argentina, nor an uninterrupted indigenous design tradition like Thailand – all countries with their own successful franchises of Hello. Little wonder then that Pakistan has a paucity of sporting stars, dazzling actresses and world famous designers to fill page after page of successive issues of Hello.To marry worthiness with bona fide glamour Saifullah will most likely have to fall back on charity circles among the moneyed elites. Enter the grand dames who host lavish fund raising balls in their mansions to raise money for schools for street children and hospitals for the poor. Or perhaps even chatshow hostesses and TV anchors like Mathira and Juggan Kazim who, in the absence of do-gooding Miss Worlds, will have to be both great and glamorous for the Hello! reading public of Pakistan.Yet there is no denying there is a genuine thirst for glamour in Pakistan. The many racy posters of sultry Bollywood actresses adorning every bazaar and the massive viewing figures for chat shows hosted by "hot" female hosts attest to it. However, with English the preserve of the rich and the magazine priced at a steep Rs 500 ($5.50) the Hello! readership is likely to be small. That said, 15,000 copies of the first issue sold out within a day (local English monthlies struggle to reach figures of 3,000). Perhaps it was the excitement of the first issue, or perhaps it was the grand dames who came out in force to celebrate their own homecoming, whatever the explanation, the arrival of Hello! Pakistan did not go unnoticed.• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree