When the house lights go down for the 87th Academy Awards in Hollywood on 22 February, much of the speculation will be about Birdman, Boyhood and whether JK Simmons, star of Whiplash, will berate the orchestra for being slightly off-tempo. But Oscar observers know that the movies to keep an eye on are not always in English, and that the best foreign language film category can be one of the most intriguing. Several films on this year’s shortlist have been lauded over the past year by critics and viewers worldwide, and some have stirred major controversy in their own countries.Submissions to the best foreign language film category are sometimes seen as PR exercises for a country’s film industry, or more generally for its culture: any country can put forward one film for Academy consideration. But this year the two frontrunners on the five-strong shortlist have spurred intense debate at home, with critics arguing that one, Polish film Ida, misrepresents the country’s past, and that another, Andrei Zvyaginstev’s Leviathan, spreads calumny on Russia’s present and its ruling regime.Russian director Zvyagintsev made a striking debut with road movie The Return in 2003. Leviathan, his fourth feature, won best screenplay in Cannes last May; this year, it was named best foreign language film in the Golden Globes and by the London Critics’ Circle, while in Russia Zvyagintsev won the Golden Eagle for best director. Set on the Baltic coast, Leviathan shows a man falling foul of a crooked mayor. The film is slyly but, for most critics, unmistakably critical of the Putin regime: in one scene, characters use portraits of Russian leaders from Lenin to Gorbachev for target practice, before the hero asks, “Haven’t you got anyone more recent?”The film impresses with its political bravery, but also with its austere visuals and Dostoevskian seriousness of tone. Surprisingly, it received substantial state funding. But Leviathan has been widely attacked at home: church groups have objected to its depiction of a corrupt Orthodox priest; the head of the town where it was shot complained that the film shows a “dirty, unwashed Russia”; and culture minister Vladimir Medinsky commented that films “with a sense of despair and hopelessness over our existence should not be financed with taxpayers’ money”.In Cannes, Zvyagintsev told the Guardian: “My goal was certainly not to confront power… What we are doing is creating a work of art. Art must provide light. It should give people hope.”But after profanity laws meant a cut-down version of the film went on general release in Russia, the director encouraged his compatriots to download a version illegally; some estimate that there have been over 4m downloads so far.Equally feted and controversial is Pawel Pawlikowski’s Ida, set in Poland in 1962. It is about a novice nun who discovers she is Jewish and ventures into the secular world, where she and her aunt – once a feared state prosecutor – uncover painful truths about Poland in the second world war and 1950s. Scripted by Pawlikowski with British playwright Rebecca Lenkiewicz, Ida has grossed more than $3.7m in the US and been a major hit in France. Voted best film in the European Film Awards, it won the best foreign language film Bafta and numerous festival prizes. Tonight Ida could triumph twice: its luminous black-and-white camerawork has earned it a best cinematography nomination.Born in Poland, Pawlikowski moved to Britain in his teens and established himself as a documentarist before making Last Resort  in 2000 and My Summer of Love in 2004, the latter launching Emily Blunt’s screen career.Ida is the first film Pawlikowski has made in Poland, where he now lives; it has won numerous awards there too, but hasn’t pleased everyone. The Polish Anti-Defamation League accused the film of failing to acknowledge Germany’s wartime occupation of the country and launched a petition, now signed by around 40,000 people, demanding that Ida be screened with captions outlining the historical context. And leftwing magazine Krytyka Polityczna detected “vulgar antisemitic tropes” in one character.Speaking on Skype, Pawlikowski told me he’d intended to make “a film that was in dialogue with the Poland of the early 1960s – not just cinema, but novels, music, theatre, the whole attitude of the period, which I love. It’s about my parents’ generation.”He attributes the antagonism to Ida mainly to “a right wing in Poland that’s off its head and generates this feeling that we’re being besieged, under some permanent struggle – completely ignoring the reality of Poland.” Pointing to the problems faced in Russia by Leviathan – a film he greatly admires – Pawlikowski says: “There’s a ‘patriotic’ element, in inverted commas, in most countries that feels films are there to sell a good image of the country and don’t have the autonomy to be just good films.”But he is delighted, and not a little surprised, at Ida’s Oscar nominations. “It’s a quiet film about withdrawal from the world. To have it suddenly in that context is surreal, but wonderful.”Leviathan and Ida are not without competition. One strong contender is Timbuktu, by Mauritanian director Abderrahmane Sissako, which swept the board at France’s César awards. It is a loosely structured panoramic account of the advent of jihadism in Mali, an angry, compassionate film, more effective for its initial light touch, before it turns increasingly tragic. But academy voters prefer something less troubling, theymay opt for sleekly entertaining Argentinian comedy Wild Tales, by Damián Szifrón, an up-and-comer widely tipped for a Hollywood career. With Pedro Almodóvar among his producers, Szifrón offers sketches showing that beneath our civilised veneer, we’re all wild at heart.The remaining title is Estonian-Georgian Tangerines, a solid but artistically modest anti-war statement. There was surprise at its inclusion in the shortlist at the expense of Force Majeure, an unsettling Swedish psychodrama about a man’s breakdown during a ski holiday. No one, it seems, was more surprised at this film’s snub than its director Ruben Östlund, seen in a YouTube clip listening to the nomination announcements. But Östlund appears to be having the last laugh; the clip is posted on Force Majeure’s Facebook page, under the tagline ‘Worst Man Cry Ever.’Whichever film triumphs, it will be in illustrious company. Auteurs who have won include Federico Fellini (four times), Ingmar Bergman (three times), Akira Kurosawa and François Truffaut. But the academy has not always been on the ball. Two magnificent films by Zhang Yimou, Ju Dou and Raise the Red Lantern – which helped put modern Chinese cinema on the map – were trumped by since-forgotten Swiss and Italian titles in 1991 and 1992 respectively. The 1977 swansong of surrealist maestro Luis Buñuel, That Obscure Object of Desire, was beaten by a French film rarely mentioned today, Madame Rosa – perhaps because the latter didn’t baffle voters by having two actresses play one part. The most egregious gaffe came in 1966, when glossy French romance A Man and a Woman (best remembered now for its “sha-ba-da-ba-da” theme tune) beat Gillo Pontecorvo’s The Battle of Algiers, today acknowledged as a masterpiece of political cinema. A key reference point for directors including Oliver Stone, Spike Lee and Paul Greengrass, as well as being considered essential viewing in its day by the Black Panther movement, The Battle of Algiers is a classic case of a film too uncompromising for Academy voters.The Academy is often accused of taking the soft option with foreign films, but in recent years it has proved open to challenging themes and forms. The past three foreign language Oscars have gone to Iranian marital drama A Separation, Michael Haneke’s severe look at old age, Amour, and the extravagantly stylised Italian film The Great Beauty.Even so, I suspect the academy will balk at the intensity of Timbuktu, which leaves the field to Leviathan and Ida – and either would be a deserving winner. One way or another, expect to order a vodka chaser with your Oscar night champagne. Whether it’s Russian or Polish remains to be seen.Babette’s Feast, 1987 Gabriel Axel’s 19th-century Danish drama about two adult sisters, an austere father, French refugee Babette – and a massive meal.Life is Beautiful, 1988 Italian Roberto Benigni’s surprise comedy hit about the Holocaust picked up three Oscars.All About My Mother, 1999 Pedro Almodóvar’s film about a mother returning to Barcelona, the place of her birth, and resuming relations with various characters from her past.Amour, 2012 Michael Haneke’s painful chamber drama about the aftermath of a stroke for an octogenarian couple.