Poland is determined to push on with plans to build its first generation of nuclear power stations over the next decade despite the Japanese reactor crisis sparking a global reassessment of the controversial energy source.In an interview, Treasury minister Aleksander Grad told the Guardian: "Of course it's time to review and analyse [safety] carefully but it wouldn't be right to make a rash decision, a 180 degree turn.""Poland is not at risk of earthquakes and tsunamis. The problem in Japan was not the power plants themselves, but the earthquake. We need to make a decision based on rational analysis and not emotions."The nuclear disaster in Fukushima has sparked public debates about the future of nuclear power around the world and Germany temporarily shut down seven of its oldest reactors pending a safety review.Grad said the centre-right government wants Poland's first two nuclear reactors to produce a tenth of the country's energy. Most of it comes from coal and gas, as well as renewables such as wind farms.Poland is in the middle of privatising some of its biggest energy companies, as part of a privatisation spree that started 20 years ago and transformed Poland's socialist state to a market economy. Many banks were privatised in the 1990s, and the Polish telecoms group TPSA was sold to France Telecom in 2000.More than 800 companies were put on the privatisation list in 2008 and so far 440 have been privatised. The list includes large companies such as the airline Lot which could be sold by the end of the year, as well as hundreds of smaller firms.The Treasury minister, who is in charge of the sell-offs, said: "The scope of the privatisation programme is unprecedented in the whole region of central and eastern Europe. We carried on throughout the crisis even though some projects were put on hold."However, the government has run into some problems recently. Last Friday it abandoned plans to sell a 51% stake in Enea, Poland's third-largest energy group, after bidders, which included France's EDF, did not meet its requirements.Price was not an issue, said Grad, but pointed to the government's condition not to break up the company and corporate governance requirements. "When the time is right, we will relaunch the process," he said.Poland aims to raise some 15bn zloty (£3.25bn) from sell-offs of state assets this year. It needs the privatisation proceeds to cut its budget deficit, which amounts to nearly 8% of GDP. The government of prime minister Donald Tusk has also reined in public spending but ruled out tax hikes, which would be embarrassing given his 2007 election promise to lower taxes.Some 20 companies, mainly in the energy and infrastructure sectors, will remain in state ownership, including PGE, Poland's bigger power group, which will build its nuclear reactors. Grad expressed some impatience with the speed of the privatisation programme, after a slowdown under the two previous Polish governments."After 20 years of transformation we should have this process behind us," he said. "When I look at the small and medium-sized businesses, these are sectors the Treasury should have exited many years ago. Not every government sees this as a priority. There was a period when the process stalled, but the past three years have been quite successful."