In the early eighties, Poland underwent a baby boom. It's this generation, now entering its thirties, which is driving the country's social enterprise sector."Those born when the country was still under communist regime are keen to set up their own businesses which fit within the social economy," says Andy Churchill, CEO of a UK social enterprise support organisation, Merseyside Network for Europe which shares best practice with Poland."Being a post-communist country, Poland is eager to develop a strong civic society and avoid the extremes of capitalism and communism, and social enterprise is seen as perhaps the key to 'a different way'. In the second half of 2011, Poland will have the EU presidency, just as the negotiations for the European programmes for 2014-2020 reach a key point, so the influence of Polish ideas, and the social economy could impact on what happens across Europe," he adds. There is strong political support for social enterprise in Poland. At the country's last major three-day NGO conference, political leaders were very engaged with the issues, according to the sector. And, in 2009, Jerzy Hausner, former economy minister and deputy prime minister for Poland, threw his weight behind social enterprise when he was quoted as saying that the social economy was "a social movement that should lead to a new vision for Poland's development," in a book called The Social Economy.This political support is not new. Several pieces of legislation have been introduced in the last eight years which have boost cooperatives, social enterprises and the people they help.In 2003, the Social Employment Act offered new tools to enable socially-excluded people to work. Then, in 2006 the Social Cooperatives Act came into force, encouraging a raft of new cooperatives. Additionally, coops set up by previously unemployed people receive public start up funding. Perhaps one of the biggest measures has been the introduction in 2004 of a mechanism enabling Poles to give 1% of their taxable income to a good cause of their choice.About 9 million of the country's 38 million citizens do this, which generated €92bn for Poland's social economy in 2009.When the country entered the European Union in 2004, it also benefited from the European Social Fund, re-invigorating a sector which had previously had a presence between the wars in the form of a co-operative movement.A large pot of that funding, in the form of the EQUAL programme, has now finished, although some ESF money is available until 2013. So, there is currently a mad rush to get social enterprises sustainable enough to operate more independently.Traditionally, about 20% of a Polish social enterprise's turnover is generated through 'trading', according to FISE (Foundation for Social and Economic Initiatives). Finding finance is tough, according to Magda Zawodny, the Polish representative for Social Enterprise Europe."Most social enterprises struggle to survive. They have many problems, such as difficulties with obtaining funding and loans - we do not have ethical banks yet, like in the UK," she explains. Help could be on its way, according to Krzysztof Cibor, spokesperson for FISE. The Ministry for Regional Development is planning to run a loans-guarantee fund for social economy businesses, which they hope will help social enterprises to sustain themselves. The government, along with FISE and eight other NGOs, is running a project called the Integrated Scheme for Supporting Social Economy in Poland, which will create network of organisations to assist social start-ups and other social enterprises on their way to market. "We want to improve social entrepreneurs' business skills and make the social economy stronger," he says. Before the year is out, we may also see a new act in Poland which could place the country as a leader in social enterprise in some respects. FISE and its partners are lobbying hard for a Social Entrepreneurship Act, which proposes a number of measures including a strengthening of the importance of social performance clauses in public procurement contracts. They say the social enterprise share of the one percent tax is low, and they want to see mainstream companies taxed and the money given to social enterprises, as well as other tax breaks. Some of Poland's most well-known social enterprisesThis content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To get more articles like this direct to your inbox, sign up to the social enterprise network.