The German chancellor Angela Merkel held a meeting with the new Polish prime minister Ewa Kopacz today, discussing many of the issues that the two neighbours face together.Both now have female leaders. Merkel is the first for Germany and Kopacz the second for Poland. But while the countries share a lot of common factors, there are also some big differences.As is the norm with central European countries at the moment, Poland is growing faster than many western nations.This is not to say that a year on year GDP growth rate of 1.6% is massive but it stands in clear contrast to the powerful, but slowing, German economy. German companies invested $4.5bn (£2.77bn) in Poland during 2012, which was almost a billion more than any other country spent there. Although Germans spent more than four times as much in the UK, Poland was their fifth biggest destination for foreign direct investment. Despite the similarities and connections, the working life of people in each country is very different. Median earnings were five and a quarter times higher in Germany during 2012 than they were for Poles. Not only do they earn considerably less, fewer people in Poland are employed and they produce a lot less for the hours they do work. We do need to bear in mind here that Poland would be a much cheaper country to live in than Germany but these stats show just how far apart the two currently are economically. Poland is the 9th most populous country in Europe and just under half the size of Germany (the most populous).Unsurprisingly for two neighbouring nations, many of each nationality have decided to move across the border. However, equally unsurprisingly, that’s skewed very much towards the more economically powerful nation - Germany has ten times more Poles than Poland has Germans. But there are a lot of cultural similarities. Both countries drink a lot of alcohol relative to their population size - you’re most likely to be given an Oettinger in Germany and a Tyskie in Poland, by the way. Each country loves their pork, which makes up the bulk of meat consumption in both nations. The richer nation of Germany has the vast majority of its adult population on the internet but Poland only fares badly by comparison here. Getting 65% of its adults online puts it at a roughly comparable stage to Italy (66%). Germany and Poland are two very similar nations, which is why they are such good partners. That will perhaps all be briefly forgotten for 90 minutes on Saturday as the German football team are welcomed in Poland for a European qualification match. 