Krzysztof Skubiszewski, who has died aged 83, was Poland's foreign minister during one of the most crucial periods in the country's history, immediately after it became an independent democratic republic, free from Soviet influence, in 1989. An established international law professor, and co-author of the first international law textbook used at the country's universities, he joined the government headed by Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a democratic opposition leader in communist times, in September that year. Immediately, Skubiszewski was confronted with the challenging task of conducting Poland's foreign relations in a new and volatile international environment.Relations with "companion" states were strained – the Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceausescu and East Germany's Erich Honecker both called for a Warsaw Pact intervention in "rebellious" Poland, and thousands of Soviet troops were still stationed on its soil. "In the beginning, I wasn't even sure if one day the whole government wouldn't be simply arrested and this experiment called off. But there were many far more important matters to worry about than this one particular problem," Skubiszewski told the daily newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza in his final interview, last November.Born in Poznan´, western Poland, he graduated in law from Poznan´ University, where he later taught international law. He undertook postgraduate studies at Harvard University, Massachusetts, and Nancy, in France. Despite his research achievements at home and lectures at universities in France, Britain and the US, Skubiszewski's professorial appointment at Poznan´ was obstructed for political reasons. In 1968 he publicly criticised the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia, as well as the antisemitic smear campaign launched by Poland's communist authorities. It was not until 1973 that he was finally made professor at the Polish Academy of Sciences, in Warsaw.Good relations with the Federal Republic of Germany were at the core of Skubiszewski's diplomatic efforts when he became foreign minister. While certain politicians from West Germany's ruling Christian Democratic party, the CDU, were openly questioning the existing Polish-German border, Skubiszewski was faced with a Gordian knot. He had to protect Poland's interests, seal the postwar reconciliation with Germany and, at the same time, not reopen the wounds left by history. Eventually he secured unequivocal recognition of the border, and his concern for bringing together Poles and Germans was the driving force behind one of his first decisions – to provide help for East German refugees who, in their desperation, had sought asylum in West Germany's embassy in Warsaw.The tearing down of the Berlin wall in November 1989 came as a shock to both east and west, but Skubiszewski had long been prepared for German reunification. Contrary to the then-widespread fear of a powerful Germany, he had concluded in his 1969 book on Poland's western frontier that Polish-German reconciliation could follow the French-German model of cooperation.Skubiszewski was not only the architect of Poland's pro-western foreign policy, oriented towards rapid integration with the EU and Nato. Before resigning, in 1993, when the post-communist left returned to power, he had also established the country's unique position as a bridge between western and eastern Europe. Perhaps the best measure of his achievement is the fact that almost all his successors – from across the political spectrum – have followed the path that he initiated."As a superior he was rigorous, but also fair. He did not expect his subordinates to work harder than he did, and he would work a dozen hours a day. You could always call him at midnight and ask for advice," recalled Władysław Bartoszewski, a former foreign minister and a friend of his. "Diplomacy was his life."In 1993, Skubiszewsk was named a judge and, in February 1994, the president of the Iran-US claims tribunal in The Hague, as well as an ad hoc judge in the International Court of Justice there. He said that once he had fulfilled his duties at the tribunal, he would plunge into the foreign ministry archives and write his memoirs. But those duties continued until his final days.He is survived by his brother, Piotr.• Krzysztof Jan Skubiszewski, international law academic, politician, diplomat and judge, born 8 October 1926; died 8 February 2010