Just after General Jaruzelski declared martial law, graffitti appeared at Warsaw train station which said: "General, perhaps history will absolve you, but I'm going to get you. Micky." I felt the same. I spent time in prison back then. There where two kinds of communists on our side of the iron curtain: those who shot and those who were shot at. For us, the reds, brought up at state universities, Solidarity was first of all the workers movement. In a country ruled by the Polish United Workers party, we saw for the first time in our lives workers speaking, attending rallies, arguing and voting, electing their representatives. Factory striking committees sent delegates to umbrella committees and from there on to the national striking committee. This was a workers' democracy that resembled that of the Soviets in the early days of the Bolshevik revolution. For 16 months this strange sociopolitical movement based on strikes co-governed a huge state that was part of the Soviet bloc. We called it "The Carnival".Jaruzelski put tanks on the streets, justifying his actions with the slogan: "We are going to defend socialism, just as we do the independence of the country". But it was completely wrong. OK, he had a difficult choice. If he didn't shoot at Polish workers he would supposedly have had to shoot at Russian tanks. But though our independence might have been in danger, socialism, which was under the workers' control, wasn't. At the end of the day it was the former Communist party apparatchiks who most were the most eager purveyors of barbaric capitalism in Poland. And the transition went so smoothly because Jaruzelski had done the dirty work of crushing Solidarity, the only force which could have saved socialism or even created a new, democratic form of it.Now, the great hope is over. It is not exciting to be Polish any more. The opposition and communist elites made a deal over people's heads. They traded free lunches at factory canteens for everyone for brunches at the Marriott hotel for those who betrayed their comrades (in the case of Solidarity) and their ideology (in the case of party members). Balcerowicz's neoliberal shock therapy took more lives than martial law. The rate of suicides due to unemployment, poverty and evictions has risen dramatically. Ironically, Jaruzelski is responsible for both martial law and capitalism. He paved the way for Balcerowicz, who also happened to be a former politburo lecturer. And now those who have made Poles work more hours than any other European nation, who have made 25% of Polish children go hungry (according to the latest EU report) are judging an old man who gave them a helping hand.I spoke to Jaruzelski in the early 1990s. It was a nice long chat between the former dictator and his political prisoner. He was indignant about his former party colleagues' behaviour, for example the draconian eviction law passed by the post-communist (Democratic Left Alliance) government. Most Poles have forgiven him and the vast majority perceive Jaruzelski as a national hero who saved us from a Soviet invasion.For me he is a dramatic figure. The world order created by Yalta taught Poles to pursue the lesser evil. Jaruzelski's choice was wrong but well-intentioned. Politicians, especially rightwing politicians, and especially President Kaczynski, want to rewrite history. They call it "historical policy". I hate it. They can't supply flats, healthcare, good jobs, pensions, decent wages. Instead they'll throw Jaruzelski to the mob. But nobody is buying it. Two million have already emigrated. People want a better life, not revenge.