The US and Poland today signed a deal to site a US missile defence base in Poland, further straining Russia's relations with the west following the conflict in Georgia.The US secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice, and the Polish foreign minister, Radek Sikorski, completed the formal agreement after 18 months of talks.Russia, angered by the deal, warned that Poland was making itself vulnerable to attack, including the possibility of a nuclear strike."The negotiations were very tough but friendly," said the Polish prime minister, Donald Tusk. "We have achieved our main goals, which means that our country and the United States will be more secure."The US has strongly denied Moscow's claims that the defence system is a threat to Russia. Speaking before the signing, Rice said: "This is a system that is defensive and is not aimed at anyone. "This is an agreement that will establish a missile defence site ... that will help us to deal with the new threats of the 21st-century of a long-range missile threat from countries like Iran or from North Korea."However, a day after Warsaw and Washington reached initial agreement last week, a Russian general delivered a stark warning. "Poland, by deploying [the system] is exposing itself to a strike — 100%," said General Anatoly Nogovitsyn said, adding that Russian military doctrine permitted the use of nuclear weapons in such a situation.Russia keeps weapons and troops stationed in Kaliningrad, which is between Poland and Lithuania. Surveys show a majority of Poles - who initially rejected the idea of their country hosting the site - now believe it offers a form of protection beyond Nato after Russia's invasion of Georgia. At an emergency meeting in Brussels yesterday, the Nato secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, denounced Russian threats of a strike on Poland. "It is pathetic rhetoric," he said. "It is unhelpful and it leads nowhere." The deal will see 10 US interceptor missiles sited 115 miles from Russia's western frontier.During a year and a half of negotiations, talks stalled on Poland's demands for the US to bolster Polish security with Patriot missiles in exchange for hosting the base. Washington agreed to do so last week as Poland used the Georgia conflict to strengthen its case.The Polish president, Lech Kaczynski, said nobody "who has good intentions towards us and towards the western world" should be afraid of the defence system.