The policing minister, Nick Herbert, was in Warsaw on Saturday, where I had a chat with him before he clambered aboard the main float of the Europride 2010 parade. Her Majesty's ambassador to Poland, Ric Todd, was also there, sporting a traditional panama hat, which stood out in the sea of curly rainbow wigs, pink feather boas and a pair of fake breasts.Is Nick's message, I wondered, to open British minds about Poland, or to open Polish minds about gay rights? Perhaps it is both. Or perhaps it is neither, and more about Conservative party public relations than anything else.Everyone knows Poland is a Catholic country, but few outsiders realise quite how fast this country is changing.On one hand, civil partnerships seem some way off, few Polish politicians endorsed Europride, and there was a big petition against it. Nobody forgets that, because of low voter turnout, an appalling (though small) fringe-right party, the League of Polish Families, joined a minority coalition government in 2006.On the other hand, record turnout in Poland's 2007 general election saw the League lose all parliamentary seats, and produced a landslide win for the liberal Civic Platform government. The Conservative opposition leader, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, (whose Law and Justice party is allied with the Tories), says his short-lived pact with the League was a mistake. Poland is the first ex-communist state in the EU to host Europride, which is a reasonable achievement, but not that surprising: the country has long pioneered tolerance, from the Statute of Kalisz to the Confederation of Warsaw to being the first European country to decriminalise homosexuality in 1932 (it took 35 years for Britain to catch up). Local "tolerance parades" have taken place in Poland for years, even when a former Warsaw mayor, the late Lech Kaczynski, refused to authorise one (he didn't actually stop it, as is mistakenly said).There's something holier-than-thou in the western media that isn't based on up-to-date experience of Polish culture, politics and society – it seems to be about liberals working themselves up into a frenzy of self-righteousness that is as exhilarating as rightwing hate-speak itself. Hopefully, Europride Warsaw 2010 has also weakened that prejudice.On Saturday, the view of the estimated 8,000 revellers (most of them Poles) to their audience of several thousand (also Poles, of course) was telling. First, there were about 2,000 police on the street – gay rights demonstrators could not have felt safer. The officers tended to look either indifferent or openly entertained. I spotted one angry counterdemonstration of about 35 skinheads, who had been rounded up into a tight circle by three ranks of beefy, black-clad, baton-wielding riot police. Apparently, eggs and plastic bottles had been thrown. There was a second group, of at most 20 youths, representing the Narodowe Odrodzenie Polski – who sniggered at their own adolescent, homophobic jokes like a class of confused British schoolboys.Nick put it like this: "How many protesters were there compared with the numbers of people marching? They really were a tiny minority of protesters," he said. "There's thousands of people here who are in support of this."There may have been other protest groups, but I didn't see them. They were completely outnumbered by the several thousand ordinary Polish pedestrians who had also come to see what was going on, many of whom joined the parade. There were very old Poles and very young Poles, people carrying shopping bags and newspapers, fruit-sellers from the local countryside, yuppies talking on iPhones. Almost all this diverse audience of Poles shared the same expression: they were smiling. This is surely what the organisers had hoped to achieve, and it is surely what politicians will notice.