Five years ago, I administered CPR to an old gent who had collapsed on a train with a heart attack. Later, I learned that he was an Auschwitz survivor named Antoni Kolodziejczyk; the number 138048 was tattooed on his left forearm. When he recovered, he spoke to me of wartime memories that he had rarely shared before, even with his own family. That experience meant a lot to me, and so did the words of the chief rabbi of Poland last week.Who could Rabbi Michael Schudrich, a smart and feisty New Yorker, have been talking about when he protested against the "grotesque distortion" of his words for political gain in the UK? Why did he feel the need to intervene and say it is wrong to play on a false stereotype of Poles as antisemites? Did he have in mind certain Labour politicians, and journalists at the New Statesman and the Guardian?Of course, he did. The chief rabbi identified an element of the British left that has propagated a smear campaign accusing a Tory ally, Polish MEP Michal Kaminski, of antisemitism. By association, it has been implied that Kaminski's Law and Justice party and its voters are extremist, far-right or even neo-Nazi. None of these labels fit: that party can only be described as staunchly conservative, or nationalist conservative at worst.I have never voted for the Tories and Michal Kaminski is not a friend of mine. His party is far too suspicious of market economics and is also far too Eurosceptic, for my liking. I disagree with its views on lifestyle and social policy. So I have no reason to exonerate Kaminski whatsoever. But I do know this charge of antisemitism against Kaminski came after preparation in the UK for a negative PR operation against Law and Justice. On my desk is a copy of the 15-page plan of attack against the Tories' Polish allies that circulated Whitehall this summer. I've been asked not to publish it, and source anonymity should be protected. But I am convinced its content is as vacuous as the "dodgy dossier", the cooked-up intelligence that took us into Iraq.Some on the British left have made one-sided assertions about the history of eastern Europe, and have cast Polish or Tory attempts to reveal the whole truth with all its nuances as hair-splitting about the Holocaust. And journalists have amplified rather than scrutinised the demagoguery of David Miliband.All this manipulation, I have been told, is justifiable because it is a way of attacking the Tories. I beg to differ. There is no excuse for demonising an entire ethnic group, in this case the Poles, because it might save a few Labour MPs their jobs at the next election.Some commentators have said this has been a Labour ploy to win over the British Jewish vote, by stirring up fear of Polish antisemitism. But people who really care about gentile-Jewish relations know there is a tremendous Jewish revival underway in Poland, and the country is clearly identifying and denouncing crimes against Jews.Poland is also investigating alleged Jewish collaboration with the Soviets, a notion many British people seem to assume must be an antisemitic conspiracy theory on a par with the blood libel. Certainly, the stereotype of Jewish Bolshevism has been used in an attempt to justify race hate. But if dealt with fairly and accurately, this subject needn't be any more taboo than the culpability of Polish gentiles in the Soviet-backed regime and at the pogroms of Jedwabne, Kielce and others.When Stalin and Hitler divided Poland in 1939, the Soviets took more territory than the Nazis did. At first, Polish Jews in the Soviet partition were naturally relieved and grateful that they would not be under Nazi oppression. By contrast, many Polish gentiles immediately viewed the Soviets as invading enemies. This is when the seam between Polish Jews and Polish gentiles was sundered. The Soviets conducted a policy of social engineering, sometimes offering poor Jews among others the positions that established Polish gentiles had once had before they were deported to the Gulags. Some Polish Jews betrayed their country and served the Soviets, as some Polish gentiles also did. There were unforgivable gentile reprisals against Jews punished because of guilt by association. When discussing this volatile subject, it is wrong to stereotype Polish Jews as pro-Soviet, but it is equally wrong to say questions about Polish-Jewish collaboration with the Soviets are necessarily antisemitic.While antisemitism exists in Poland, as it does in the UK, more and more Jews are discovering their Polish roots, while many Polish gentiles are discovering their Jewish roots too. Moreover, ever more research is showing us that Poland's pre-war gentile and Jewish communities were far more united than popular myth has led people to believe.Some 120,000 Polish Jews served in the Polish army at the start of the second world war, and defended their country against the joint Soviet-Nazi invasion of 1939. At the Katyn forest massacre of the Polish elite, the Soviets executed at least 600 Jews who were Polish army officers. Among them, the chief rabbi of the Polish army, Major Baruch Steinberg, was shot in the back of the head by a Soviet bullet. His body was slung in a mass grave next to the bodies of his Polish gentile countrymen. The motivations were different, but it is quite possible that as many Polish Jews were murdered at the massacre at Katyn as were murdered at the massacre at Jedwabne.Ignoring these facts prompts the slightly confusing thesis that the Jedwabne pogrom can be compared to what the Nazis did in the Holocaust. But Stalin's crimes cannot be compared to Hitler's. In case anyone has forgotten, Nazi Germany killed up to 3 million Polish citizens who were gentiles, 3 million Polish citizens who were Jews, and 3 million Jews from outside Poland. Some Polish gentiles saved Jewish lives; some Polish gentiles betrayed Jews. A far greater proportion of the Polish Jewish community was wiped out than the Polish gentile community.During the war, the Polish government in exile, which included Jews in its cabinet, passed a Polish intelligence report to their British allies. In it, the Poles informed the British about the Nazi German gas chambers, and requested an RAF air strike on the train lines. Churchill ignored the Polish request to save tens of thousands of Jews from death at Auschwitz. One wonders whether David Miliband will ever see fit to apologise for that on behalf of Britain, and whether it would be antisemitic of him to oppose the apology.One of the main charges against Kaminski, of course, is that he opposed Poland's 2001 apology for the 1941 Jedwabne pogrom, in which a mob of around 40 Polish gentiles, in the presence of German police, murdered at least 300 Polish Jews. Kaminski said that asking for an apology would be as wrong as asking Polish Jews to apologise for their collaboration with the Soviets and their crimes against Polish gentiles.In my view, Kaminski was wrong to oppose that apology, which was intended as an act of reconciliation rather than a suggestion that the entire Polish nation had participated in the Holocaust. The point is, many Poles view Jedwabne a criminal act against fellow Polish citizens carried out by a small but vicious rabble who betrayed the core Polish value of anti-Nazism. Those 40 pogromists have always been viewed as traitors in Poland.Kaminski was wrong to oppose the apology, and his analogy was offensive. But according to the chief rabbi, Kaminski has put his teenage extremism behind him and he is not an antisemite.Polish people, including the million-strong Polish community in Britain, are deeply proud that Poland never produced a collaborationist regime, nor home-grown SS units, as happened elsewhere in Nazi-occupied Europe. Poland also resisted the savagery of the Soviet Union long before the Western allies did. So, for many Poles, there has never been a choice between fascism and communism – their country is characterised by its defiance against totalitarianism in all its forms.Today, even as Poles challenge the stereotype of Polish antisemitism, many have the courage to depict incidents of Polish wrongdoing against Jews with total clarity; and they show how strongly they object to cowardly anti-Polish slurs. Slowly but surely, Poles are defining themselves not by the suffering of the forefathers, but by their courage.Both Miliband and Kaminski are political opportunists, and their simplistic comments get in the way of genuine understanding. We should be very cautious of them both.