Mitt Romney has accused Vladimir Putin of reversing democratic gains and liberties in Russia, holding Poland up as a shining example of the economic, political and democratic benefits of freedom, in a speech at Warsaw University on the values of liberty.Romney rounded off his first campaign venture into foreign policy – a six-day tour of Britain, Israel and Poland – with a performance free of the gaffes and controversies that dogged earlier legs of his trip.His entourage, however, became embroiled in mudslinging in Warsaw with accompanying US journalists who complained that in six days they had been able to ask the likely presidential contender only three questions – and none about the rows Romney triggered in Israel.As Romney walked in Warsaw after paying tribute at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, he was peppered with shouted questions: "Governor Romney, are you concerned about some of the mishaps of your trip?" "Do you have a statement for the Palestinians?" "What about your gaffes?" "Governor Romney, just a few questions sir, you haven't taken but three questions on this trip from the press."Rick Gorka, Romney's spokesman, turned on the travelling reporters and said: "Kiss my ass. This is a holy site for the Polish people. Show some respect." He then told another journalist to "shove it", before apologising a little later.On the British leg of his tour, Romney was accused of insulting his hosts over their Olympic preparations. His later declaration that the superiority of Jewish culture explained Israelis' greater prosperity relative to the Palestinians prompted charges of racism from leading Palestinians.Romney told Fox News on Tuesday that he was not talking specifically about Palestinian culture. He blamed the media for his perceived gaffes, saying reporters were more interested in "finding something to write" than in reporting on the economy and national security threats.The Republican presidential candidate, who has previously characterised Russia as America's principal "geopolitical foe", bracketed President Putin in his speech with Bashar al-Assad of Syria, Hugo Chávez of Venezuela and Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus, emphasising clear differences with his campaign opponent, Barack Obama, who famously announced a "reset" in relations with Russia early in his term."Unfortunately, there are parts of the world today where the desire to be free is met with brutal oppression," said Romney."Just to the east of here, the people of Belarus suffer under the oppressive weight of dictatorship. The Arab world is undergoing a historic upheaval, one that holds promise, but also risk and uncertainty. A ruthless dictator in Syria has killed thousands of his own people."In Latin America, Hugo Chávez leads a movement characterised by authoritarianism and repression. Nations in Africa are fighting to resist the threat of violent radical jihadism. And in Russia, once-promising advances toward a free and open society have faltered."Traditionally staunchly pro-American, the Poles' Atlanticist enthusiasm has faded because of Washington's reluctance to waive visa requirements, a perceived failure to appreciate Polish efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan, a dilution of plans to station US missile defence facilities in Poland and the Czech Republic, and Obama's gaffe three months ago when he talked of "Polish death camps" in reference to Nazi Germany's camps in occupied Poland.Romney, with an eye on both the Roman Catholic and central European diaspora votes in November's US presidential election, praised Poland, while emphasising that its democratic gains went hand in hand with a shrinking of the state. "There has never been a moment when our peoples felt anything but mutual respect and goodwill, and that is not common in history," he told the Poles. "The highest value Poland honours, to the world's great fortune, is man's innate desire to be free."The world should pay close attention to the transformation of Poland's economy. A march toward economic liberty and smaller government has meant a march toward higher living standards, a strong military that defends liberty at home and abroad, and an important and growing role on the international stage."Romney was invited to Poland by ex-president and Solidarity trade union leader Lech Walesa. The current Solidarity leadership issued a statement saying it wanted nothing to do with Romney, making plain its support for Obama in the presidential contest.