My friend and colleague Dariusz Butowski, who has died of cancer aged 48, was a caring GP at Sherwood House surgery in Edgbaston, Birmingham.Dariusz was born in Gdynia, Poland, and was brought up in the seaside town of Sopot. He spoke fondly of his early years, particularly of time at summer scout camps. The family lived close to the Gdansk shipyards in the early years of Solidarity, and after being good citizens for many years suddenly fell foul of the authorities. In 1979 they fled to Germany, were granted political asylum and remained in an internment camp for nine months. Dariusz, who at this point spoke only rudimentary German, learned the language and finished his baccalaureate in German.After a year reading economics, he was delighted to change to medicine at the university in Hamburg and submitted a doctorate on the biomechanics of the knee. He had to work to fund his studies and took on a variety of jobs including being a nurse and a film extra. Compulsory unpaid internships were difficult for an immigrant without independent means, so he moved to the UK, first to the military hospital in Aldershot and then to work in A&E in Glasgow, where he learned most of his English. After the usual hospital rotation, he moved to Birmingham for his general practice training and then worked for 10 years at Sherwood House.In 2008 he developed gastro-oesophageal cancer and underwent arduous and intensive treatment. The avalanche of cards and messages from staff, patients and friends kept him going through some dreadful low points, and that November he achieved his ambition to return to work. He continued to work and teach fourth-year medical students until a recurrence of cancer in March 2010. Despite further intensive treatment, he never recovered his former fitness. Forced to retire, he had intended to return to Hamburg to be near family but his disease returned swiftly and viciously and he spent the remainder of his time in Birmingham.He is survived by his father, Marian, and mother, Urszula.