The forests around Smolensk evoked dread in the Polish soul long before the tragic airplane accident that claimed the life of President Lech Kaczynski, his wife Maria and 94 others at the weekend."Katyn" is shorthand for the events of 70 years ago, when an estimated 22,000 prisoners held in Soviet internment camps were murdered on Stalin's orders. Many of the prisoners, who were shot in the base of the skull by the NKVD, found their final resting place in the mass graves of Katyn Forest just outside Smolensk. Among the victims were professional army officers and reservists drawn from Poland's police forces and university-educated elites. One of them was Aleksander Wielebnowski, my great-grandfather.While it is impossible to overstate the significance of what is known as the Katyn massacre in Poland's collective memory, until 1989 this collective memory was officially suppressed and only maintained by thousands of families.Unlike national narratives that often form when the essence of shared experiences is captured by a writer, poet or statesman, the Katyn memory was formed through the fragmented suffering of the families of the victims, so unlike the public outpouring which has characterised the aftermath of the recent accident.My grandfather's story is not special – it is typical of the experiences of many in his generation. I wish to share it here not to evoke sympathy for him or for Poland, but to better explain why Kaczynski and a plane full of dignitaries and victim's families tried to touch down in the fog of Smolensk, and why recent Russian gestures, both before and after the plane accident, mean so much to the people of Poland and offer so much hope for reconciliation.My grandfather, Jerzy, grew up in Lutsk in what is today a large Ukrainian city. In September 1939, Jerzy was nine years old, and one day his father, a reserve officer, did not return home after he was arrested in his office at the local police headquarters."We first received a card letting us know that he was in an internment camp in January 1940," he recalls. "He said that he was in Ostashkov, and that he was feeling well despite the cold winter. He tried to raise our spirits and he believed that he would come back."On 12 April 1940, Jerzy, his mother and his three siblings were woken up at 3am by an NKVD officer and two soldiers who stood at their door."The NKVD man told us that we would go to see our family," he recalls. "This is what the Soviets would say back then. This was one of their ways of dealing with people."Instead, the family was sent east to a labour camp in Pavlodar, in modern Kazakhstan. Wielebnowski does not believe that they would have survived, but after the Soviet Union joined the war on the side of the allies, a friendly commissar's wife petitioned the NKVD for their release and they were evacuated, first to Tehran, and then to Lusaka where Jerzy spent the remainder of the war in an orphanage for Polish children.They returned in 1947, finding a Polish state dominated by the Soviet Union."My mother was 47 years old and still hoped to find my father, so we came back. But, just as we crossed the border she noticed that the secret police, questioning all the returnees, took away one of the men that we were travelling with. When she saw this, she said 'Kids, what have we done! We should not have returned'."Jerzy enrolled in school and, thanks to a high school principal who advised him on how to hide his background and a friend's father who worked in a city office and who falsely vouched for his working-class upbringing, he was able to attend university."At the time, the officials were trying to destroy young people with my background, but I managed to get by. In 1954 I finished my studies in architecture at the university in Gdansk. Could you imagine that? A policeman's son? If anyone found out what my family background was, I would have been thrown out, and probably ended up breaking boulders or mining uranium with a penal workcrew."The word "Katyn" remained painful when it was whispered in the post-war darkness when the truth was sacrificed on the altar of "eternal friendship" between the Polish and Soviet communist states. This is the reason why it was aggressively shouted after 1989 when the archive doors slowly began to open, reluctantly revealing what had happened to the victims."I only found out in 1990 what happened to my father. We always suspected what his fate was, but until we saw something final, like a list, we could never be certain. In 1990, Lech Walesa received the lists from Boris Yeltsin and those lists were given to families like ours looking for relatives. My father's name appears on 16 April 1940. He is listed 10th on a list of about 250 prisoners taken from Ostashkov to Tver, where he was executed in an NKVD building. That's when I finally knew what had happened to him."In 1992, Jerzy visited Ostashkov, Tver and Mednoje, where his father lies in a mass grave.In Ostashkov, he walked through the remains in the NKVD camp in an old island monastery, but found no signs of the prisoners. In Tver, he saw the room where the prisoners were executed, and in Mednoje he got angry."They built a summer recreational home for the NKVD on the site, and the latrines leaked into the mass grave. For me, as a son of someone who is laying there, I protest with every ounce of my being. This is unacceptable, and every time I speak about this, I choke up a little."In the aftermath of the crash, Poles are avoiding the "second Katyn" moniker that was used by Timothy Garton Ash, calling this the "tragedy in Smolensk" instead. This is apt, since this time the victims do not have to wait decades for information, and people both in Poland and abroad have publicly poured their hearts out while the Russian authorities are assisting the families at every turn."It is welcome and it is genuine," Jerzy said. "And I hope that things will change. In the Soviet system, everything was possible and nothing was sacred. Today, memory is sacred again."