Poland is a fast-developing country benefiting from post-communist economic liberalisation, with a growing appetite for western products. Political freedom led to the country becoming the 22nd largest globally by GDP. Before political liberalisation in 1989, Polish consumers had limited choice when it came to buying products. Nearly everything was developed by public sector organisations driven by politics. These organisations had 30-year business plans which were based on political ideals rather than market research or customer demand. Consumers ended up with homogenous products that didn't really meet their tastes.Western products were inaccessible unless Poles travelled abroad, and even then were unaffordable for most people. This is one of the reasons why Polish consumers now have such high demand for western brands. Not only do Polish consumers want the brands, they have the finance to back up the demand.Research from KPMG shows wealthy Poles spend 18% of their income on luxury goods, and aspirational Poles spend 13% on luxury goods. The total spend in Poland in 2012 on luxury goods was 36.8bn zloty (around £7.2bn), up by over 10% since 2011. This figure is expected to keep rising, hitting 46.4bn zloty by 2015. The Poles' budget for spending is going up.As a second generation Pole, every time I visit Poland I'm struck by how quickly the country is developing both economically and culturally. Visiting 15 years ago, it was still difficult to find western products; now, it's quite the reverse, with shelves stacked full of familiar western brands like Wilkinson Sword and Head and Shoulders.British brands in PolandMany British brands have already made major inroads in Poland. The country is the largest Central European market for Tesco, which has more than 400 stores and £2bn turnover in Poland.It's not just big businesses that can take advantage of exporting to Poland. Statistics show that Poland is a major importer of goods, including manufactured products, chemicals and machinery. That means the country is importing more value of goods than countries like Saudi Arabia, Sweden and Portugal.What to consider for Polish export successSo if you're thinking of targeting Poland, what do you need to consider? Well, first you need to consider the trends in Poland. What type of products are in high demand? What is there untapped demand for? These factors will determine who is successful and who is less so.There's good news for e-commerce retailers. Research suggests that Poland is ranked among the top 20 most attractive markets globally for retail brands. The fast developing tastes and stable economy mean that if retail is your business, Poland is a great country to target. With internet penetration of 65% in Poland, there are more than 24 million internet users in Poland. That potential can be accessed by simply translating and localising your website for the Polish market.Another good sector to target is the Polish pharmaceutical market, which is the seventh largest in Europe. The modernisation of healthcare in Poland means that the pharmaceutical industry is likely to keep growing, making it a key focus for UKTI and UK exporters.According to ING, by 2017, Poland's biggest imports will be chemicals, fuels, office telecom and electrical equipment. These products together account for 36% of total imports of Poland, and illustrate the variety of products that Poland imports. The breadth of products needed is so diverse, the potential for exporting there is huge.Arek Estall is marketing manager at the language services provider Wolfestone.Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.