Voting is under way in Poland's presidential elections, more than two months after the country's last president, Lech Kaczynski, was killed in a plane crash.The late president's identical twin brother, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, faces an uphill battle to defeat the favourite, acting president Bronislaw Komorowski, despite a recent surge in sympathy for him.The outcome is expected to shape Poland's stance on issues such as the adoption of the euro, welfare reform and its mission in Afghanistan.Poland is the only European Union country to have avoided recession during the global economic downturn. The election will also determine how it reacts to the new debt crisis.Komorowski is a pro-EU, moderate member of the governing Civic Platform party who has pledged to work closely with the prime minister, Donald Tusk, to adopt the euro in about five years, end the unpopular military mission in Afghanistan and promote pro-market reforms.Kaczynski is a social conservative who has pledged to fight crime and corruption, scale back market reforms in order to preserve a strong welfare state and promote Roman Catholic values in public life. More sceptical about the EU and the euro, Kaczynski says it is too early to set a timetable for giving up the Polish currency, the zloty.Kaczynski, a former prime minister, is known for his nationalism and his combative tone. But he has struck a more moderate tone since his brother's death. Many Poles are unsure whether the change is permanent or a strategy to win over middle-of-the-road voters.Opinions were split in Warsaw early today. Komorowski's supporters stressed his calm and ties to the governmentk, while backers of Kaczynski called him trustworthy and said he truly cares for Poland's interests.Jan Rostafinski said he voted for Komorowski, whom he knows personally. "He is the best among the candidates: he has rich experience, moderate views and a sense of humour, which the predecessor was lacking, or at least so it seemed. Komorowski will represent Poland well," Rostafinski said.But Ewa Stawinska said she would vote for Kaczynski because she thought it was better for the president and the prime minister to be from different parties. She liked the fact that he stands for Catholic values in public life and believed he would push for a thorough investigation of the plane crash that Poles call the "Smolensk tragedy".Lech Kaczynski and his wife were among 96 people killed when their plane crashed while trying to land in heavy fog in Smolensk, Russia, on 10 April. The delegation included many high-ranking civilian and military leaders, and the loss provoked deep grief across the nation. Many officials have called it Poland's worst tragedy since the second world war.More than 30 million of Poland's 38 million citizens are registered to vote in nearly 26,000 polling stations across.One opinion poll published on Friday by the Rzeczpospolita daily newspaper showed Komorowski had the support of 42% of those surveyed, to Kaczynski's 31%.