For developing countries, the very idea of Poland hosting the UN climate talks is bizarre.While the poor are being pushed hard by rich countries to reduce fossil fuel consumption, a relatively wealthy central European nation – one that has barely cut its emissions in the past 10 years, generates 90% of its electricity from coal, and has single-handedly vetoed the EU, setting more ambitious targets to combat climate change – is invited to host talks aimed at cutting fuels."It's not a good example to countries like us, is it?" says the lead negotiator of one rapidly emerging African country. "We are being asked to take Europe and the rich countries seriously, but we see a lot of hypocrisy."On Monday, as protests marked the start of a government-backed World Coal summit just half a mile from the Warsaw stadium that is the venue for the climate talks, the irony of Poland hosting the negotiations was not lost on the country's fledgling renewable sector."These are very hard times," says Grzegorz Wisniewski, president of the Polish Institute of Renewable Energy. "Government has for several years tried to slow down the development of renewables. It protects coal. For two years now they have been doing everything possible not to implement an EU directive which would give renewables a chance to develop.""We are in a sad way," says Bartlomiej Susik, a spokesman for Projekt Solartechnik, which has built but not commissioned an 800KW solar farm on 2 hectares (4.94 acres) of farmland in central Poland. "We are going through bad times. All investment in renewables stopped two years ago, except for the big state utilities. Renewable energy is seen as competition for them, and the government does not want independent power producers."Without government help, solar power in Poland is twice as expensive as subsidised coal. "In Germany, where they have cut subsidies, we could pay back our loans in seven years. It will take longer here," adds Susik."Coal is votes," says former Warsaw MP and environment committee member Krzysztof Tyszkiewicz. "Coal is dominant in the economy. Many politicians have close ties to the coal industry. Politicians don't think about the environment because people don't."The scale of the political problem is enormous, he says. Civic Platform, the largest party in government, and Law and Justice, the largest opposition party, both officially support the carbon lobby; the two parties have many MPs from mining regions. The main opposition parties are also broadly opposed to wind energy and in favour of fracking.WWF Poland calculates that, since 1990, the state-owned coal industry has been subsidised by more than $25bn, while the private renewable industry has next to nothing. "Barriers are placed in front of anyone wanting to develop renewables," says Tobiasz Adamczewski, WWF Poland's climate and energy spokesman.Thermal power, generated with homegrown coal lignite and coal imported from the US, Ukraine and Russia, produces 31,425 megawatts (MW) of electricity, while the collective total for renewables is just 5,177MW. In fact, nearly 50% of the power classed as renewable comes from co-firing – burning coal and wood together – which many say is not strictly renewable.Green energy companies look enviously over the border to Germany, where billions have been spent on developing small-scale renewable solar and wind power. While Germany plans 80-100% renewable electricity by 2050, critics say Poland is likely to find it almost impossible to reach its modest 15% target."We see a clear practice of favoured support for the state-owned energy companies. This [aid] is clearly prohibited under EU law," says Jacek Bladesk, a director of Geo-Renewables, which in 2011 built a 22MW windfarm near Rawa Mazowiecka in central Poland."We have no renewable success story in Poland. We burn forests and coal. It's a sad story," says Bladesk.Poland unashamedly says it plans to develop coal power over renewable energy sources, and is ready for a showdown with Brussels, which has taken it to the European courts to force it to set more ambitious targets. Warsaw has delayed translating a renewable directive into Polish law on three occasions.The government wants to spend more than $2.7bn on building a giant coal-fired station at Opole, which is technically illegal because the site has not been assessed for its readiness to capture CO2 emissions.If Opole is built, say campaigners, it will emit more than 1.5bn tons of carbon dioxide over the next 55 years and could single-handedly prevent Poland from meeting its renewable targets.But coal is not sustainable for much longer in Poland, says Adamczewski. As the price of renewables falls, it will need ever-larger subsidies from state-owned power companies to sustain its dominance. In addition, the EU no longer allows state aid for coalmines, and tighter European commission emissions controls will require Poland to shut down 5 gigawatts of old polluting coal-fired plants within a few years.The noose is tightening, says Adamczewski. Poland is trying to expand its coal sector, but it cannot remain the dirty man of Europe much longer.