Mieczyslaw Rakowski, who has died aged 81, was one of the key figures on the Polish political scene during the communist era. As editor of the Polish weekly Polytika, from 1958 to 1981 - and a member of the Polish Communist party's central committee from 1964 until its dissolution in 1990 - Rakowski established himself as a reformist communist who successfully challenged censorship to produce the most outspoken publication to appear regularly behind the iron curtain.But, as deputy prime minister under General Jaruzelski during the tumultuous weeks leading to the declaration of martial law (December 13 1981 to July 22 1983) - in Polish stan wojenny, "the state of war" - during which the military government usurped for itself powers reserved for wartime and thousands of people were arrested without charge and as many as 100 were killed, Rakowski's reputation suffered a reversal from which it never fully recovered. Opponents of the Jaruzelski regime, including much of Poland's intelligentsia, who had counted Rakowski as one of their own during his editorship of Polityka, could not forgive him for his role during the martial law period or readmit him to their circles.Rakowski, however, put himself in the forefront of those who believed that the general had acted as a true Polish patriot. It embittered him that his efforts as government negotiator to achieve a compromise with Lech Walesa, the co-founder of Solidarity, the Soviet bloc's first independent trade union, after the Gdansk strikes of 1980 ended in failure, and only led to more strikes and deeper divisions. Although mutual dislike and distrust were self-evident, he always dismissed the allegation that personal friction had any bearing on the decision to declare martial law.In later years he consistently asserted that Soviet pressure and the threat of a Warsaw Pact invasion were so intense that Jaruzelski had no other option but to detain Walesa, together with hundreds of other Solidarity activists and their allies among the intelligentsia, and to impose the "state of war". During a brief but decisive period as prime minister in 1988-1989, Rakowski presided over the round table negotiations where agreement was reached on the legalisation of Solidarity, and which led to the dissolution of the Polish Communist party in 1990 and Poland's return to a pluralist democracy.After his retirement from political life, Rakowski became editor of a monthly political journal, Dzis (Today), which owed its existence to Jerzy Urban, Jaruzelski's former spokesman, who had transformed himself into a media tycoon eager to apply some of his new-won profits to a respected academic publication. Rakowski, with the twin aims of restoring his reputation and of throwing more light on the true character of the communist era in Poland, also edited and published, in successive volumes, the daily diaries that he had kept for more than 40 years. He was also the author of several other books.A fluent German speaker, Rakowski maintained close links with Germany's Social Democrats and forged strong friendships with many leading figures - which survived the martial law period - including both Willy Brandt and Marion Dönhoff, the publisher of Die Zeit. His English was also good, and during a visit to London soon after Poland's martial law had been ended, Rakowski astonished the Guardian's editorial staff with an off-the-record briefing that was remarkable for its openness and frankness about the Polish regime's actions and its links with Moscow. He made plain that he recognised the need for a multiparty democracy in Poland.His relations with the Soviet Union were always fraught: as a journalist not afraid to step out of line, he was viewed by the Kremlin as a revisionist. Later, when Rakowski had become a senior party figure in Poland, Moscow considered him a negative influence on Jaruzelski.Western journalists visiting Poland during the 1970s were frequently taken to meet the editor of Polityka. The Polish authorities did this by way of trying to demonstrate that freedom of expression, including the occasional barb at the Soviet Union, was possible even in the one-party communist state.Western diplomats also regularly sought him out. There were, of course, limits then to what Rakowski was prepared to say by way of analysing Poland's restive social scene and creaking economy. But he certainly went far beyond the communist jargon that had to be endured from the regime's other spokesmen, and those who came to know him better sometimes found themselves invited to small private gatherings where the conversation was much franker.On a memorable day in 1979 at the close of the newly elected Pope John Paul II's first triumphal tour of his native country, Rakowski, together with other journalists, was in the courtyard of the Archbishop of Cracow's residence. Millions of Poles had turned out in venue after venue to greet the Pope and confirm their religious beliefs and allegiance to the Church. They had not followed the atheist communist script. Now the Pope emerged on the balcony above us to pronounce a blessing for the media that had covered his journey.Rakowski sought no blessing. But he realised that "Poland will never be the same again". The Pope had mobilised the masses. The genie was out of the communist bottle. But this only reinforced Rakowski's fear of Soviet intervention in Poland: he never wavered in his feeling that the Soviet Union would invade the country rather than allow it to choose its own course.Rakowski was no ideologue and he accepted long before most of his party colleagues that the Communist party could not retain its grip on the Polish nation without major concessions to pluralism. But until Mikhail Gorbachev arrived on the scene, Rakowski also believed that Poland had little room for manoeuvre, and that the Soviet Union had demonstrated on more than one occasion that it was prepared to intervene militarily if the Polish leadership itself failed to halt anti-regime demonstrations and to stifle organised opposition. Because of its geography - as a lifeline to the German Democratic Republic - the Kremlin would consider Poland an even more important asset to the communist bloc than Czechoslovakia.Rakowski came from a poor peasant background. He was born in Kowalewko, in the Bydgoszcz district, and his father was executed by the Nazis. During the Nazi occupation Rakowski worked in Poznan, in west central Poland, at a factory where trains were repaired. In 1946 he joined the Polish Workers' Party, a forerunner of the Communist Party (PZPR), and studied at the party's social studies institute. He earned a doctorate in history and, in 1949, became an instructor in the press and publishing department of the Communist party's central committee.This was his launch pad to become a co-founder of Polityka. In 1957 he became deputy editor, and from 1958 until 1982 he was editor-in-chief. He became a member of the Sejm (parliament) in 1972, and from 1964 he was also a member of the Polish Communist party's central committee. In 1981, as vice-premier for labour relations, culture and science, he took a leading role in the Gdansk negotiations at the Lenin shipyard with Walesa and his comrades.He was prime minister from September 1988 to July 1989 when, after the first multiparty elections, he had to give way to Professor Tadeusz Mazowiecki. At the same time Jaruzelski resigned as Communist party leader. Rakowski succeeded him and remained just long enough to preside in 1990 over the party's last congress, and to initiate its transformation into a leftwing social democratic party.From his first marriage Rakowski had two sons, one of whom broke with his father to leave communist Poland and become a banker. They were later reconciled. His second wife, Elzbieta Kepinska, is an actor who was boycotted for a long time by the theatrical establishment in protest against her husband's association with martial law. After 1989 she was able to resume her career.• Mieczyslaw Franciszek Rakowski, journalist and politician, born December 1 1926; died November 7 2008• This article was amended on November 12 2008. The Polish parliament is the Sejm, not the Semj. This has been corrected.· This article was amended again on Wednesday November 26 2008. We originally said both Mieczyslaw Rakowski's parents were executed by the Nazis. That was true only of his father. This has been corrected.