The following correction was printed in the Observer's For the record column, Sunday 18 April 2010Our coverage of the Polish air disaster said 15,000 Polish officers died in the 1940 massacres at Katyn and other locations. The more generally accepted figure is 22,000. Piotr Paszkowski is foreign ministry spokesman for Poland, not Russia, and the sacking of shipyard worker Anna Walentynowicz, which led to the formation of Solidarity, was in 1980, not 1990. Poland was confronting the worst political disaster in its postwar history after President Lech Kaczynski, his wife, and dozens of top officials were killed when their plane crashed in thick fog on Saturday in western Russia.At least 96 people died, including eight crew members, when the president's Tupolev plane clipped a copse of trees on its approach to Smolensk airport. It then broke up. There were no survivors. Russian TV showed pictures of the upended wing and smouldering fuselage. Small fires burned in woods shrouded in fog.The crash wiped out almost half of Poland's leadership. Those killed included Kaczynski, his wife, Maria, the army chief of staff, the head of the national bank, Poland's deputy foreign minister, 12 members of parliament, and at least two presidential aides, the Polish foreign ministry said. Rescuers found several unidentified bodies and the plane's black box.Across Poland bells were rung at a slow and mournful pace. People sought solace in churches and drifted through city squares, apparently in a daze, and laid candles at national monuments and government buildings. Mourners queued in their hundreds to sign books of condolences, young people in leather jackets and torn jeans, and elderly women in headscarves and clutching pictures of the Black Virgin of Czestochowa."I can't fathom this, it reminds me of when the pope died – five years ago this month," said Zofia, recalling the death of Pope John Paul II on 5 April 2005. Kaczynski had been flying to Smolensk to attend the 70th anniversary of the Katyn massacre, when Soviet secret police executed 15,000 Polish officers in one of the most notorious incidents of the second world war. In a tragic twist, family members of the Katyn victims were on board the president's plane. Others were waiting at the airport.Although there was no suspicion of foul play, the extraordinary timing and location of the disaster, together with Kaczynski's known antipathy towards the Kremlin, are likely to fuel conspiracy theories on both sides. Newspapers bearing headlines such as "Katyn – a double tragedy" lay next to portraits of some of the crash victims."We still cannot fully understand the scope of this tragedy and what it means for us in the future. Nothing like this has ever happened in Poland," a foreign ministry spokesman, Piotr Paszkowski said. "We can assume with great certainty that all persons on board have been killed."Russian officials said that the airport, 430km (270 miles) west of Moscow, had been closed because of thick fog. They advised the pilot to land instead in Moscow or Minsk. But he continued with the original flight plan – making three abortive attempts to land at Smolensk's Severny military airport. On the fourth attempt, the Russian-built airliner crashed. According to witnesses, Kaczynski's plane was between 500 and 700 metres from the runway, and about 20 metres off the ground when it ploughed into the trees."The Polish presidential plane did not make it to the runway while landing. Tentative findings indicate that it hit the treetops and fell apart," Smolensk's governor, Sergei Anufriev, said.In Warsaw, Poland's prime minister, Donald Tusk, held an extraordinary meeting of his cabinet, as disbelieving Poles struggled to comprehend the news that the country's 60-year-old president – and numerous civilian and military leaders – had perished. Looking shattered, Tusk emerged to declare a day of national mourning. He said a two-minute silence for victims of the tragedy would be held at midday today. "The contemporary world has not seen such a tragedy," he said.World leaders yesterday paid tribute to Kaczynski, who was elected in 2005 after defeating Tusk in a presidential vote. He and his twin brother, Jaroslaw, a former prime minister now in opposition, emerged from Poland's anti-communist Solidarity movement. They have dominated Polish politics for the past decade, espousing a national conservative – and often anti-Russian – ideology. Kaczynski leaves a daughter, Marta, and two granddaughters.Gordon Brown said: "The whole world will be saddened and in sorrow as a result of this tragic death in a plane crash of President Kaczynski and his wife Maria and the party that were with him. I think we know the difficulties that Poland has gone through and the sacrifices that he himself made as part of the Solidarity movement, and we know the contribution he made to the independence and the freedom of Poland."The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said she was "deeply dismayed by the plane crash and the death of the Polish president", while France's president, Nicolas Sarkozy, hailed him as a "tireless defender" of liberty and "the fight against totalitarianism". Russia's president, Dmitry Medvedev, also sent his condolences.The subject of Katyn has for decades been a source of unresolved friction between Moscow and Warsaw – with successive Soviet governments falsely blaming the Nazis for the massacre. Recently, however, tensions had been easing, with Tusk and Vladimir Putin, Russia's prime minister, attending a joint ceremony at Katyn last Wednesday. Putin and Tusk were due to travel to Smolensk to inspect the crash site.Kaczynski had said he would seek a second term in presidential elections this autumn. He was expected to face an uphill struggle against the speaker, Bronislaw Komorowski, the candidate of Tusk's governing Civic Platform party. Komorowski yesterday took over Kaczynski's job as head of state, a largely symbolic role. The election will be brought forward, with Poles set to go to the polls to choose a new president by the end of June.Polish officials have long discussed replacing the planes that carry the country's leaders but said they lacked the funds. The presidential Tu-154 that crashed was 26 years old. It was overhauled in December in Russia, with Russian experts yesterday insisting that it was airworthy and blaming pilot error and bad weather.Among the victims was Anna Walentynowicz, whose dismissal in August 1980 from the Lenin shipyards in the Polish port of Gdansk ignited the strike that led to the creation of the Solidarity movement and, ultimately, the collapse of communist rule. She became a prominent Solidarity member.