If Russia does persuade Syria to surrender its chemical arsenal, it could put off the threat of direct US military action for months at least, but it will also enmesh Damascus in new international obligations that could strengthen the case for outside intervention if it ever breaks the rules.The process offers Damascus an obvious avenue to buy time. It would be very hard politically, both at home and abroad, for the Obama administration to take military action while the process was under way. But at the same time, Syria's legal obligations would deepen with every passing day."It's a way of avoiding an escalation of the conflict by external powers, so it could be a good start. It would strengthen the Chemical Weapons Convention [CWC]," said Michael Elleman, senior fellow at the International Institute for Strategic Studies. "My concern is that the Russians don't have that leverage on Assad. The other questions are how long is it going to take, will it involve just the weapons stockpile or the whole production programme, and who would maintain security while this process is under way?"Syria is thought to have up to 40 sites where either chemical weapons or precursors for mustard gas and nerve agents such as sarin and possibly VX are stored. As the civil war has intensified it is possible that the weapons have been dispersed even further. Elleman said there were some reports that the binary precursors for nerve agents were being mixed in the field by the military units responsible for them. That would complicate any accounting and verification exercise – and make their removal and destruction a logistical nightmare."It could be done but if you are going to try to transport the weapons there would be all sorts of practicalities," said Richard Guthrie, a British expert on chemical and biological warfare. "You would have to put UN troops in and feed and water them, and protect them. If you move these weapons, they could leak. If you destroy them in situ, it depends where they are. You could create a buffer zone around them, but these weapons are likely to be in military bases, and is the regime going to agree that nothing can happen in a 10km radius including those bases?"If Syria is serious, the first step would be for Bashar al-Assad to sign an agreement to join the CWC. Thirty days after the accession document had been submitted to the UN secretary general, Syria would officially become the 190th state party to the agreement. After that, the convention would become binding, any use or stockpiling of chemical agents or munitions would become illegal, and the country would have to submit to emergency inspections at 24 hours notice if it was accused of cheating.After signing the CWC, Syria would have to provide a full account of its stockpile, at which point it would either have to admit what it has produced, and state whether it has retained full stewardship of its weapons, or concede it had lost control. The regime would then have to admit inspectors from the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), based in The Hague, to verify the stockpile and seal the weapons and chemical vats.Under the convention iIt is the job of the state joining the treaty and surrendering its weapons to carry out the destruction under OPCW supervision, and pay for the process. Destroying vats of chemicals is relatively straightforward. They are poured into special machines that blend them with neutralising agents. Dismantling bombs and missiles that have already been armed with chemicals is more complicated, and requires a blast-containment vessel to carry out the tricky and dangerous procedure.The timing of the declaration, verification and destruction of the weapons is all a matter of negotiation with the OPCW, which can lay down a timetable, but has to listen to appeals from the state if it believes it is too rushed. Syria would not be the first state to surrender its chemical weapons. Seven countries have done so in the 16-year existence of the OPCW: Albania, India, US, Russia, Japan, Libya and an anonymous country widely believed to be South Korea, have all destroyed or are in the process of destroying their stockpiles.Russia and the US have yet to destroy their cold war stocks entirely. The closest parallel with Syria is Libya, which started to destroy its stockpile under OPCW supervision in October 2010, and was just over halfway through when the Gaddafi regime fell. After a new government took over it took up to 18 months to set up the infrastructure again. Libya has now destroyed all its chemical reserves in vats but has recently come across some previously undeclared chemically armed shells that will take several more months to dismantle.