1992 Chechnya declares independence from Russia a year after the collapse of the Soviet Union.1994 Russian troops invade Chechnya to crush the independence movement. The war, which kills up to 100,000 people, starts in December and lasts 20 months.1995 Chechen rebels hold hostages at a hospital in Budennovsk, southern Russia. More than are 100 killed in a Russian commando operation.1996 The Chechen president, Dzhokhar Dudayev, is killed in a Russian missile attack and Zemlikhan Yandarbiyev succeeds him. Rebels launch a successful attack on Grozny. The rebel leader Aslan Maskhadov signs a ceasefire with Moscow and Russian troops begin to withdraw.1997 Russia recognises Maskhadov's government and the two leaders sign a peace treaty, although the problem of Chechnya independence is still unresolved.1998 Maskhadov imposes a state of emergency amid continued unrest.1999 Maskhadov declares that sharia law will be phased in over three years. Suspected Chechen separatists carry out a series of terror attacks in Russia, killing more than 300 people. In response, the prime minister, Vladimir Putin, sends Russian troops back into Chechnya. Troops fight on the Chechnya-Dagestan border and Chechen rebels invade Dagestan to try to create an Islamic state.2000 Russian troops capture the captial, Grozny, and Putin declares direct rule from Moscow. He appoints a former cleric, Akhmad Kadyrov, as head of its administration in Chechnya.2001 There are reports of widespread human rights violations in Chechnya at the hands of Russian troops, fuelled by the discovery of a mass grave filled with mutilated bodies.2002 Chechen rebels storm a Moscow theatre holding 700 people hostage for three days. All 50 rebels and 120 hostages are killed when Russian forces gas the building. In December a suicide bomb attack destroys the Grozny headquarters of Chechnya's Moscow-backed government.2003 Suicide attacks continue. Akhmad Kadyrov is elected Chechen president.2004 Kadyrov, widely regarded as a Russian puppet, is killed in a bombing. In September nearly 400 people – hundreds of them children – are killed during a siege at a school in Beslan, North Ossetia. Putin blames international terrorists with links to Chechen separatist fighters.2005 In February the separatist leader Aslan Maskhadov calls a ceasefire and urges the Russian authorities to agree to peace talks. In March Russian forces say Maskhadov has been killed in a special operation in Chechnya. In May Maskhadov's successor, Abdul-Khalim Saydullayev, signals an end to peace talks with Moscow.2006: Ramzan Kadyrov, son of the former Chechen leader Akhmad Kadyrov, becomes Chechen prime minister.2009: After two wars and a decade of strict security, Russia ends its counterterrorist operations in Chechnya, marking the end of the Kremlin's war and enhancing the power of the president, Ramzan Kadyrov.