One year after he punched a businessman in the face live on TV, Russian billionaire Alexander Lebedev has been charged with hooliganism and battery in a case he called politically motivated.The outspoken owner of London's Evening Standard and the Independent could face up to five years in prison if found guilty. Lebedev said the move to charge him was designed to silence a tycoon who has become increasingly critical of the rampant corruption of the regime of Vladimir Putin and its powerful security services.Prosecutors opened an investigation into Lebedev nearly one year ago after he punched Sergei Polonsky, a property developer, during the filming of a television programme for the state-run channel NTV. In a heated discussion on the financial crisis, Lebedev, a 52-year-old former KGB agent, jumped out of his chair and flew at Polonsky, knocking him to the ground. Lebedev insisted he was provoked. "I think it was a trap from the beginning," he told the Guardian.The charges against Lebedev come amidst a wider crackdown as Putin attempts to defuse the growing opposition against him.Lebedev is part owner, alongside former Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev, of Novaya Gazeta, the country's leading opposition and investigative newspaper. He has also recently aligned himself with Alexey Navalny, the de facto leader of Russia's protest movement and a prominent anti-corruption crusader."My father has been targeted because of his determination to fight against corruption and to be a crusader for democracy in a country where this has not always been welcome," Lebedev's son Evgeny, chairman of his UK media holdings, said in a statement.The elder Lebedev said he had long been the target of the authorities' ire but attempts to pressure him had recently increased. Lebedev's National Reserve Bank is under investigation after being raided by masked armed men, and he insists video and audio surveillance of his homes and businesses have been boosted, while a sex tape was leaked onto the internet this summer."They are hoping I will leave the country," Lebedev said. "It's a standard procedure: first they go against your business, then second is a smear campaign and third is the most threatening weapon – first the threat of prison and then, if you don't emigrate, you go to trial on some fabricated case."The hooliganism charge against Lebedev is the same one levelled against the anti-Kremlin punk band Pussy Riot, three of whose members have been jailed for two years after being found guilty of "hooliganism motivated by religious hatred" for performing an anti-Putin song in a Moscow cathedral. The criminal code article levied against the band includes "political, ideological, racial, ethnic or religious hatred". Lebedev has been charged with "hooliganism motivated by political hatred", according to a copy of the charges the tycoon posted on his website."I'm not a politician, [Polonsky] isn't a politician – what is political hatred?" Lebedev said, calling the charge "complete nonsense".Lebedev insisted he was not funding the opposition that emerged in Russia after Putin announced his intention to return to the presidency late last year. But his National Reserve Bank has agreed to put out a debit card that will see a part of all expenditures donated to Navalny's anti-corruption project, RosPil. Navalny has also recently taken a seat on the board of Aeroflot, in which Lebedev owns a 15% stake. Navalny has been charged with economic crimes and faces up to 10 years in prison if found guilty.Yet Lebedev pointed to his ownership of Novaya Gazeta, which has seen several of its journalists killed for their hard-hitting investigative reporting into corruption and human rights abuses, as the reason for the campaign against him.When asked if he thought Putin had been directly involved in his case, he declined to point directly point the finger but said: "They definitely know everything. There is no possibility to go behind somebody's back. The system is tightly controlled."The investigation into Lebedev's punch-up was opened days after Putin publicly called the incident "hooliganism".Oligarchs in Russia were sent a strong signal not to dabble in politics with the 2003 arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky, once Russia's richest man as the head of the oil company Yukos, now bankrupted. Khodorkovsky was jailed on charges of fraud and tax evasion in a case government critics say was launched to punish him for funding the Russian opposition without Kremlin approval.Lebedev acknowledged that he could fall prey to Russia's notoriously politicised justice system. "This is not a case where law, rule of law, prevails," he said. Asked if he was ready to go to prison, he said: "I don't think anyone can be ready for that, especially someone with a family".Polonsky, a formerly successful property developer who suffered greatly during the financial crisis of 2008, could not be reached for comment. Russian media reported he was in Cambodia and on the verge of selling his heavily indebted business. He had tried to reach an out of court settlement with Lebedev, the media tycoon said.Lebedev's laywer, Henry Reznik, said the charges were designed to sow fear. They come as the Russian parliament debates a host of new laws – including fines for treason and insulting religious feelings – that critics say are designed to clamp down on the growing opposition. The parliament has already passed a raft of new laws targeting illegal protests, NGOs and the internet. An opposition deputy, Gennady Gudkov, has been stripped of his mandate, and more than a dozen people face criminal charges for a protest that turned violent in May.Lebedev declined to comment directly on why the charges were coming now, but noted that he had been co-owned of Novaya Gazeta for seven years. "Why would they tolerate it for so long? Maybe something happened this year."