One might have thought that an agreement with Russia on cutting the stockpile of nuclear weapons would have been widely welcomed in Washington. This is, after all, arms control rather than disarmament, and cutting the number of warheads each side is allowed to have from 2,200 to between 1,500 and 1,675 can hardly be considered appeasement. But no, before the details of the deal have even been released, all 41 Republicans senators have put on record their determination to block ratification (which, being a treaty, requires 67 votes and thus seven Republican ones) unless the US "modernises" its ICBM force and delinks offensive weapons with missile defence. As the agreement with Russia has only been reached by recognising the relationship that exists between offensive weapons and missile defence, this condition alone is tantamount to tearing any new treaty up.There are more than 20,000 nuclear weapons around today, enough to convince former Republican secretaries of state like Henry Kissinger and George Shultz , that nuclear weapons are a liability to US security rather than an asset. This modest agreement with Russia is a first step in a year which will contain exponentially larger challenges: how to convince the 184 states that have signed the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT), but who don't have nuclear weapons, that the five signatories who have weapons are doing enough to bring along non-signatory nuclear-armed states such as India, Pakistan and Israel? President Barack Obama had originally hoped to have the successor to Start in his pocket and ratified before going to the review conference of the NPT, which this year will be dominated by fears of a nuclear arms race in the Middle East. While the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in Middle East has broad support, Israel has flatly rejected Egypt's demand to join the NPT as a non-weapons state. Egypt is determined to press its demand for an international conference in 2011 with both Iran and Israel at the table, and has threatened to withdraw its support for other areas of the treaty, should the United States go cool on the idea. And all this before Mr Obama attempts to pursue US ratification of the comprehensive test ban treaty, the cornerstone of nuclear arms control.This is, to say the least, a crowded and complex agenda and one measure of how little progress was made in arms control and non-proliferation under the last two US presidential terms. Republican senators can ill afford to see the replacement to Start with their customary post-cold war myopia. Russia has had its own problems in negotiating this treaty. Not least of these are the repeated warnings from the Russian defence establishment that their conventional forces are now so weak, in relation to Nato's, and so lacking in global reach, that their nuclear arsenal is their only real defence. While there are many US exponents of a world free of nuclear weapons, there are for this reason, few Russian ones.It was thus all the more important for Mr Obama to reset relations with Moscow, and it is now right that his policy of engagement has produced his first major foreign policy dividend. Remember the fears that eastern European states expressed about the prospect of being left out in the cold by America's new strategic alliance with Moscow? Today Radek Sikorski, foreign minister of Poland, takes a somewhat softer line welcoming the prospect of a new agreement with Russia and looking forward to steep reductions in tactical nuclear weapons in Europe. A major arms control agreement with Russia is not being made at eastern Europe's expense. Quite the contrary, it enhances European security. The important thing now is for negotiations to start on a treaty that would make deep cuts in nuclear arsenals. This agreement has cemented the US dialogue with Russia, but it should not stop here.