A European democracy is under full-scale attack from Russia, and EU and Nato leaders are either wringing their hands or sitting on them. The continuing conflict in Georgia is not really about the small south-Caucasus country. By opening up a three-front offensive on Georgia, Moscow is deliberately testing Europe's mettle.The broader west – European countries, the US, Canada and the host of post-1945 international institutions – are of course also being tested. But Moscow is particularly interested in how Europe's heavyweights will react. In the wake of serious violence and immense geopolitical consequences, however, Britain, France and Germany have done nothing that might be expected of great powers.This is surprising given that with the stationing of its Black Sea fleet and troops preparing for an amphibious landing off Georgia proper, Russia could at any time cut off Europe's strategic oil link to the Caspian Sea. It is perhaps not that surprising that Russian-backed South Ossetian militia chose last week to attack Georgian troops, sparking the conflict we see now. The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline from Azerbaijan's Caspian shore had just been sabotaged by Kurdish rebels in Turkey, and its exports have been rerouted through a pipeline to Georgia's coast. With just one more bold action, Moscow could control Europe's only major energy import route designed to avoid Russia.Mikhail Saakashvili, the Georgian president, has compared the day's events to the Soviet Union's 1956 intervention in Hungary and the 1968 Russian crushing of the "Prague Spring". Russia's 2008 strike against Georgia is in fact very different. Hungary and Czechoslovakia were understood to be within the Soviet Union's agreed area of control, cemented by the cold war's nuclear freeze. Today, Georgia is a fully-independent, sovereign democracy, engaged in a concerted, if bumpy, reform effort to achieve Nato and EU membership. Only Moscow deludes itself that its sphere of influence includes Georgia, a country which has sent troops to Afghanistan and Iraq, which hosts US military trainers, western-oriented energy infrastructure and a western-educated leadership.Russia is a nuclear-armed and increasingly indispensable power. The US and Europe cannot satisfy Georgian calls for material aid against their old cold-war foe. They can, however, take a page out of Moscow's playbook. On his way back from the Olympic opening ceremony in Beijing, Vladimir Putin stopped in Vladikavkaz, in Russian North Ossetia, to lend his support to the war effort. Standing amid Ossetian refugees and Russian tank columns, the message he sent was that Russia takes Georgia seriously, while many western policymakers are on holiday.George Bush, Gordon Brown, Angela Merkel and Nicholas Sarkozy should all visit Tbilisi next week. That one action would send a more powerful message to Moscow than any military or diplomatic aid. It would also lead to the immediate end of the conflict. Merely the security needed to ensure their safety would necessitate a ceasefire on the part of Moscow. While this scenario may be unlikely, it is the vein in which western leaders should be thinking. John McCain could revitalise his flagging presidential bid in one fell swoop by standing side by side with Saakashvili, while his competitor relaxes in Hawaii.Such a sign of solidarity would be an effective, but short-term measure. For the long term, Europe must finally get serious about security in its neighbourhood. South Ossetia is just one among several ominous thawing conflicts, in Georgia's Abkhazia, Azerbaijan's Nagorno-Karabakh and Moldova's Transnistria.All four disputes directly or indirectly involve Russia. The raging conflict sparked in South Ossetia only underscores that each hotspot serves as a tool for Russia to block the region's western integration, to keep strategic energy reserves, trading routes and markets in its "orbit". This gives Russia a free hand to divide the EU into Russophobes and Russophiles, energy-dependent and energy-hungry states, countries that receive visits from Vladimir Putin, and countries that receive visits from polonium-wielding agents.Moscow's outdated worldview sees an encroaching west as a threat rather than an opportunity for mutual prosperity. Only through a comprehensive stabilisation initiative for Europe's eastern neighborhood, including high-level European diplomatic engagement, peacekeepers, and economic incentives, can the west effectively convince Moscow that it means business – in more ways than one.Amid the horrific scenes of violence from Georgia beamed to living rooms around the world, let us attempt for a moment to be serious about this conflict and look at the geopolitical causes and consequences. This is not a Balkan-style ethnic brawl in which all sides share the blame for irrational inhumanity. Russia is using ballistic missiles and strategic bombers against a country one-fortieth its size to finally smash the dream of a Europe whole and free.