Russian investigators have questioned the 82-year-old father of Mikhail Khodorkovsky over the murder of a Siberian mayor in the 1990s, in a move apparently designed to put pressure on Russia’s former richest man, who spent a decade in jail.Boris Khodorkovsky was questioned in Moscow on Thursday over the 1998 killing of the mayor of Nefteyugansk, a Siberian town where Mikhail Khodorkovsky’s Yukos oil giant had major operations. Investigators say the younger Khodorkovsky, who now lives in Switzerland, is a key suspect in the murder.He has always denied involvement in the murder, and his supporters have suggested the timing of the case is meant to put pressure on him. The former Yukos chief continues to oppose President Vladimir Putin from his Zurich exile. Alexei Pichugin, formerly the head of security at Yukos, was sentenced to 20 years in jail for organising the murder in 2005, though he maintains his innocence. Related: Mikhail Khodorkovsky breaks political silence, saying he would lead Russia Vladimir Markin, of Russia’s investigative committee, said in June that officials had new evidence suggesting Mikhail Khodorkovsky “personally ordered” the murder. However, a statement from Khodorkovsky’s press service this week said there were no signs any serious investigation into the murder was going on, and “the only goal is to apply pressure” to him and his family.“As far as we know, his father is the only witness to have been called so far,” said Maria Baronova of Khodorkovsky’s Open Russia foundation. She said she believed one of the goals of the investigation was to pressure Boris Khodorkovsky into leaving Russia. Related: Russia's opposition: who is left to take on Vladimir Putin? Mikhail Khodorkovsky spent a decade in jail on charges of tax evasion and embezzlement, which were widely seen as a warning to Russia’s other oligarchs to stay out of politics. Putin agreed to release the former tycoon after he wrote to the president asking to be allowed out to see his dying mother. He was flown straight to Germany and has not returned to Russia since.Khodorkovsky remained silent until his mother died last summer, but shortly afterwards began making political statements, and set up the Open Russia foundation to work inside Russia, although he himself has remained in Zurich. He believes he will be arrested immediately if he returns to Russia.Late last year, Khodorkovsky told the Guardian in an interview in Zurich that he is “prepared to go all the way” to ensure that the regime in Russia changes. He claimed he does not have a burning desire to replace Putin, but allowed for the possibility that he might launch a presidential campaign one day. “I can’t really say that I am really interested in doing that, but if people ask me, then yeah, OK, I’m ready,” he said.