At least 22 people were feared dead and many more injured last night after an express train carrying hundreds of passengers from Moscow to St Petersburg derailed.Early indications from government officials suggest a bomb may have been the cause, after investigators found a three-foot crater beneath the rails.Russian Railways, the state-owned train operator, said four carriages of the luxury Nevsky Express came off the tracks near the town of Bologoye, 200 miles from Moscow, just after 9.30pm local time.In addition to those killed, more than 50 injured passengers required treatment at hospitals in St Petersburg.An officer at the emergencies ministry said: "A one metre-diameter hole has been found next to the railway track. Witnesses heard a loud slap before the accident. All of this could point to a possible act of terrorism."In 2007 a terrorist attack on the same line, which is a popular route with business passengers and tourists travelling between Russia's two largest cities, derailed a train and injured 27 people. Two suspects were arrested in connection with that attack and authorities are searching for a former military officer they believe masterminded the blast.A Kremlin spokesman said President Dmitry Medvedev was immediately informed of yesterday's derailment and had ordered the FSB federal security service to investigate.According to an unnamed law enforcement official quoted by Itar-Tass news agency, a small crater under one of the rails was being investigated. "Several versions are being considered. It might be just a pit someone dug out. Or the crater was left by an explosive device," the source said.Earlier Russian news agencies had quoted transport officials as saying the cause may have been an electrical fault. Russia has a poor record of serious accidents caused by Soviet-era infrastructure.The 14-carriage train was carrying 633 passengers and 20 railway workers, the emergencies ministry added.Russia has been beset by concerns over terrorism since the wars with Chechen separatists of the 1990s. Terrorists have repeatedly attacked Russian cities, although in recent years the number of attacks linked to Chechens has diminished. In its place violence from the republic of Ingushetia has mounted. The small, poor and turbulent area of the north Caucasus has been gripped by an intensifying Islamist insurgency.Russian forces have also been targets of sporadic attacks in lawless Dagestan, where Islamist militants and organised criminals are blamed for bomb blasts and shootings.