Anyone who doubts whether Russians are still willing to take on autocrats should look at the example of Natasha Estemirova, who was abducted and murdered in Grozny on Wednesday. Her job title said it all. To be head of the office of the human rights organisation Memorial in a place like Chechnya; to document the torture, kidnapping and extrajudicial killings that take place routinely there; to be threatened by the man responsible for this reign of terror; and yet to continue to live and work there regardless: this is bravery in its purest form. How many other human rights workers would be willing to take these risks in the knowledge that they could be the next victim?Oleg Orlov, the director of Memorial, had little hesitation yesterday in pointing the finger of blame at the Chechen president, Ramzan Kadyrov - the former rebel turned loyalist. Ms Estemirova collaborated on two reports into punitive house burnings and killings carried out by the "kadyrovtsy", thousands of armed thugs who form part of the state's official forces. President Kadyrov's critics are shot wherever they happen to live. The campaigning journalist Anna Politkovskaya, a friend of Ms Estemirova, was assassinated outside her flat in Moscow in 2006. A lawyer, Stanislav Markelov, was shot dead in Moscow in January, as was a former member of the president's bodyguard, Umar Israilov, in Vienna. He claimed the Chechen leader had personally taken part in his torture. When Politkovskaya was killed, President Kadyrov claimed he had been set up by his political opponents; in the same vein, he vowed yesterday to pursue Ms Estemirova's killers, whom he called "the cruellest of criminals".But the longer these killings continue, the more President Kadyrov himself becomes a liability for the Kremlin. The presidents of autonomous republics in the Russian Federation are direct Kremlin appointees, as are the governors of regions. These appointees are rubber-stamped by regional parliaments, but responsibility for their actions now lies firmly with the Russian president. Dmitry Medvedev has exercised his power over despots in the North Caucasus before. Last October he forced Murat Zyazikov from office in neighbouring Ingushetia after 80,000 - out of a population of 480,000 - signed a petition demanding the corrupt leader go. Mr Medvedev could use his presidential powers again. However, President Kadyrov and his gang are so entrenched in power (his portrait looms from huge billboards in Grozny) that removing him may not be as simple as it was with President Zyazikov. The Chechen leader's main rival, Sulim Yamadayev, was killed in Dubai in March, and the president himself is popular in Chechnya. Under his rule, Grozny was rebuilt from the ruins of two bitter wars.Western governments should not simply give up on Chechnya, as George Bush and Tony Blair did when they made their Faustian pact with Vladimir Putin over Afghanistan. After a period of prolonged tension which culminated with the war in Georgia, Russia is once again on the brink of a deal with the US. The outlines of this are clear, as is the timing. Barack Obama drops, significantly delays or substantially modifies plans to install missile defence batteries in Poland and a radar in the Czech Republic, in return for which Russia backs the US drive for tougher sanctions against Iran in the UN security council.If this materialises, and all this has to happen in the next few months, Russia may decide it has bigger fish to fry. British and US troops have been found guilty of gross human rights violations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Britain has used proxy torturers in Pakistan. But in both countries a judicial process exists to reveal dirty secrets, and television channels report them. There is no such process in Russia, and the killers are never brought to book. Every western politician should follow the example set by Angela Merkel yesterday by keeping Chechnya on the political agenda. Natasha Estemirova would have done no less.• This article was amended on 7 August 2009. The original referred to Stanislav Markov. This has been corrected.