Russia has branded foundations run by the financier George Soros a threat to the country’s constitutional order, and banned them from disbursing grants to Russian partners.The Open Society Foundation and the Open Society Institute’s Assistance Foundation, both financed by Soros, are the latest additions to a list of “undesirable organisations”, a list the government says is necessary to stop foreign governments from interfering in Russia’s internal affairs. The two are accused of posing a threat to Russia’s constitutional order and national security.Supporters say such organisations provide crucial funding for human rights and civil society organisations that Russian donors would not risk supporting, and blast the laws on which the ban is based as a sign of an increasing government crackdown and paranoia.Russia’s parliament passed the law on “undesirable organisations” in May, and two months later the upper house sent the prosecutor’s office a list of 12 international organisations it wanted to see added to the list, including the two Soros foundations. At the time, parliamentarian Konstantin Kosachev said the organisations on the list “criticise Russia at any chance and are trying to gain external control over the situation in our country and over our people”.Soros has long been a controversial figure in Russia because of his financing of civil society groups active in protest movements. He is often referred to as a kind of puppet master, directing “coloured revolutions” in post-Soviet states. However, organisations which had received grants from Soros said this characterisation was inaccurate.“I think this is a deeply unfair decision, although of course it was predictable in the current climate,” said Arseny Roginsky, of Memorial, an organisation working on preserving historical memory, which has received grants from Soros for a number of years. “Soros has done much good for Russia ever since the 1990s, supporting education and science as well as civil society. The organisation should be thanked, not banned. But those are the times we live in.”The foundations closed their offices in Russia in 2003 but continued to disburse grants to a number of civil society groups.“The authorities are using the law on ‘undesirable organisations’ to squeeze the life out of Russian civil society,” said Tanya Lokshina, of Human Rights Watch. “While not banning foreign funding as such, they have banned specific major donors, and are pushing other foreign donors to stop their programmes in Russia due to the increasingly hostile political climate.”The National Endowment for Democracy, largely funded by the US Congress, was the first organisation to be confirmed as “undesirable” in July. At the same time, the MacArthur Foundation pulled out of Russia after being put on the provisional list of 12. It had been active in the country since 1992, disbursing about $172m of grants in areas including education, human rights and nuclear non-proliferation. The Open Society Institute said it would wait for a formal decision before pulling out. Now that has come, it is illegal for Russian organisations to accept its money.Separately, another law requires any Russian organisation that has a foreign source of funding to register as a “foreign agent”, a term reminiscent of Soviet-era propaganda. Memorial’s Moscow office and a number of its regional affiliations have already been declared foreign agents by local courts.