Tomorrow, EU heads of government will resume talks with Russia on a new EU partnership agreement. Both the EU and Russia would find it useful, but it is vital to neither for a good deal of trade and dialogue to continue. Yet this decision is of enormous symbolic importance.Restarting talks effectively means a return to business as usual between Europe and Russia – the lightest of slapped wrists for Russian aggression. That is a major strategic error whose significance will be noted not just by Russia and its neighbours, but around the world.On August 12 President Sarkozy, representing the whole European Union, helped bring the Georgian war to an end with a six-point ceasefire agreement that Russia and Georgia signed up to.Russia has failed to meet those obligations. In breach of the ceasefire, Russian troops have still not returned to the positions they held before the war, a point EU heads of government again made a specific condition for resuming talks at the September 1 EU summit.Instead, Russia has stationed thousands of troops in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, including in areas where there were no Russian troops present before the war. EU peace monitors have been denied entry to those territories. In breach of UN resolutions guaranteeing Georgian territorial integrity, the Kremlin has unilaterally recognised the two breakaway territories' independence and is now allowing them to block progress in international talks to settle the conflict.As I saw for myself when I visited Georgian refugees three weeks ago, Russia has also failed to safeguard the return of ethnic Georgian refugees to their homes in South Ossetia and Abkhazia. The latest report from the NGO Human Rights Watch accuses Russia of doing nothing to protect Georgian civilians from militia. Less than a decade since we last said "Never again" to ethnic cleansing in the Balkans, it has happened again on Europe's borders.Granted, it is widely agreed that the wisdom of Georgia's actions was doubtful, notwithstanding the series of likely calculated provocations they were subject to. It is equally accepted that Russia's response was severely disproportionate and excessively violent.This background made Monday's decision on EU-Russia negotiations a major test of the European Union's resolve and clarity. If European countries working together through the EU hope to be taken seriously in the world they must show themselves capable of consistency, perseverance and strategic patience. The EU has ended up displaying extraordinary weakness by not just failing to enforce the terms of a ceasefire it brokered just three months ago but even seeming willing to let its terms slide entirely.The EU can still move forward from this depressing situation. First, there should at least be no final agreement on a new partnership until Russia meets its ceasefire obligation in full, with no fudges, and facilitates the return of refugees to their homes.Secondly, the EU should play its part in enforcing international law in the breakaway regions. There have been numerous UN resolutions, signed by Russia, that recognise them as sovereign Georgian territory. So there should be visa, travel and financial restrictions on individuals and companies doing business in South Ossetia and Abkhazia without lawful authorisation from the Georgian government.Thirdly, European countries must act to remove Russia's ability to exert undue influence on European policies through energy. Greater security of supply is essential. This means, partly, diversifying sources of supply from outside Europe and putting right the government's failure to ensure we have sufficient gas storage to withstand external supply shortages.It also means doing things the EU should in any case have done long ago: completing the single market in energy and allowing energy to flow freely across the EU by helping to build interconnectors. So today's proposal from the European Commission for an EU energy security plan is timely and merits serious and urgent consideration.Taken together, those measures would ensure that Russia pays a political price for its aggression towards Georgia. They would make a just political resolution in Abkhazia and South Ossetia more feasible. They would enhance Europe's joint strength and security.We, and more broadly Europe, rightly want a positive and constructive relationship with Russia. More than half of Russia's trade is with the EU. Last year Russia was the largest foreign investor raising money on the London Stock Exchange and Britain is now the largest foreign investor in Russia. That is a mutually beneficial relationship and we want to see it prosper. We want Russia to enjoy stability in the northern Caucasus and we need to work with Russia on Iran. But it would be a serious error and a mark of feebleness and irresolution for Europe to let Russia set the terms of that relationship.After the slow start the government had taken a properly robust stand on Russia's actions. In response to questioning in the Commons by David Cameron and myself the Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary gave specific guarantees that there would be no talks until Russia had met its obligations and let refugees go home.Many other EU member states expressed the view that a revival of partnership talks was unwarranted and would send completely the wrong message to Russia. They have found themselves let down by the British government's reversal on the issue. The government's U-turn over the past week has been a culpable failure of British leadership. It will be remembered, and Britain's reputation for reliability and steadfastness has suffered.