Hillary Clinton arrived in Moscow this morning for talks on nuclear arms reduction and the Middle East, amid signs that the Kremlin has raised fresh objections that could further delay the signing of a new US-Russia Start treaty.The US secretary of state is meeting Russia's foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, and will tomorrow attend a meeting iof the peace mediators who comprise the Middle East quartet – the European Union, the United Nations, the US and Russia. Clinton is also seeing the Russian president, Dmitry Medvedev.For almost a year, Russian and US teams have been negotiating a historic strategic arms treaty to replace the 1991 Start agreement, which expired in early December. Despite pronouncements from both sides that a deal is close, and could be signed as early as next month, the Russians now appear to be raising fresh objections.This morning, Boris Gryzlov, the speaker of Russia's pro-Kremlin parliament, said Moscow would refuse to ratify any new nuclear treaty unless there was an explicit link between nuclear arms reduction and the US's revised missile defence plans in Europe."Without it there is no chance the treaty could be ratified in the Duma," Gryzlov said.The White House believes the two issues are separate. US officials have privately expressed growing frustration with the Russians, who appear to reach agreement on key issues, only to raise fresh problems later. There is a suspicion that Moscow is deliberately dragging out the negotiating process.According to the New York Times, Barack Obama has telephoned Medvedev twice in the past three weeks, in a frantic effort to push the long-delayed negotiations over the finishing line. In the first call, the US president was surprised to hear Medvedev raise several new objections, including over the US's amended plans for a European missile defence system.Obama believed negotiators had already settled the issue in Geneva, the paper said.Last year, Obama announced he was shelving the Bush administration's plans to deploy a missile system in Poland and the Czech Republic, following fierce Russian objections, and as part of a "reset" in relations with the Kremlin. In January, the White House said elements of the system would be deployed in Romania.Clinton is hoping to seal a deal in time for a high-profile international summit on nuclear non-proliferation to be held in Washington in mid-April. Ukraine's president, Viktor Yanuokvych. has offered Kiev as a venue for the agreement to be signed.The White House is believed to prefer the Czech capital, Prague, where Obama set out his vision of a nuclear-free world in a major speech last year.The Middle East quartet is meeting in Moscow tonightfor dinner.There are formal negotiations tomorrow , to be attended by Clinton, Tony Blair, the quartet's Middle East envoy, the EU's new foreign policy chief, Lady Cathy Ahston, and the UN secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, who is expected to travel to Israel and the Gaza Strip on Saturday and Sunday. The quartet is likely to offer strong support for US-backed proximity talks between Israel and the Palestinians.But the negotiations have been overshadowed by the unusual US-Israeli dispute over plans to build 1,600 Jewish homes in part of the occupied West Bank it annexed to Jerusalem. Clinton has described the announcement – made while the US vice-president, Joe Biden, was in Israel last week – as insulting.Washington hopes to win Moscow's backing for tougher sanctions against Iran over its nuclear programme, which the west suspects is intended to produce atomic weapons. Medvedev earlier this month promised support for "smart" sanctions against Tehran which are not aimed at civilians, but Moscow has long been reluctant to agree to punitive measures against a traditional ally and trading partner. China is also opposed to sanctions.