Today, many Russians both at home and abroad believe that the west doesn't like us. I agree: it does not. If asked why, the majority would reply, "Russophobia"; Russophobia in the western media, in western politics, in the prejudiced mind of the western man in the street. In other words, their attitude has got nothing to do with us; it is their fault, and theirs alone, and if they don't mend their ways their future relations with Russia are going to be rather dim.There are many interesting assumptions about the Russophobia theory. It presupposes, for example, that the west has somehow singled out Russia and the Russians for unfair treatment. And if so, then there is definitely a western – particularly American – conspiracy against Russia. But why would the Americans be interested in such a conspiracy? The majority of my compatriots would answer that it is because Russia is now strong, and the west in general, and the USA in particular, wants to weaken it.This is how many explain the current economic crisis, and this is certainly how they interpret the attitudes of the western media. I hear this from my neighbours, from my students and from my friends. Moreover, this logic has come to define not only the perceptions of lay citizens, but also the views of Russia's political elite who influence its foreign policy. But why should the west like us? A couple of months ago I read a very unflattering account of the misbehaviour of Russians abroad: rowdy, disrespectful to the locals, and crudely throwing money around. The author – a lover of Russian 19th-century literature – felt disillusioned about the descendants of Russia's 19th-century intelligentsia. To be sure, we don't all behave like this, but let's face it – many do. We may be no better or worse than other foreigners abroad, but we have to learn to own up to the behaviour of some of our compatriots. Politically, Russia has been using its newly acquired weight, disproportionately inflated by the world's demand for oil and gas, to try to pressure its neighbours into compliance with its wishes, rather than attempting to turn them into friends and allies. Of course, the Americans have been doing exactly the same since the end of the cold war – but then, as we know, this has not earned them many friends in the world, either.The allegation of Russophobia presupposes also that while the west is Russophobic, we, the Russians, do like the rest of the world, and even the west itself – because if we didn't why should we be offended by its dislike of us? But do we really like the west? All public opinion polls show that Russians' attitude to the west, the US and the UK in particular, has steadily deteriorated since the early 1990s. The coverage of these countries by most of the Russian media (and film industry) has become increasingly unfavourable, particularly since the early 2000s, and is at its worst in decades. The British media is prepared to discuss its own Russophobia on its pages, but few Russian publications would even consider publishing an article about Anglophobia in Russia. Not because it does not exist, but because the logic is that while they deserve our dislike, we do not deserve theirs. The same applies, of course, to all others who "deserved" Russia's wrath. Has our coverage of Georgia, Ukraine and Poland been objective? More objective than theirs of us? And what about Russia's xenophobia aimed against those foreigners who come to work in its cities and even its own citizens – the Tatars, the Chechens and other – all those who are called, disparagingly, "blacks"?Even if we accept this logic and assume that the west has been unfair to us (which it was, for example, at the beginning of the Georgia war – a fact that the Russian propagandists inside the country used to the utmost), than why not do something about it? If Russia loses a propaganda war abroad, than whose fault is that? There is yet another twist to the Russophobia theory. Why is it that we are particularly interested in what the west thinks of us? Why are we not equally concerned about how we appear to the public opinion in China? Or Venezuela? Or Iran? Or Zimbabwe? Is this because they are our partners or friends, and there is certainly no Russophobia there? But then it is we who choose our friends. We have to concede that the Americans and the British have the same right to choose theirs. The Russian philosopher Georgii Fedotov wrote after the first world war: "Russian national feeling has been deeply hurt by the defeat, partition and the fall of Russia, and, unwilling to take the responsibility on itself, lacking the courage for penitence, it has begun to look for a culprit outside itself – in the west." His words still apply. Self-pity, righteousness and a sense of victimhood are extremely destructive for any nation. The Russophobia theory feeds into all these traits. If Russia's relations are not all that one might wish, let's not blame it on Russophobia. Russia has to take its full share of the responsibility for this.