Why has BP formed a partnership with Rosneft when it has its own Russian subsidiary, TNK-BP?Like all of the oil majors, BP is finding it harder to access new oil and gas reserves. They are either physically difficult to reach (in deep water or contained in oil sands, for example) or are located in countries that are off limits (like most of the Middle East and, increasingly, Russia). BP had hoped that the US would drive future growth but, after the Gulf of Mexico spill, the oil industry faces tougher regulation and it will take years for BP, in particular, to regain trust. Partnering Rosneft gives BP the exclusive right to explore an area in the Russian Arctic the size of the North Sea. Having the Kremlin as a backer is also likely to ward off any unwelcome takeover bids and could blunt any anti-BP backlash in the US.Is this deal risky for BP?Yes. BP has had a rough ride in Russia in the past. In the 90s it lost almost $500m after buying a stake in a company that was seized by the outfit with which BP went on to form TNK-BP. Two years ago, President Putin, left, landed TNK-BP with a £495m back tax demand, while in 2008, BP's Russian partners ousted Bob Dudley – now BP group chief executive – as head of the subsidiary in a struggle for control.Why does Rosneft need BP?BP's reputation has taken a hammering after the Deepwater Horizon disaster, but it still has the expertise that Rosneft and other Russian companies lack to explore for oil and gas in harsh offshore conditions. Rosneft is also likely to be more comfortable dealing with a company such as BP, which is used to operating in Russia, warts and all.What does the alliance mean for TNK-BP?BP is riding roughshod over its agreement with TNK-BP that the British company can pursue opportunities in Russia only via that venture. BP believes its best bet in Russia lies with Rosneft, not TNK-BP. The company insists that the prediction by its top executive in the country, David Peattie, of a Kremlin-backed carve-up of TNK-BP are out of date. But the omens for TNK-BP and its Russian backers do not look good.