The EU today began negotiations with Russia over an ambitious new strategic pact designed to rebuild relations between Europe and Russia following years of tension.The EU wants to reach a deal with the Kremlin's new leadership on a wide-ranging and legally binding cooperation agreement. But negotiations, which start later today in the booming Siberian oil town of Khanty-Mansiysk, could drag on for years, analysts predict. The Russians favour a short and concise format, while the EU is insisting on a far more comprehensive pact, which lays out concrete details of cooperation in key areas including energy, justice and security. Brussels will hope that Russia's new president, Dmitry Medvedev, adopts a more conciliatory tone than his predecessor Vladmir Putin. The summit marks Medvedev's international debut. Prime Minister Putin will not attend, Russian officials said.Fyodor Lukyanov, editor-in-chief of Russia in Global Affairs, said that Putin's absence is likely to make negotiations much easier. "Medvedev won't use the same ugly metaphors that Putin did. This isn't insignificant," he said.Russia, however, was less enthusiastic about rebuilding its troubled relations with the EU, he suggested. "The situation has changed significantly since 2006. Back then Putin was eager to start negotiations before he left office. Now the Russian side has lost interest a lot," he said.Negotiations on a new partnership deal have been delayed by a series of bruising bilateral rows between Russia and its EU neighbours. There has also been confusion and disarray among the EU's 27 members over how to deal with a resurgent Russia.The 10-year-old EU-Russia "partnership and cooperation agreement" ran out last year. Poland vetoed negotiations following a Russian ban on its meat exports. Lithuania then blocked talks following Russia's refusal to fix an oil pipeline, which was allegedly broken. EU foreign ministers finally agreed a negotiating mandate last month.Britain, meanwhile, wants to include a protocol on Russia's refusal to extradite Andrei Lugovoi - the former KGB agent accused of murdering Alexander Litvinenko in London 18 months ago. Russia is likely to look unfavourably on any fresh extradition request. There are also several other major areas of disagreement, analysts say. The EU wants Russia to ratify the union's energy charter, which would give European energy producers access to Russia's pipelines. Russia has refused and in turn accused the EU of barring access to European markets. The choice of today's summit venue is highly symbolic - reminding the EU of its continuing dependence on Russia's vast energy reserves. The Khanty-Mansiysk region, some 1,500 miles east of Moscow, in western Siberia, produces almost two-thirds of the country's oil. It is known as Russia's Kuwait.Today the town had a festive summer atmosphere, with a giant screen erected ahead of Russia's Euro-2008 semi-final against Spain tonight. The centre has been decorated with EU and Russian flags - together with the mistranslated slogan The Pulse of Cooperation. Gleaming new office blocks have sprung up here against a traditional Siberian landscape of endless green fields and silver birches."With the oil price sky-rocketing Russia seems to have the EU over a barrel. But it isn't quite as simple as that," one western diplomat said. He added: "We have something they [the Russians] want - a market. The oil isn't any use to them stuck in the ground."British officials are optimistic that the UK's relations with Russia can be improved - or "recalibrated" - during Medvedev's next big international outing at the G8 summit in Japan early next month where Gordon Brown is meeting Medvedev for private talks.It will be the first bilateral meeting between a Russian and British leader since the Litvenenko row. Officials, however, say it is too early to contemplate a visit by Medvedev to London, suggesting "there is no point in trying to walk before you can crawl".Medvedev's foreign policy adviser Sergei Prikhodko visited London this week. Asked whether Brown's meeting with Medvedev meant an end to the row between London and Moscow, he said: "It's a good signal for those who want an improvement in British-Russian relations."