There is a substantial paradox in the relationship between Russia and Britain. Trade between the two nations has tripled in the last six years and Britain remains the fourth biggest foreign investor in Russia. There are also about 250,000 Russians living in the south-east of England. But among that select group of people whose job is to get on with each other – British and Russian diplomats – things could not have been worse. The dialogue at one point descended into expletives over Russia's war with Georgia. And as a result, Britain has the worst bilateral relationship of any other major EU state. It's a case of relations being good in practice and bad in theory.Somewhat late in the day, David Miliband is in Moscow to restore an official relationship in dire need of repair. His visit is the first in five years, although Gordon Brown speaks frequently to the Russian president Dmitri Medvedev. There was no attempt to evade the subject that produced the big freeze, the poisoning of the former Russian agent Alexander Litvinenko in London three years ago, and no breakthrough on Britain's demand that the prime suspect in his killing, Andrei Lugovoi, be extradited. Apart from Lugovoi's extradition, Britain continues to demand things that it knows Russia will not deliver, such as an admission that the Russian secret services were involved in Litvinenko's murder and an assurance that it will never happen again. And there is no indication that Britain is prepared to relax the visa restrictions on senior Russian officials, which diplomats say cause disproportionate irritation to the Russian elite.These issues remain unresolved. What is new and welcome is a mutual determination not to let the consequences of this affair affect overall bilateral relations. Mr Miliband's hand has been forced by Barack Obama's decision to press the reset button. One can debate the benefits this has achieved: America traded a missile defence system that did not work for an influence on Iran that Russia did not have. But engagement has undoubtedly produced a better atmosphere from which to launch negotiations on bigger, technical and more complex issues. Talks to replace the Start 1 agreement which expires in December are difficult enough. Under a continuation of George Bush's policies, attempts to find a compromise would have been doomed.The continued impasse with Russia was an example of Britain punching well below its diplomatic weight, and it is high time that this was changed. If yesterday's visit has provided the political impetus to do this, then there should be fewer expletives in the dialogue and more communication.