 4.38pm BST We are wrapping up the blog for today. Thank you for your interest. 4.18pm BST In this piece, Alec Luhn in Moscow delves into the question of whether Russian troops have returned to base. Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu says they have, but Nato says it has seen no such indication.According to experts, Russian troops have “stepped back” from an imminent invasion but haven't pulled back from the border.Pavel Felgenhauer, a defence analyst and columnist at the independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta, said Russian forces had been on a brink of invading last Thursday, but had stopped “yards short” of the border after Ukrainian forces turned back an offensive on the militia-held city of Slavyansk. He said the most important factor is not distance from the border but rather the level of battle readiness.“Shoigu's talking about stopping an invasion for the time being, being on the brink of doing it and stepping back, but Nato's talking about moving Russian troops back to the point where it would take many hours to move in,” Felgenhauer said. “They stepped back from ready to go, going in, and returned to their temporary bases where up to 12 hours' notice may be needed to deploy, but they're not withdrawing from the region or ending this standoff,” he added.Ruslan Pukhov, director of the Centre for the Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, said it is possible that the troop buildup involved only soldiers from Russia's western military district, who could therefore be said to be at their “home base” even while they remain ready to invade Ukraine, but he could not say for sure.Felgenhauer said the window is closing for Russia to invade due to the Ukrainian presidential election planned for 25 May and the need for the Russian army to focus on its annual draft. Vladimir Putin has to “make up his mind” because he “can't keep troops on such high alert indefinitely,” Felgenhauer said.He said he expects further provocation from pro-Russian fighters and Russian agents in Ukraine to try to produce a casus belli for an invasion. Last week, militia blew up a military helicopter with shots to its fuel tank at Kramatorsk airfield near Slavyansk.Nato has estimated 40,000 Russian troops are massed along the border, but Felgenhauer said any invasion would involve a second wave of rearguard forces and at least 100,000 total troops. 4.00pm BST  3.38pm BST This video shows Ukrainian journalist Valentyn Chernyavsky, Michael Moore style, testing how easy it is to take over a government building. Wearing a uniform of a Russian separatist militant, armed with a mock AK-47 assault rifle, he gets a friend to drive him downtown to the provincial capital of Cherkasy, about 125 miles south of Kiev.Hilarious video in which #Ukraine journalist poses as pro-#Russia "green man" to expose weak security in Cherkasy: http://t.co/pc0g0YrNCI 3.20pm BST Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, says sanctions against his country lack common sense, reports Reuters.Lavrov rejected US and EU sanctions on Russia over the Ukraine crisis, saying the sanctions lacked common sense and were the result of the west's own weak policies."We reject sanctions in any of our relationships, in particular those sanctions that were sponsored by the United States and the European Union, which are against all common sense, regarding the events in Ukraine," Lavrov said in remarks in Havana before beginning a closed-door session with Cuban foreign minister Bruno Rodriguez. 3.13pm BST Alexander Zemlianichenko, who is in Luhansk for the The Associated Press, has details of the takeover of government buildings. Demonstrators seeking more power for Ukraine's regions stormed the government building in Luhansk with baseball bats, seizing control of a key site in one of the largest cities in Ukraine's troubled east. The action further raises tensions in the east, where insurgents have seized control of police stations and other government buildings in at least 10 cities and towns. The demonstrators who seized the building are seeking at the very least a referendum on granting greater authority to Ukraine's regions. The storming came as 1,000 demonstrators gathered in front of the building. About 150 people, some masked and wielding baseball bats, broke out of the crowd and charged into the building without resistance. Later protesters formed a corridor for police who had been inside the building to leave.Luhansk, a city of about 450,000, is just 25 kilometres (15 miles) west of the border with Russia. Regional autonomy is a core issue in the unrest in eastern Ukraine's, where insurgents fear the government that took power after Yanukovych will suppress the region's Russian-speakers. 2.57pm BST Anthony Woolich and Daniel Martin, partners at Holman Fenwick Willan, a law firm specialising in international commerce, echo Ian Traynor's point that wider sectoral sections will be tough for the EU to adopt.While Russia has accused the US of bringing back 'iron curtain' policies with recent additional designations of Russian individuals and entities, and indications of broader sector-focused restrictions to supplement the current measures, it may well be more difficult for the EU than the US to obtain consensus on such wider sanctions, in particular with regards to energy. The EU has closer and more extensive trade links with Russia, with around 30% of EU gas being imported from Russia and in addition, individual member states are likely to be affected to a greater or lesser extent by particular restrictions (eg those affecting finance will affect in particular the UK, and those affecting energy and trade are liable to have most impact on Germany and France).Before any further sanctions are imposed, there would need to be confidence that alternative supplies would be available on comparable terms. The effect on existing contracts would need to be considered carefully. To date, EU member states have adopted generally a collective approach to the adoption of targeted sanctions, although individual member states may add asset freeze targets to those listed by the EU, and at the moment it looks likely that such a collective approach will continue. 2.43pm BST Stephen Jones, professor of Russian Studies at Mount Holyoke College, argues on the Conversation website that Putin might enjoy short-term benefits but that the newly-acquired territories will eventually become an albatrossRussia has a weak economy; its GDP growth is in decline, and corruption is endemic. These revanchist efforts offer only temporary relief. In the short-term, Russia’s democrats will suffer as Russia glories in its victories, but the newly acquired territories will come at a great price. Since 2008, 27 billion roubles have disappeared without trace in South Ossetia, the smallest of the acquisitions; Crimea is 40 times its size, with 2m inhabitants.Crime, corruption, and smuggling will tarnish these victories before long. They will end up as instruments in the hands of Putin’s opponents, who will decry the leader’s follies in their appeals to citizens infuriated by economic stagnation. These expansions into weak neighbouring states are not only demonstrating the hollowness of Russia’s modernisation and growth – they are actually hastening its economic and political decline. 2.35pm BST  2.30pm BST You can watch a livestream from Luhansk here. 2.29pm BST Pro-Russia activists - some in masks and military fatigues - have just seized the regional administration building in #Luhansk 2.25pm BST  2.23pm BST There has been another takeover of government buildings, this time in the city of Luhansk. This from Reuters.Hundreds of pro-Russian separatists stormed the regional government headquarters in Ukraine's eastern city of Luhansk on Tuesday, unopposed by police, and the Ukrainian government said they also planned to seize the local television centre.The government in Kiev has all but lost control of its police forces in parts of eastern Ukraine, where pro-Russian activists have seized buildings in the region's second biggest city of Donetsk and several smaller towns."The regional leadership does not control its police force," said Stanislav Rechynsky, an aide to interior minister Arsen Avakov. "The local police did nothing."He added that the ministry had information that the separatists would next try to take the local television centre.Video footage showed men, some dressed in green camouflage fatigues and holding shields, walking around what appeared to be the foyer of the building as hundreds massed outside the building's large wooden doors.Pro-Russian separatists had previously occupied only the local security services' building in Luhansk, which they took in early April. 2.12pm BST The Guardian's Luke Harding writes from Donetsk, where pro-Russian militants yesterday set upon people marching in favour of Ukrainian unity.Serhiy Taruta, the Kiev-appointed governor of the Donetsk region, has put out a statement condemning yesterday's attack by pro-Russian thugs on a peaceful rally in Donetsk.Taruta said that 14 people had ended up in hospital after "criminal elements" assaulted participants of a rally in support of Ukrainian unity. "I consider it unacceptable that if you go out on the streets wearing the colours of your country you run the risk of receiving serious injuries from an aggressive crowd," he said, Taruta praised the "bravery and devotion" of those who had shown what he called a "civic position".He also had harsh words for the masked activists from the "Donetsk People's Republic", who attacked peaceful demonstrators with clubs and iron rods, and ripped down pro-Ukraine banners. "Not one of your ideas is worth a human life. Not one of your words justifies violence. Let me be clear - you don't have the right to thrust your will on the Donbass region". 12.59pm BST It is ironic that Russia has accused the west of bringing back the iron curtain of the late 1940s. It was of course Winston Churchill who had accused Stalin of bringing down an iron curtain across Europe. Here is that historic speech, officially called "Sinews of Peace" made in Fulton, Missouri in 1945. The phrase occurs well into the discourse.From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the continent. Behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of central and eastern Europe. Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Bucharest and Sofia, all these famous cities and the populations around them lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere, and all are subject in one form or another, not only to Soviet influence but to a very high and, in many cases, increasing measure of control from Moscow. 12.45pm BST Ukraine's gross domestic product shrank an estimated 1% in the first quarter of 2014, compared with the same period last year. "The first quarter result is better than we expected," deputy economy minister Anatoliy Maksyuta told a briefing. "...It will be roughly minus 1%, according to our estimates."  12.35pm BST Tim Judah, who covered the Balkan wars in the 1990s, has this thoughtful piece in the New York Review of Books. Here's an extract on how the people in eastern Ukraine are being subjected to Russian propaganda about the "fascists" taking over in Kiev.Talk to people manning the anti-government barricades and taking part in the demonstrations against Kiev here, however, and one thing in particular is scary. After a day or two you realize that they all say more or less the same thing. “We want to be listened to,” people say. The government in Kiev, which took power after the pro-European revolution there, is a “fascist junta” backed by Europe and the US.It is as though the Russian media—which is widely watched and read here—has somehow embedded these messages into the heads of people and they have lost the ability to think for themselves. Those who are angry talk as though they were a long persecuted minority, as if they have forgotten that easterners under former president Viktor Yanukovych ran the country until February. Everyone here has been robbed blind by politicians in a system that was as corrupt as can be, but all that seems to be registering right now is a nationalist and hysterical drumbeat from Russia about the new Nazis of Kiev and their Nato masters.Now the Russian media says the fascists have returned. And of course, just as there were indeed then some admirers of Croatia’s wartime fascists, there are some right-wing nationalists in Ukraine now; the big lie is to give them a significance they simply don’t have. 12.23pm BST  12.04pm BST  Visa, the US credit card company, is to suspend network services to Russian banks SMP and InvestCapitalbank, to comply with US law. This from Reuters."We regret any disruptions that the institutions, their cardholders or merchants may experience," Visa said in a statement. "All of Visa's systems are processing normally, and we continue to service our other unaffected Russian clients." Rival MasterCard Inc said yesterday it would suspend services in the near future to cards issued by SMP bank and InvestCapitalbank. InvestCapitalbank and SMP bank are controlled by the Rotenberg brothers, Boris and Arkady. The Rotenbergs, linked to big contracts on gas pipelines and at the Sochi Olympics, were named on a previous US sanctions list issued in March after Russia annexed the Crimea region of Ukraine. Russia recently revived plans to develop its own card payment system to cut its dependence on Visa and Mastercard . 11.58am BST Anti-corruption experts from around the world are in London to discuss the retrieval of assets worth billions of pounds stolen from Ukraine by former president Viktor Yanukovych and his regime. The Press Associations reports:Home secretary Theresa May, co-hosting the Ukraine Forum on Asset Recovery at Lancaster House with US attorney general Eric Holder, said that the meeting was a "tangible manifestation" of determination not to allow impunity to leaders who loot the assets of their own countries. Asked whether the White House was considering targeting the personal assets of Russian president Vladimir Putin himself, Holder said: "We believe that Russia must cease its illegal intervention and its provocative actions in Ukraine and we remain prepared to impose further sanctions if that doesn't occur."Ukraine's general prosecutor Oleh Makhnitskyi told the London forum that the country has already identified stolen assets totalling at least 35bn Ukrainian hryvnias (£1.8bn) and expects the eventual total to amount to tens of billions of US dollars. Funds are believed to have been transferred to international bank accounts in countries around the world. Describing the Yanukovych regime as an "organised criminal group" whose tentacles reached throughout the administration, Makhnitskyi said: "The new government was set up and we found that our treasury was empty and the funds were misappropriated." Holder announced the creation of a kleptocracy squad within the FBI tasked with "aggressively investigating and prosecuting corruption cases not only in Ukraine, but around the world".  May said officials from Britain's National Crime Agency and Crown Prosecution Service have already travelled to Ukraine to offer their assistance.  11.36am BST Updated at 11.44am BST 11.17am BST Around 2,000 pro-Ukrainian protesters march through the city of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine on Monday, resulting in violent clashesUpdated at 11.21am BST 11.07am BST Alec Luhn assesses the latest EU sanctions and provides details on those targeted.The EU sanctions on 15 Russian officials announced Tuesday lacked the punch of the preceding US sanctions, since they did not target officials overseeing Russia's state-owned oil giant Rosneft or the assets of Kremlin-connected oligarchs. However, they did target General Valery Gerasimov, chief of the Russian general staff, deputy prime minister Dmitry Kozak, who has been charged with developing Crimea, and several leaders of the pro-Russian militia and protestors who have been occupying buildings in eastern Ukraine. EU countries depend heavily on Russian oil and gas exports.Among the pro-Russian leaders, most of whom were little-known before the wave of unrest, was Igor Strelkov, cited by some media as the head of the Donbass People's Militia. He is also reputed to be one of the “little green men” Russia has allegedly sent to promote unrest in eastern Ukraine, and EU officials identified him as a Russian military intelligence officer and an advisor to Crimean PM Sergei Aksyonov. Denis Pushilin, the prime minister of the self-declared “Donetsk People's Republic,” was also included on the list. Little-known before the occupation of the Donetsk regional administration building, Pushilin previously worked for MMM, a company that ran a notorious pyramid scheme in the 1990s. After Russia, Ukraine, the United States and the EU negotiated a plan in Geneva to defuse the crisis in Ukraine, Pushilin refused to recognise the agreement, saying the Donetsk protestors would refuse to leave the buildings they've taken until the Kiev government leaves its buildings, and they hold a referendum on the region's fate.Several other pro-Russian leaders from Donetsk also fell under sanctions. Little is known about Andrei Purgin, besides the fact that he is a pan-Slavic activist who has agitated against the new pro-western government in Kiev. According to a social network page apparently belonging to him, he holds an IT degree from a Donetsk university and is now the co-chairman of the Donetsk People's Republic. Sergei Tsyplakov is reportedly the deputy head of the Donbass People's Militia and is also apparently a long-time pro-Russian activist. He told Russian state news agency RIA Novosti that he was “extremely proud” of his inclusion on the list, adding that the sanctions are laughable.Two protest leaders from the neighbouring Luhansk region, where heavily armed men have been holding the regional security service headquarters, also face visa bans. Valery Bolotov, a commander of the Army of the Southeast group that has been occupying the building, was announced as the “people's governor” of Luhansk last week. The protestors soon followed Donetsk's example and declared a “Luhansk People's Republic.”German Prokopyev is also reportedly a leader of the Luhansk militia, but even less is known about him than about the other pro-Russian leaders.Updated at 11.22am BST 11.00am BST The German government is none too pleased that former chancellor Gerhard Schröder is being feted by Putin. Schröder attended a meeting in St Petersburg, Russia, of gas pipeline operator Nord Stream AG, of which he is board chairman. After the event Putin reportedly turned up for a celebration in honour of Schroeder's 70th birthday.A senior German official, has stressed that Schröder was not in Russia on behalf of Angela Merkel's government. An opponent of EU sanctions on Russia, Schröder has compared Russia's annexation of Crimea to Nato's intervention in Kosovo in 1999. Merkel rejected the parallel as "shameful".Updated at 1.03pm BST 10.51am BST Catherine Ashton, the EU's foreign policy chief, says the EU announced sanctions against 15 Russians because of the threat to Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence. Here is part of her statement.I am alarmed by the worsening security situation in Eastern Ukraine. The downward spiral of violence and intimidation undermines the normal functioning of the legitimates tate institutions. A number of people have been killed, wounded, tortured or kidnapped in the last few days. I notably condemn the shooting of mayor of Kharkiv Henadiy Kernes yesterday and the detention of military observers from OSCE participating States in Slavyansk by armed separatists since last Friday. All persons still illegally detained by armed groups in Eastern Ukraine need to be immediately released. I am also concerned about continued attacks on journalists and the deterioration of media freedom environment in Eastern Ukraine, including the illegal seizure of TV transmission towers. 10.36am BST Russia's foreign ministry has responded to the latest set of EU sanctions with criticism of the EU. "Instead of forcing the Kiev clique to sit at the table with southeastern Ukraine to negotiate the future structure of the country, our partners are doing Washington's bidding with new unfriendly gestures aimed at Russia," a statement said."This is a revival of a system created in 1949 when western countries essentially lowered an 'iron curtain', cutting off supplies of hi-tech goods to the USSR and other countries," said Russian deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov.Updated at 11.12am BST 10.04am BST Reuters has this newsflash: Nato has no information indicating a withdrawal of Russian troops from the Ukrainian border. 9.56am BST  The self-declared mayor of Slavyansk, a pro-Russian separatist stronghold, has said he would discuss the release of detained military observers with the west only if the EU dropped sanctions against rebel leaders. Reuters reports: Vyacheslav Ponomaryov told Interfax news agency the imposition of visa bans and asset freezes against Denis Pushilin, leader of the self-styled People's Republic of Donetsk, and Andrei Purgin, another leader in the eastern region, "was not conducive to dialogue". "We will resume dialogue on the status of the prisoners of war only when the European Union rejects these sanctions," he said. "If they fail to remove the sanctions, then we will block access for EU representatives, and they won't be able to get to us. I will remind my guests from the OSCE about this." The six observers were in Ukraine under the auspices of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), a democracy watchdog. They were detained last week after separatists said they had found a Ukrainian spy with them. 9.51am BST Those Russian military exercises near the border with Ukraine seem to be winding down. The Guardian's Alec Luhn writes from Moscow.Russia has called back military forces who were conducting exercises along the Ukraine border, news agency Interfax reported. Defence minister Sergei Shoigu told this to his US counterpart Chuck Hagel in a phone conversation, it said. "As soon as the Ukrainian authorities announced they didn't have any intention of using regular military units against the unarmed population, Russian divisions were returned to their home bases," the Defence Ministry said in a statement on Monday.Shoigu said Russia had announced the exercises on 24 April after the Kiev government concentrated 80 tanks, more than 130 fighting vehicles and transports and more than 60 artillery pieces in southeastern Ukraine.Updated at 10.04am BST 9.36am BST The BBC's Steve Rosenberg tweets on the latest sanctions.I doubt those members of Donbass People Militia/Donetsk People's Republic/Lugansk Guard in EU sanctions list will be quaking in their boots 9.34am BST The Russian markets may be untroubled so far, but Gazprom sounds worried although it has not been targeted by sanctions yet. It says any expansion of sanctions could lead to adverse consequences for its business and shares, reports Reuters. The company, which meets 30% of Europe's gas demand, also said in its financial report that a pricing disagreement with Kiev could potentially lead to a disruption of its gas exports to Europe through pipelines crossing Ukraine. 9.29am BST Russian finance minister Anton Siluanov says he sees no immediate impact on Russia's hi-tech companies from US sanctions imposed yesterday.  "I cannot see at the moment that any companies will suffer," Siluanov told journalists, Reuters reports. Vladimir Putin said yesterday that Russia will be able to replace any defence industry imports lost due to the Ukraine crisis with its own products.The Russian stock market has not been too bothered by the latest western sanctions. Russia's main indexes, the rouble-traded MICEX and the dollar-denominated RTS index, both rose in early trading, up 1.8% and 1.1% respectively. Stocks closed up yesterday on relief that no major listed companies were included in the sanctions. 9.19am BST The mayor of Kharkiv, who is fighting for his life after being shot in the back, has been flown to Israel for treatment, Agence France-Presse reports. Kharkiv is Ukraine's second largest city. The shooting came as pro-Russian thugs broke up a pro-Ukraine rally in Donetsk.Yury Sydorenko, director of information at Kharkiv city council, said in a statement that Israeli doctors decided after examining his wounds that mayor Gennady Kernes, who is Jewish, could be transported."At half past two, he was driven to the airport," Sydorenko added. The shooting of Kernes in Ukraine's second-largest city was the latest violent incident in the east of the country where authorities have launched what they call an "anti-terrorism" operation against pro-Russian separatists. He appeared to be targeted by a sniper although the exact circumstances and motivations behind his shooting remained unclear. Locals officials say he was cycling but his entourage said he was jogging. The city council said he was "hit by a bullet in the back". The doctor who performed emergency surgery on him, Valeriy Boyko, said the mayor's life was "in danger". 9.10am BST The EU has imposed asset freezes and travel bans on 15 Russians, including deputy prime minister Dmitry Nikolayevich Kozak and a deputy chairman of the Duma - the lower house of Russia's parliament - Ludmila Ivanovna Shvetsova. Others on the EU include Valery Vasilevich Gerasimov, chief of staff of Russia's armed forces, as well as separatist leaders. The move follows yesterday's sanctions announced by the US targeting seven prominent Russians, including the head of Rosfnet, Russia's largest oil company, and 17 Russian companies. But as the Guardian's Ian Traynor writes from Brussels, there is little to suggest the two stages of western sanctions already being implemented will change Vladimir Putin's ways. Tier Three sanctions - sectoral measures on trade, energy, finance and military equipment - are a different story. But Traynor says there is little stomach for such sweeping moves as the result would be a trade war that would damage a weak European economy.