On Friday, the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, tried to cool tension between Russia and the United States by calling on the US to abandon its drive for a European-based missile defence system, and calling on Russia to cancel deployment of ballistic missiles to the Polish border. Unfortunately, Russian and American manoeuvres have made it difficult for either country to back down.The election of Barack Obama as president of the United States has opened some space for discussion on the proposed missile defence system, as Obama is far more sceptical of missile defence than his predecessor. Russia, however, is doing itself no favours by forcing a confrontation over the missile shield. Instead, Russia has made it far more difficult for Obama to cancel the programme once in office by making him vulnerable to domestic proponents of missile defence. The Bush administration has worked frantically to make the Polish BMD base a reality before the expiration of its term in January. In spite of Obama's announced support of ballistic missile defence, the administration (and many of Obama's own backers) has suspected that Obama is not nearly as committed to missile defence as President Bush. On November 8, Denis McDonough, an Obama adviser, confirmed that Obama was not committed to following through on the deployment of a missile defence system in Poland. This contradicted an earlier statement by the Polish president, Lech Kaczynski, that Obama had promised to deploy the system. Russia has repeatedly and assertively made known its opposition to the deployment of a ballistic missile defence system in Eastern Europe. Nevertheless, Russia has provided invaluable assistance to proponents of the system. The conflict in South Ossetia jump-started the missile defence deal between Poland and the US. The agreement had languished for months, as the Poles pressed the Bush administration for further concessions. The Russian invasion of Georgia made both sides more flexible. Russia reacted aggressively to the agreement, promising to dispatch a naval taskforce for manoeuvres off Venezuela. Finally, last week President Medvedev announced that SS-26 Iskander ballistic missiles would be deployed to Kaliningrad, on the Polish border. Georgia claims that Russia used these missiles in the conflict in South Ossetia, although Russia has denied the accusation. The Iskander deployment amounts to a clumsy effort to intimidate Poland and the US into cancelling the ballistic missile defence deal. It seems quite likely that the effort will have the opposite effect, as proponents of ballistic missile defence in the US can use the Russian threats to pressure Obama into going forward with the Polish deal. Lieutenant General Trey Obering, head of the Missile Defence Agency, publicly stated on November 12 that ending the European ballistic missile programme would have dire consequences. Boeing, a key missile defence contractor, has released studies touting the economic value of missile defence to Alaska and Alabama. If Obama reneges on the Polish BMD deal, these opponents will accuse him of showing weakness in front of the Russians. It would be a pity if Obama allowed the Russians to goad him into going ahead with the Polish BMD deployment. His scepticism toward missile defence, a programme on which the US has spent billions in spite of a poor testing record and a shaky rationale, is healthy. The US and Russia would both benefit from the cancellation of the Polish deployment. Unfortunately, Russia has chosen to pursue what amounts to "brute" diplomacy, pursuing confrontation instead of accommodation with the US. This makes his job harder, but Obama should nevertheless resist the impulse to try to look tough on missile defence. The Russian-American relationship and the financial balance sheet of the US will benefit if Obama displays actual toughness in the face of domestic critics, rather than faux-toughness to the Russians.