Vladimir Putin's power and popularity in Russia was built on a simple political model: a large carrot and a large stick. The carrot was Russia's consumption boom fuelled by oil revenues. The large stick was his centralised, authoritarian control over political life, from the quashing of other political voices to the control of the media, which has painted an excessively rosy picture of the country, linking Putin with all the successes and blaming the west or Yeltsin's so-called democracy for all the problems.These two factors came together to destroy politics in Russia. No one was interested in options other than Putin's plan, as people could see on the TV and feel in their pockets what a good job he was doing. Putin didn't even have to crush all voices of dissent – there are a small number of magazines and newspapers that have critical coverage of the authorities, but hardly anyone reads them. Nor did anyone pay much attention when other voices were crushed. Why rock the boat when it's sailing along so nicely?But the crisis is hurting Russia, and threatening this political model. The country's foreign currency reserves have dropped by a quarter, GDP growth is slowing and there is talk of a budget deficit next year. According to a recent poll, 20% of the working population have been laid off, faced cuts in their salaries or delays in getting paid during the crisis. The carrot is fast disappearing.The stick is also beginning to look increasingly flimsy. Control of TV coverage is all well and good when what is shown bears semblance to reality. But it's hard to play down the present crisis, although the Kremlin is doing its best by heaping criticism on the US, while blacklisting certain words, such as "crisis" and "collapse," from coverage about Russia. But is it possible to believe there is no crisis when your friend loses their job, your salary is cut and your neighbour's home is repossessed?The crisis threatens to reveal the glaring failure of Putin's reign to take advantage of strong economic growth and relative stability to push forward with modernisation and reform. While Putin's "power vertical" allowed him to take credit for the country's economic progress in the last few years, the situation is now reversed. As the Kremlin is the only political and economic decision-maker in the country, the blame for the problems could begin to fall on the same man as the praise did.It is not clear how society will react to the consequences of the crisis. How will the newly wealthy middle class react to losing their jobs, cars and foreign holidays? Will it encourage them to push for economic and political reform? Social and political scientist Yevgeny Gontmakher caused a stir with a recent article in the respected daily Vedomosti, in which he imagined a scenario he called Novocherkassk-2009. (Novocherkassk is the city where protests against food price rises led to a massacre in 1962.) Gontmakher's scenario begins with the shutting down of a large local factory, which leads to protests that the local authorities are unable to deal with. Moscow – Russia's only real decision maker in the "power vertical" – is forced to make a decision: negotiate or use force? As a result of the article, Vedomosti was censured by the Federation on the Supervision of Communications and Mass Media for publishing material that may be interpreted as inciting extremist acts. "Extremism" is the Kremlin's word for any kind of protest or opposition.An indication that politics may be returning came from an interesting recent spat between president Dmitry Medvedev and Moscow mayor Yury Luzhkov, a leading member of Putin's United Russia party. Luzhkov recently called for the return of direct gubernatorial elections (under Putin, regional governors were appointed). He was on solid ground, given that a recent survey revealed 63% of Russians are in favour of returning to a system of elections.Medvedev's response was to say that anyone who wants to see elections return can tender his resignation.The censuring of Luzhkov and Vedomosti demonstrates the inflexibility of Putin's political model and gives us an idea of what to expect in the next few months. There is no space for any voice other than the Kremlin's. Any differing opinions or protests will be swiftly shut down. No one knows how long the crisis is going to continue or how bad it's going to get. But the messier things get, the more Putin and Medvedev risk being left with a heavy reliance on the uglier side of their political model: less carrot means more stick.