Dmitry Medvedev begins his tenure as president of Russia in very unpromising circumstances. Far from taking office with a strong and legitimate mandate, the manner of his election confirms Russia's retreat from open democratic standards. Opposition candidates were excluded from the ballot paper, there was heavy state-media bias in his favour and the machinery of government was used to campaign on his behalf. Restrictions placed on international observers were so tight that election monitors from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe refused to take part.The new president should strive to rebuild Russia's international reputation, which has been damaged by recent signs of authoritarian and nationalist policies. At a minimum, this must include respect for Russia's international obligations. The Russian government's actions against the British Council violate the Vienna conventions, but that is only the most recent example of its disregard for international law. Russia is clearly not in compliance with the democracy and human-rights obligations of the OSCE and Council of Europe. It is also violating its legally binding commitments as a signatory of the energy charter treaty by expropriating investments and using gas supplies as an instrument of coercive diplomacy.Now is the right time for the EU to address this problem head-on. Russia is currently campaigning to join the World Trade Organisation and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Russian eligibility should depend on tangible evidence of acceptance of the rigours of rules-based agreements. The EU should also insert some competition rules in any free-trade agreements with Russia. It is a test of EU resolve. Ian Taylor MP Con, Esher and Walton Bruce George MP, Lab, Walsall South Danny Alexander MP, Lib Dem, Inverness, Nairn, Badenoch and Strathspey Timothy Garton Ash (Comment, February 28) urges us to spell out to Moscow the terms of closer western engagement with Russia: more respect for the sovereignty of neighbouring states, for human rights and for the rule of law. But since Britain has failed to respect Serbia's sovereignty by colluding in the illegal amputation of part of its territory (Kosovo); failed to respect human rights by introducing a mass of illiberal anti-terror legislation that includes detention or virtual house arrest for people neither charged with nor convicted of any offence, and permitting UK sovereign territory to be used for illegal rendition flights; and failed to respect the rule of law by participating in attacks on Yugoslavia (1999) and Iraq (2003) without UN authority and in breach of the UN charter, wagging our fingers at Moscow in the way suggested might invite an embarrassing retort. Brian BarderLondon