Russian president Vladimir Putin and his successor Dmitry Medvedev in Red Square in Moscow. Photograph: Vladimir Rodionov/EPADmitry Medvedev celebrated his victory in the Russian presidential election with a rock concert in Red Square, Moscow. I have not yet seen transcripts of his speech, but I think I could guess at a few phrases. Perhaps, "For those about to rock, we salute you" (AC/DC), accompained by a devil's horn salute. Or maybe, "You are my people, you are my crowd, this is our music, we love it loud" (Kiss), followed by a lewd tongue waggle.President Medvedev is a rocker, a roller, a right out-of-controller. At least, he is in his publicity materials, boasting of his hard rocking ways to counter his image as a backroom lawyer, author of a textbook on the Civil Code. Medvedev loves Zep, the Sabs and, especially, Deep Purple. He announced his candidacy by recounting how he collected the original vinyl copies of every Deep Purple record; which strikes me as just the kind of nerdy completism one would expect from a backroom lawyer-type.Medvedev may yet turn Russia into a new Wayne's World, putting the par-tee into Putin's United Russia party. But his fealty to the royalty of British rock was widespread in Russian universities in the 1980s. My wife is a contemporary, attending Moscow State University at the same time Medvedev was at Leningrad State University. She recalls the student dorms echoing to rock, especially the holy triumvirate of Led Zeppelin, Deep Purple and Black Sabbath (though my wife continues to have a soft spot for Nazareth).It is easy to see why Russians love British rock. Deep Purple are the musos, with keyboard player Jon Lord's showy references to Russian composer Rimsky-Korsakov. Black Sabbath are more meaty, or meat-headed, but have the chundering riffs, like the Red Army crossing the Rhine. Led Zeppelin have a pastoral edge, the perfect accompaniment to a summer evening at the dacha among the silver birches.Given Russia's love for this music, could it have affected the course of history? Were Gorbachev and his team influenced by the young comrades in the universities? Could Ozzie Osbourne, Ian Gillan and Robert Plant have contributed to the end of the Cold War?Ozzie's sharp insight that "Generals gather in their masses/Just like witches at black masses", is a powerful argument for an intercontinental ballistic missile treaty, like the one Gorbachev brokered in Reykjavik with Reagan. Led Zeppelin's infectious love of freedom ("Baby, I don't want to leave you/But when the summer comes around I gotta to ramble") leads inevitably to Glasnost.What could Deep Purple have contributed? Gillan looks a little like a Russian Orthodox Priest, but so do most members of outlaw motorcycle gangs. Jon Lord's classically trained fingers may have persuaded Russians that it was possible to embrace the new without abandoning the old. But I suspect it was middle-period Deep Purple that proved decisive: the Coverdale years. Once you have heard the double entendres that characterise the songs of David Coverdale, showcased on the album Come Taste the Band, dialectical materialism simply loses its savour.