The shooting down by Turkish forces of a Russian Su-24 warplane follows rising tension between the two countries over a continuing Russian bombing campaign against ethnic Turkmen villages in north-western Syria, close to Turkey’s border.It also marks the first direct clash between a Nato member and Russia’s armed forces since Vladimir Putin launched his unilateral military intervention in Syria last month. Nato had already warned Russia over previous border infractions, and the US took “deconfliction” steps to minimise the risk of accidental conflict.Now the Nato alliance and the US-led coalition in Iraq and Syria find themselves facing exactly the kind of unplanned but inflammatory confrontation with Moscow they had been urgently striving to avoid. Turkey has repeatedly expressed concern over the attacks on the Turkmens, a Sunni Muslim minority who many Turks regard as their kith and kin. Like the Ankara government, the Turkmens oppose the regime of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad.Fighting in the Latakia governorate, in western Syria on the border with Turkey, has intensified following last month’s Russian military intervention. Russian warplanes are backing an offensive by Syrian government forces, Lebanese Hezbollah and Iranian Shia Muslim units, Turkmen fighters say.Turkey summoned Russia’s ambassador at the weekend to protest over the “intensive” bombing of the villages. Ahmet Davutoğlu, Turkey’s prime minister, said Ankara had demanded an immediate end to Russian military operations along the border. “It was stressed that the Russian side’s actions were not a fight against terror, but they bombed civilian Turkmen villages and this could lead to serious consequences,” Turkey’s foreign ministry said.The ministry said Turkmen villages had also been subjected to heavy bombardment by Russian planes in the Bayır-Bucak area of north-west Syria, close to Turkey’s Yayladağı border crossing in Hatay province. Like the US and Britain, Turkey says Russian forces have been predominantly targeting a range of anti-Assad rebel groups inside Syria, rather than concentrating their fire on Islamic State forces. Turkey also regards the areas in north-west Syria held by the Bayır-Bucak Turkmens as an important buffer preventing the territorial expansion of Syria’s Kurdish minority militias, whom it regards as terrorists linked to the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK).Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s president, expressed his anger at what Ankara said was a Russian incursion into Turkish airspace in October. Turkish forces recently shot down an unidentified drone along the border. Egged on by Turkey, Nato condemned as unacceptable, the Russian violations of Turkish airspace. Turkish media reports say Turkmens from 50 villages were forced to flee the Gimam area of Latakia governorate last week. There were also reports of Turkmen refugees fleeing from Syria towards Hatay province. Ömer Abdullah, commander of the Turkmen Sultan Abdülhamit Brigade, called on Ankara to intervene to halt the month-long offensive, the Cihan news agency reported.“We are trying to survive under unbearable brutality and we need Turkey’s help,” Abdullah said. “Every day our Turkmen brothers are dying. We expect the government to support us … Why are we left alone?” Abdullah said his forces were under attack from the Syrian army, Hezbollah and Iranian forces. “I don’t understand why our Muslim brothers remain silent. We need all kinds of support. It’s impossible to survive under such heavy bombardment,” he said.Turkey’s National Intelligence Organisation (MIT) was accused of involvement in clandestine arms shipments to Turkmen forces earlier this year. The Cumhuriyet newspaper published a report on arms smuggling on 29 May that included images of weapons allegedly carried by trucks operated by MIT. Mehmet Şandır, a former Nationalist Movement party MP, told Today’s Zaman newspaper that Turkmens were facing ethnic cleansing in northern Syria. “Turkey has to help the Turkmens. The aid going to the Turkmens is not enough,” he said. Russia’s intervention on behalf of the regime in Damascus angered Erdoğan, who vowed to bring down Assad after Turkish mediation efforts at the outbreak of the civil war in 2011 were rejected by Damascus. Like the US, Turkey fears Russia’s involvement will complicate an already fraught situation, prolong the war, and exacerbate the refugee crisis along Turkey’s border, across which more than 2 million Syrians have fled.Erdoğan was said to be especially annoyed that he was not consulted about Russia’s intentions during his visit to Moscow in September, when he met Putin. Turkey has a long history of tension with Russia over unresolved disputes such as Moscow’s support for Nagorno-Karabakh, the Armenian-controlled breakaway enclave in Azerbaijan.Ottoman Turkey and tsarist Russia fought a war in 1877-78. And Stalin briefly laid claim to parts of eastern Turkey at the end of the second world war. But ties have improved in recent times, with a series of energy and trade deals. Russia is now Turkey’s second-largest trading partner and 60% of its natural gas comes from Russia.Economic dependence is one powerful reason, among several, why Erdoğan will not want this latest border incident to escalate into a wider confrontation – although this is something that may not be entirely within his control. • This article was amended on 26 November 2015. An earlier version referred to Turkmen refugees “fleeing towards Turkey from Syria’s Hatay province”. The writer had intended to say that Turkmen refugees were fleeing from Syria towards Hatay province in Turkey.