Around 300 coalminers rallied in support of pro-Russia separatists in Donetsk on Wednesdayyesterday as rebel fighters fortified their positions in the city in anticipation of a possible attack by Ukrainian forces.The miners marched through the city centre to show support for the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, waving Russian flags and banners that read: "We will revive the power of Donbass.""I want peace and to be able to work and make money. I want the occupying soldiers to leave and return to their Kiev junta," one protester, Valery, who works at the state-owned Abakumova mine, told Reuters.Tensions are high across the city after Kiev used warplanes on Tuesday to dislodge rebels who had seized Donetsk airport. At least 50 pro-Russia fighters were killed in the offensive. More shooting was reported around the airport on Wednesday.On Wednesday, the Kiev government claimed the dead from three days of fighting included Russians from the North Caucasus republics of Chechnya, Ingushetia and Dagestan, as well as Serbs and Ukrainians.Dmytro Tymchuk, a government spokesman, said Ukrainian forces had recovered mortars and flamethrowers from the "terrorists", as well as a minibus carrying 10 anti-tank grenade launchers. The operation against "illegal armed formations" was continuing, he said.Alexander Borodai, the rebels' unelected prime minister, admitted that Chechen and Ossetian fighters had arrived in Donetsk. But he described them as "volunteers" who were protecting ethnic Russians.On Tuesday Chechen fighters told the Financial Times that Chechnya's president, Ramzan Kadyrov, had ordered them to eastern Ukraine. The fighters said they were from the "dikaya diviziya", or savage division. Kadyrov has denied the claim.Much of Donetsk – a city of one million – was largely deserted on Wednesday as residents stayed indoors and Ukrainian combat aircraft flew overhead. Witnesses reported hearing firing from inside the main security service building in Schorsa Street, occupied by Donetsk People's Republic fighters. The rebels claim to have shot down a pilotless drone flying over the area.The separatists seized the fire department building, removing crates and erecting barricades. Donetsk's city mayor, Oleksandr Lukyanenko, urged people nearby to stay home. "We're asking residents of neighbouring houses not to approach the [rebel-occupied] buildings, not to come on the balconies or the street without extreme necessity," he said, according to the Kyiv Post.A column of rebel military vehicles was spotted early on Wednesday trundling through the city centre towards the regional administration building, occupied by the separatist leadership since April. The vehicles included an armoured personnel carrier, with fighters perched on the top, a large-calibre gun, trucks, buses and an ambulance. Kiev officials accuse the rebels of using ambulances to transport weapons and military equipment.The miners, meanwhile, said the pro-western government in Kiev was made up of "fascists" who had seized power illegally. Petro Poroshenko, a chocolate baron who won Sunday's presidential election by a landslide, has offered the east greater autonomy. But he has vowed to take a tough line against armed separatists who have refused to give up their weapons, comparing them to Somali pirates. Ultra-nationalist Ukrainian leaders did badly in Sunday's poll, winning only 2% of the vote.Russia wants an immediate end to Ukraine's military offensive against the rebels. It has denied arming or training the separatists, who have taken power in several cities and towns across the region, but says their calls for autonomy from Kiev are legitimate and should be addressed.On Wednesday, Denis Pushilin, the self-appointed head of the Donetsk People's Republic, suggested the armed fighters from Russia were joining the battle against Kiev. He said more and more volunteers were crossing Ukraine's long eastern border from Russia to support the rebel cause. "We will drive fascism away," he declared.Coalminer Vladislav said he hoped Russia would recognise the Donetsk People's Republic as an independent state. "But I can also live on bread and water if that is what it takes to win independence," he said.The Union of Mine Workers, to which most of Wednesday's protesters belong, has close links to the Party of the Regions, which ousted president Viktor Yanukovych once led.Other miners' unions distanced themselves from the rally. "We did not organise this action," said Mykola Volynko, head of the Independent Miners' Trade Union of the Donbass, on Ukrainian television. "[The protesters and the Party of the Regions] continue to do everything to break up the country."