Russia is not China. And so far there has been no attempt by the Kremlin to crack down on the web, which is the last remaining source of free information for ordinary Russians in an otherwise controlled media landscape.The authorities keep an iron grip on television, ensure that most newspapers toe a pro-government line, and keep critics off the airwaves.Recently, however, there are signs that the Russian government is reconsidering its laissez-faire attitude towards the internet, especially in the wake of Iran's web-driven "green revolution".Several Russian bloggers who have posted critical articles have found themselves charged with extremism. One is in jail. Another was arrested after comparing Russia's prime minister Vladimir Putin to a penis.The Kremlin also uses other darker strategies for getting its PR message out, employing dozens of young, patriotic bloggers to flood chatrooms with a pro-Kremlin message, and to attack its enemies.Writing in last week's Moscow Times, the economist Yevgeny Gontmakher revealed how he came under "massive attack" from government bloggers after criticising Vladislav Surkov, the Kremlin's chief ideologue.He concluded: "The modern Russian propaganda machine permeates nearly every major media outlet and even extends to the blogosphere." As well as the Russian language blogosphere, bloggers are also active in the western press, including the Guardian.Overall the picture is fairly dismal. "Today's Russia is an authoritarian state where a corrupt and illiberal ruling elite maintains its power through media manipulation and the subversion of the democratic process," the US-funded watchdog Freedom House said in a report this month.Still, the situation in Russia is better than in former Soviet central Asia. According to Oleg Panfilov, director of Moscow's Centre for Journalism in Extreme Situations, former Soviet countries can be divided into three categories.The first includes Ukraine, Georgia, Armenia and probably Azerbaijan, where the internet is absolutely free. The next includes Russia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, where the web is largely or partly free. In the last category are Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, Central Asia's most repressive, and generally paranoid, republics. Here, there is severe censorship. In Uzbekistan even the BBC's website is banned, although you can watch BBC World TV in upmarket Tashkent hotels.The country's secret police maintain a vigilant watch on net use, and have arrested users in internet cafes. There are ominous signs that more countries across the region are beginning to follow the Uzbek example.Journalists, human rights groups and the Organisation for Security and Co-Operation in Europe (OSCE) have all decried recent proposals by Kazakhstan to introduce a new law on the internet. Under the law the government will be able to regulate forums, chats, blogs, and even online shops. Eight months ago Kazakhstan banned LiveJournal, the most popular social networking website among Russian-speakers, as well as a dozen opposition sites.The restrictions have spilled over into neighbouring Kyrgyzstan, which uses the same web servers. Enterprising Kazakhs are getting round these restrictions by using proxies, but the overall picture is not an encouraging one.