When Indiana Jones And The Kingdom Of The Crystal Skull hits our screens this week, we can be sure of one thing: it will be quite unlike any other Indiana Jones movie. After all, no movie franchise has so consistently flipped the narrative script from one episode to the next. And yet, when one looks closely at the oeuvre, one can spot certain motifs, chief among them being that IT'S EXACTLY THE SAME STORYLINE EVERY TIME. In a nutshell, Indy has to go somewhere exotic with a sidekick and swipe some kind of artefact before the Nazis get it. No, you can't accuse George Lucas and Steven Spielberg of skimping on their recycling. Now YOU too can enjoy the thrill of creating your own plot thanks to our Random Plotline Generator! Simply generate a random five-figure number between 00000 and 99,999, match the figures to the entries in the list of five plot-element pools, and you're set! For example, choose 63,824 and Indy is off to Russia, to steal a fancy box from the Nazis, whose leader will die spectacularly. Way to go Indy!1. Irritating sidekick0.  Little squeaking twerp in sideways baseball cap1.  Woman who can't act2.  Fat bloke from Transformers3.  Denholm Elliott, if he's not dead4.  Bloke who plays Gimli in Lord Of The Rings in a comedy fez5.  Woman who is almost certainly in league with the Nazis6.  Adorable helper monkey7.  Bald holy child possessed of other-worldly wisdom8.  Bumbling alcoholic Englishman9. Asian bloke who says "Goodniss grayshish me doctor Jone!" a lot2. Swish location0.  Austria in the early 1930s (comedy Hitler cameo mandatory)1.  Cairo2.  Deeply racist beetle-eating version of India3.  Arctic Russia4.  Bangkok, sans the saucy bits5.  Jerusalem6.  Baghdad, allowing scope for war allegory7.  Afghanistan (ditto)8.  The waterways of Venice9. All of the above3. The thing Indy has to find0.  The cross upon which Christ was crucified1.  The nails that were hammered into Christ's hands when he was crucified2.  Christ's pre-crucifixion pauper's bowl3.  Basically, anything to do with Christ dying4.  The tablets upon which Moses wrote the commandments5.  A Da Vinci painting with a code written into it6.  Mayan pre-Christian artefact sent by aliens7.  Pagan statuette that heals all wounds8.  Big fancy box with ghosts in it9. Just a massive box full of gold4. Evil forces that want it0.  The Nazis1.  The Nazis2.  The Nazis3.  The Nazis4.  The Nazis5.  The Russians6.  Opus Dei7.  South Asian cult fond of human sacrifices and beetles8.  The Masons9. The Nazis5. Death of chief bad guy0.  Minced by airplane propeller1.  Exploding Zeppelin lands on head2.  Melted by ghosts3.  Eaten by ghosts4.  Decapitated by a flying metal disc5.  Falls into river of subterranean lava6.  Crushed by sinking ceiling7.  At hands of cult fond of human sacrifices and beetles8.  Tortured to death by Indy unexpectedly9. Eaten by Christ