The parallels are written in the blood of the innocent. On a day much like any other, suicide bombers descend into the underground system of a major European city in the midst of the morning rush hour. They board a crowded train, crammed with commuters. They detonate their explosives. The impact is indiscriminate and lethal, in many cases life ending, in all others life changing. For a while, chaos reigns in the city. Then come the calls for action and the pledges of revenge. Five years ago the city was London. Yesterday morning it was Moscow.What happened yesterday at two Moscow underground stations was barbaric. Violence of this kind against innocent people is intolerable wherever it occurs. Quite rightly, there is a reflexive sense of solidarity between those who have suffered from terrorist outrages. Many Londoners know what many Muscovites have just experienced. Countries such as Britain, Spain and India, all of which have endured long and difficult battles against their own terrorists, as well as lethal terror attacks on their urban transport systems, have lessons – mistakes as well as successes – to share with the Russians.Our societies face a similar scourge. But we do not face a common enemy. It is important that we do not pretend otherwise, not least because the world is riddled with indefensible actions taken by states with varying degrees of justification in the name of a common struggle against terrorism. Most terrorism has local not global roots and most solutions are local too. The logic, if that is the right word, of the bombings lies in several previous attacks over the past decade and in Moscow's often ruthless and occasionally incompetent responses to them. This in turn is rooted in the bitter nexus of Moscow's relationship with its subject territories in the north Caucacus, a relationship that stretches back beyond the Soviet era to the imperial age. The bombers' choice of the Lubyanka underground station, underneath the headquarters of the FSB security police, as a target was surely very deliberate.At the very least yesterday's bombs question Russian claims to have quelled the insurgencies in the north Caucasus. A brutal stability may now exist by comparison with the era of the Chechen wars, but it has been achieved at the cost of massive and ongoing human rights violations. Yesterday's bombings follow last month's escalation of Russian action against insurgents in Ingushetia, which killed the suspected leader of the team that bombed the Moscow to St Petersburg express train in November. Rebels duly threatened reprisals that now seem to have occurred in the Moscow Metro. Russia's dirty war is not over after all. And, as so often, the innocent are the first to suffer.