The results of the "Name of Russia" poll – in which 50 million people voted by SMS, internet and telephone for who they thought to be the greatest Russian – have been announced. Ridiculous as these things sound, they do reflect the "state of the nation". Or "the youth of the nation", to be precise, since electronic voting is mostly practiced by younger groups.It is noteworthy who is in and who is out. Cultural and scientific geniuses did not feature very high in the land of Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. Alexandr Pushkin may be the greatest poet of Russia, but millions remember how they had to memorise his verses by heart, not always getting the meaning, and recite to fearsome teachers the next morning. So he gets the fourth place. Worse for Dmitrii Mendeleev (ninth place), the creator of Periodic Table of Elements – didn't we suffer enough in chemistry lessons? Instead, Alexandr Nevsky, a 13th century Russian prince who fought the Swedish and German invaders, came first. Voting for Nevsky is like voting for William the Conqueror: he is the first truly famous national historical figure and too distant to have controversy about him. Most Russians have a very vague recollection of what the prince actually did, apart from drowning some Teutonic knights in a lake. They draw their image of Nevsky from a Braveheart-style Soviet classic glorifying the Russian past. The prince is famed for the phrase seen on the screen: "He who comes to us with a sword, will die of a sword". Now the representatives of the Union of Christian Orthodox Citizens argue that the phrase should be adopted as a motto for the FSB (internal intelligence agency), while the prince is to be made the agency's patron saint.Stalin (third place) consistently generates public appeal, although not on the same scale as in his native Georgia. The reasons are not terribly sophisticated and mostly work for the young. Stalin is associated with the Soviet victory in the second world war and with the USSR's superpower status, held in high esteem on the world arena, in sharp contrast with the international humiliation of the 1990s. Moreover, Stalin is becoming more of a celebrity cult figure, with aesthetics of the period undergoing a revival. The vote for Stalin is less about approval of his actual rule, but more about the images of grandeur, Kalashnikovs and the Red Star, which made the Soviets world-famous. The power of televised lobbying was also apparent in the poll. When voters started to swing to put Stalin in the first place, elite figures geared into action. Prince Nevsky was effectively lobbied for by mytropolit Kirill reflecting the growing cultural influence of the church. The Burnt by the Sun director Nikita Mikhalkov advocated for Stolypin, a modernising reformer of the early 20th century under the last Tsar, who came only a short distance after the prince. This may tell us more about Mikhalkov's powers of persuasion than Stolypin's agricultural reforms. In the meantime, no Soviet or Russian reformist politicians (current rulers were excluded), such as Khrustshev, Gorbachev or Yeltsin, made it in the poll. Voting for a fairy-tale Nevsky means that segments of the public prefer the symbols of glory to harsh realities. The state of the nation is of escapism, while national history is held in high esteem – especially if it is too distant to be remembered. Indeed, if such a poll were to be done in this country, which place would Shakespeare come in?