Vladimir Putin. Testosterone Vesuvius. Behold him, his alert nipples and his Kalashnikov rifle trundling past in a tank. Or in a PR picture playing pully-ears with a tiger. We'd be saying "Crikey Vladimir, it's a bloody tiger, run!" And Pooty-Poot would be all, "Dude, I'm Putin, this enormous land-beast totally respects my tough fiscal policy reforms and Leningrad judo king trophies. We're all good." Meanwhile a flurry of worried advisers holding boxes of Elastoplasts stare on. Putin is a real man, of this we can be sure, but details of his actions between his Rambo Dr Dolittle photocalls are less clear, which is why BBC2's Putin, Russia & The West (Thu, 9pm, BBC2) is rather fascinating.In part one, Taking Control, we watch Putin's first press interviews as prime minister and his swift move to acting president, then president, and see the footage of his frankly astonishing (by British standards anyway) public declawing of Russia's oligarchs. Several cocksure blokes in shiny suits swagger into a boardroom, the documentary freeze-framing to explain how each oligarch harvested their billions – oil, advertising et al. Following some perfunctory chit-chat, they're all informed that they're paying tax from now on, or being privatised and/or booted out of the country. "This is very fair, yes, very fair," they chunter through tight lips, fists scrunched. It's impossible to envision Nick Clegg hauling Philip Green or Goldman Sachs and Vodafone to Downing Street one morning for a fiscal shafting. Poor Nick Clegg: I wouldn't trust him with a stubborn jam jar lid. We've been furnished with no photos of Clegg stripped down to underpants, nuzzling the nose of a wild stallion and his political positioning is all the poorer for it.Putin's voice during the oligarch dethroning procedure is eerily matter-of-fact, yet his eyes occasionally twinkle, hinting at a bubbling inner joy at his own plutonium-grade chutzpah. Soon Putin and George Bush are planning a weekend sleepover, Colin Powell and Condaleezza Rice both providing BBC2 with candid recollections of the moment a bright spark asks Bush, "So President Bush, do you trust President Putin now?" Bush, totally put on the spot, ventures: "I looked the man in the eye. I found him to be very straightforward and trustworthy and we had a very good dialogue. I was able to get a sense of his soul." Powell winces at the memory: "Well I wouldn't have gone so far … I was looking at Putin and thinking, 'Look there's a reason this man speaks fluent German – he was in the KGB.'"Putin and Bush play a merry game of tit-for-tat, expelling each other's spies, while keeping the bonhomie vibrant enough for trips to The Nutcracker, as Bush tolerates Putin's moans that he's really rather concerned about Pakistan's al-Qaida network and he's sure they're planning to attack America. Bush brushes this worry off as minor.It's hard not to warm to Putin in this opening chapter, even if the sequences on Chechnya are distinctly chilling and one's heart lurches slightly for the plight of one feisty oil field-hogging oligarch who stands his ground against Vlad and has virtually everything aside from the socks he's standing in spirited away. "You controlled politics for so long. You put me in charge. This is your own doing," Putin tells the oligarchs, biting his lip to stop smiling. He's the tiger who came to tea who ate all the buns then ate you too.