Floods do not have to be political disasters. Gerhard Schröder's response when the Elbe burst its banks reversed a federal election in 2002 that he was predicted to lose. The floods of Gloucestershire established Gordon Brown's reputation as a competent leader in 2007, until he himself sabotaged it. But disasters occupy a place apart in Russia. It is not just that major incidents such as aeroplane crashes, forest fires, gas explosions and roof collapses occur regularly. It is also that they hit a live political nerve. Survivors do not see themselves exclusively as victims of fate. They also see themselves as victims of their state. There is so little trust between the two, and no independent institutions to cushion the shock, that disaster presents a surer challenge to the man at the top than many a demonstration.Vladimir Putin moved swiftly on Saturday to show he was in charge of the rescue operation after a flash flood swept at least 171 people away in the town of Krymsk in southern Russia, submerging thousands of houses the night before. He and the regional governor travelled up and down the disaster zone by helicopter and minibus, and Mr Putin ordered an inquiry into why warnings were not given and who should have given them. "I ask you to co-operate," he told a meeting of emergency officials in the town. Neither the footage of Mr Putin demanding answers nor the postmen stuffing envelopes of cash into householders' hands will be anything like enough.Whether or not it turns out to be the case that the wall of water which swept through the town came from a nearby reservoir whose gates were temporarily opened (this was denied yesterday by emergencies minister Vladimir Puchkov), or that it was unloaded on Krymsk to save lucrative oil installations in the nearby port of Novorossiysk, the truth will have a hard time making itself heard. The working assumption is that power is theft and that when its venal rulers are not actively thieving they are passive connivers in the collapse of the state. So often accused from afar of being the strongman of a strong state, Mr Putin, as viewed from Krymsk and many other disaster zones like it, is the exact opposite – a weak man presiding over a collapsing state, one hard put to deliver the bare minimum of emergency services.Mr Putin cannot be blamed for everything that goes wrong in Russia. He can, however, reflect on one aspect of this blame game. Each time a disaster strikes, Mr Putin finds that nothing stands between him and the outraged victim. That is a consequence of years of "manual control", years of lack of investment in infrastructure, and the vertical structure of directly appointed officials, which is now buckling under the weight of its own ineptitude. That is by design, and it is a rotten one.