The weekend election of Johann Lamont to lead the Scottish Labour party is important. But only time and the Scottish National party will decide whether it will matter to anyone except political anoraks. After its debacle in the Holyrood elections, Scottish Labour desperately needs to regain a sense of political purpose and electoral credibility. That, though, is easier to say than to do. Labour remains by some distance the second party in Scotland. But it has long been used to coming a dominant first. Ms Lamont said the right things about the need for change in her acceptance speech on Saturday, but it remains open to doubt how far she and those who elected her really want to go.The manner of Ms Lamont's victory has distinct echoes of Ed Miliband's narrow victory as British Labour leader 15 months ago. Now, as then, the new leader won in an electoral college contest only because of heavy support from the trade unions. Now, as then, the defeated candidate – Ken Macintosh, like David Miliband – won a comfortable majority among the party's individual members. The only big difference between the two contests is that Ms Lamont also got a majority among the party's parliamentarians, something Ed Miliband failed to do. Yet the facts remain. She is not the choice of the party grassroots and she would not be leader under the one-member-one-vote systems now used by all Britain's other major parties. It does not help that Labour has failed to publish a full result, including the numbers voting. Labour should look again at its electoral system. It looks unfair and it is unfair.Ms Lamont faces four immediate challenges. The first is to raise her profile. No Labour leader in Scotland has ever been less well known. The second is to start cutting into the SNP's substantial opinion poll lead and to start winning back lost seats in local government again; she does not have much time, since all Scottish local authorities will go to the polls as soon as May. The third is to find a skilful way of combatting the SNP leader Alex Salmond's current mastery of his chosen arenas of political combat at Holyrood and in the television studios: this is more a matter of choosing a different and cannier style of combat rather than trying to outpunch Mr Salmond directly. And the fourth is to work with other parties (and civil society too) to reverse the SNP's current grip on the constitutional agenda, particularly by challenging the nationalists' delaying tactics on the independence referendum plan and by prising Mr Salmond's hands off the devolution alternative too. All of these things can be done – but Labour has thought that before, and failed. Ms Lamont does not have much time to prove she will be better than her failed predecessors.