Keen to pursue a career in political risk analysis, Alan Clements originally had no interest in going into television, describing TV as "just something that was in the corner". That attitude did not last. Clements took a Christmas job as a runner in the BBC's Glasgow offices and went on to make a fortune from creating a Scottish "super-indie" production company before selling it to an even bigger indie. He joined STV, Scotland's main commercial network, a year ago as the head of content, but not before a headline-making court case.It would be unfair to say that controversy follows Clements around, but it has been an eventful year. STV has dropped some ITV mainstays from its schedule, including Doc Martin and The Bill. It didn't even screen Wuthering Heights, opting instead for a repeat of a 2002 police drama starring Daniela Nardini and beating the adaptation's audience share. The company is also engaged in a trio of legal disputes with ITV, which supplies about 90% of its programmes, over programming fees, digital media rights and advertising sales.In August, ITV's chief operating officer, John Cresswell, claimed STV was "damaging the ITV network and its ABC1 profile". Claim and counter-claim are heading for the courts. Is it fair to say that STV is trying to devolve from ITV? Clements, who is still keenly interested in politics, pauses a moment before replying: "I think it is very fair. The company fundamentally faced a crossroads. You could either have become ITV in Scotland and just taken all the ITV schedule apart from local news. I'm really proud and absolutely unrepentant that we have gone down the road of STV being the national broadcaster of Scotland." Thus soaps are sacrosanct, Murderland with Robbie Coltrane is in, but Al Murray's Pub Landlord is definitely out, because it "goes down like a cup of cold sick in Scotland, a cockney landlord shouting at an audience".And STV did not screen Collision, ITV's big drama success last month, which was stripped across five weeknights at 9pm. Instead, it asked its five million-strong audience to search for The Greatest Scot, with five documentaries across the week, accompanied by a debate and an online vote. Robert Burns was revealed as the greatest Scot in a St Andrew's Day special. While that beat ITV's offering in terms of audience share, the five factual programmes were not as popular as Collision, which starred the Scottish actor Douglas Henshall – which STV didn't know when it decided to opt out. Clements refuses to admit the decision was a mistake, adding "it was a lesson learnt". He says the policy is "not about cost", in spite of STV receiving 6% of its budget back when it opts out of ITV programming, but is rather "a real statement of intent for us".STV matters because it is attempting to reverse the 20-year destruction of ITV regional production centres across Britain in places such as Norwich and Birmingham, he says. "I don't think we want that and I don't think our audience wants that." If the government grants STV independent producer status next year, it will make it easier to add to its first BBC commission, the daytime programme Antiques Road Trip.Amazing showIt is clear that Clements aims to transform STV. "The slogan is from Scotland to the world, and it is not a sense of everything has to have a kilt in it. It is about being a producer that produces for me, for Scotland, for the UK and internationally." He says STV is proud to be part of the network. "Who could not watch X Factor on Saturday night and think that was an amazing show, although the Scottish guy was really rubbish, slightly disappointingly." Combining those hit shows with local product is the "best of both worlds".Back to the legal battle. ITV claims STV owes it £38m in unpaid programming bills and that STV is attempting to opt out of programming agreements retrospectively. In turn, STV claims ITV has withheld money it is due as part of its ad sales agreement. The third legal fight is about digital media rights. Yet Clements still has to deal with the Sassenachs down at the ITV network centre on a weekly basis, saying that relationships are "on a professional and personal level very cordial". He says he gets on well with Peter Fincham, the ITV director of television, who also jumped from an independent production company to a major broadcaster.But, while Clements thinks "people have never felt more Scottish", proud newspapers, including the Herald and the Scotsman, have suffered circulation slumps. In September the Daily Record sold about 50,000 copies fewer than the Scottish Sun. Figures from that month showed that STV's audience share decline has accelerated this year, falling to 16.9% for the first 34 weeks of 2009, from 19.1% over the same period last year. It is below ITV1's audience share, which fell from 18.3% to 17.3%.STV, which owns the two ITV franchises in Scotland, believes it can fight the trend for regional consolidation in the industry. Hence it wants to steal a march on the BBC and create its own version of a Scottish Six, a one-hour news bulletin produced entirely in Scotland that replaces the two half-hour bulletins of Scottish and national news. It wants to combine the 30-minute STV News and ITN's ITV News into a single one-hour news bulletin with 10 minutes of ultra-local news from centres including Dundee, Perth, Edinburgh and Aberdeen.Clements sells this as a virtue, but a separate 30-minute local bulletin based in Aberdeen would be axed to make room for the new programme and staff fear job losses in Aberdeen, Inverness and Dundee. And its fate is inextricably linked to the government's pilot schemes for independently funded news consortia to replace ITV regional news, one of which is for the Scottish Borders.Clements maintains that when STV airs quality homegrown shows it equals or beats ITV's offerings. But audiences can desert it dramatically, such as when it opted out of Marple in September for a repeat of the surfing movie Blue Crush. A disastrous 112,000 viewers watched, putting STV last out of the five terrestrial channels. The Scottish Sun asked "Has STV lost its Marples?". There are also questions of quality. One newspaper derided STV's Made in Scotland, presented by the Taggart actor John Michie, as a "no-expense-incurred travelogue".Clements is pushing ahead with The Scots At War, another hint of the direction that STV is moving in, not so much for the nationalistic subject matter – part of it will focus on the Black Watch – but because it is co-produced by the History Channel. If the stalwart detective drama Taggart is axed by ITV, STV hopes it can survive with co-producers.Over lunch, Clements is cheerful, charming and fizzing with ideas, so it is surprising to learn that colleagues once labelled him a "little weasel" and worse in a court case. It is not overstating it to say that his decision to jump ship in March 2007 to STV went down badly at RDF, the super-indie production company where he worked, particularly when Clements tried to take some projects with him. He and his wife, the Newsnight presenter Kirsty Wark, had created Scotland's first "super-indie" producer, when they merged their production company, Wark Clements, with the fellow indie Ideal World to form IWC. RDF bought it for £14m in 2005 and Clements agreed to stay for three years, pocketing £2m in cash and shares. But then he announced his intention to up sticks for STV.Constructive dismissalThere was a court case, a personal and professional nadir, during which evidence revealed that he got his wife's personal assistant to hack into a colleague's email account. Clements sued for constructive dismissal, lost the case and had to pay about £450,000 in legal costs. He appealed but a peace deal was struck with RDF that meant that Clements could start at STV three months earlier. His settlement that allowed him to sign on at STV also bars him from discussing it.No profile of Clements can be complete without a question about his wife. How does he cope with being referred to as Mr Kirsty Wark? He says they now lead totally separate professional lives. "When I am running content at STV nobody asks me 'what does Kirsty think of it?'."Some weeks, he adds, they say goodbye to each other on a Monday morning and don't see each other until Friday. "We get a lot of 'we are the power couple' but when you are sitting at home on a Saturday night having a beer and watching X Factor you don't feel the most powerful couple in Scotland."CVAge 48Education Stranraer Academy; University of GlasgowCareer 1989-1991 freelance journalist 1990 founder and managing director, Wark Clements & Co 2004 chairman and director of specialist factual, IWC Media 2006 creative director, IWC Media 2008 director of content, STV