Campbeltown is a bit off the beaten track but it contains my favourite bookshop - an oasis of interesting books. My own interest is in Scottish regional histories, and it has a great selection of Scottish books as well as an antiquarian section which turns up some amazing stuff. For everyone else there is a great history section, biography, literature and the rest. Again they have some fascinating out of print and antiquarian books as well, which they also sell online. The owners are friendly and it is the kind of place where politics, religion and philosophy can often be heard being debated among the shelves.Robert BurrellA real treasure of a bookshop. Stocking a comprehensive range of books and the usual accompaniments such as cards, maps and stationary. An extensive selection of titles by Scottish authors, combined with a comprehensive range of books on local history and attractions proves there is everything you need. From the moment you walk in, your enquiry is met with charm and expertise by the three knowledgeable ladies, or the owner, Fiona Roy. This is the embodiment of a great little bookshop: everything you expect and some pleasant surprises!Audrey WedderburnA treasure house of books on Islay's two main claims to fame - Islay Malt Whiskies (we have six - yes, six - working distilleries on our small island) and the legendary Lords of the Isles who ruled vast tracts of the west coast of Scotland during the 14th and 15th centuries from their council at Finlaggan on Islay. In addition, the ever-attentive proprietor Pat Roy has shelves of the latest fiction, a large range of books on general Scottish subjects and a complete section for children and young people. With major cutbacks in the local authority's library service, The Celtic House provides a literally unique book service to our island community.George RhindNot since a 1980s visit to Creative Camera's legendary Bookroom have I encountered a bookshop devoted to photography ... until now. Beyond Words, situated near Edinburgh's historic Royal Mile, is an Aladdin's cave for photography devotees. Here, in a shop staffed by friendly, knowledgeable people you will find countless volumes on the artistic, historical, pictorial and practical aspects of photography. The proprietor, Neil McIlwraith, also holds regular book launches and publisher displays, frequently in conjunction with the nearby Stills Gallery, the most recent being Arizona's Nazraeli Press. Finally, by becoming a "close friend" you receive regular newsletters and a discount on purchases.Alistair MaitlandEdinburgh does, in all fairness, have a good few independent and secondhand bookshops, but even among these Transreal Fiction tends to stand out. As may be guessed it specialises in fantasy and science fiction, and the selection of books it has in these two categories is impressive. It lacks the classical independent bookshop image of worn leather sofas and old furnishings, but this is more than made up for by the aforementioned plethora of titles decorating the shelves. For those not into Transreal's rather narrow, specialist field it also sports books on arts, mythology and similar. Well worth the visit.Sigve MoenWord Power - motto "books to change our world" - is Edinburgh's pre-eminent radical outlet. Via a tiny, packed, bookstore and a functional website they stock every conceivable alternative, critical and imaginative work. Word Power is run by warm people who believe wholeheartedly in a better world, and resistance though education. Rather than simply flog merchandise they constantly organise talks and events. And they are even located next to Susie's Diner, a great vegetarian caf?Word Power is an old, honest friend to every activist in Edinburgh.Stoned WolfA delight for anyone interested in science fiction and fantasy, although the stock is not restricted to these subjects (it covers a wide range, from children's books upward).The proprietors, Richard and Marion, are booklovers and will go out of their way to get books or advise on availability, publication dates etc. If your desired book is unavailable, they can usually find a number of other books to match your reading tastes As I now live in the Midlands I can't get to them and have to shop via their catalogue.Bill MilesLovely secondhand bookshop in Scotland's book town, specialising in social, environmental and women's interests. Part of the bookshop is set aside for a coffee shop serving homemade cakes. Spent a happy afternoon there on a sunny winter's day a couple of years ago, looking for out-of-print Martha Gellhorn and finding a rare copy of Hemingway's Women by Bernice Kert instead.Maria del Carmen CleggYou'll never find what you're looking for in this extremely cluttered hideaway in the West End, but who knows what else you'll uncover? With tottering piles of literature threatening to take over the shop, and a room devoted to books for under a pound, this is the impecunious browser's paradise. Don't forget to say hello to Trevor the friendly ginger cat, who you'll find asleep on the chair next to the foreign language dictionaries.Anna BullWith just one branch, this small but perfectly formed shop is run by enthusiastic, knowledgeable staff who have a knack of recommending just the right book, and are keen supporters of local writing groups, literary events and readings. With its wonderful range of contemporary fiction, children's, local interest and poetry, the shop has a warm, friendly atmosphere - plus great coffee - and is a much-loved hub of this small market town.Fiona DoakOne of the many cute surprises that await the visitor to Stromness - the capable baker, the quintessential butcher, the extraordinary Pier Arts Centre - is the huge and tiny Stromness Books and Prints. Here are no display tables, no specials, no e-money and no sofas, no drinks, no website, just books - one of everything or it can be obtained chop-chop - and the grizzled Tam McPhail, bookseller, wit. For the resident, this shop like the rest provides the necessities unfailingly - repartee, jokes, shelter in all weathers, and that-book-you-didn't-know-you-wanted-till-you-saw-it-on-the-counter AS THOUGH HE KNEW YOU WERE COMING. And your friends coming and going as you are yourself. If the Strand in New York has eight miles of books, Stromness Books and Prints (and there are no prints) has about a hundred yards, but everything you need is there before you. All you need is courage.Alistair PeeblesA true haven! It actually encourages you to treat it as a library, with comfy sofas and a cosy coffee shop (with good coffee). The range of books is amazing. I am interested in poetry andunexpectedly found some of George Mackay Brown that I never knew existed. Staff actually encourage you to browse ... I spent hours there and it really lifted my mood!Gill RussellA bookshop with a working water wheel that generates electricity to illuminate the great range of books. Converted from an old meal mill, this amazing old stone built building has books and a coffee shop at the lower level, books and music on the main level, and books and art displays at the top. Situated in a small town in the middle of the Scottish highlands, the bookshop is a gem, both for the local population and visitors. The friendly staff and comfortable atmosphere make browsing, and buying, a pleasure.Chris TauberA beautifully converted watermill off the main street, this is a bookshop which encourages involvement. Children's reading groups, adult book clubs, and regular readings from an eclectic range of authors, all focused on the local community. Reasonable prices, with offers at least as good as the chains. The standard is always in stock, the obscure is ordered faster than any chain store I've come across. Its friendly (and child friendly - they have their ownroom), has a great Fairtrade coffee shop with a terrace overlooking the stream and knowledgable, friendly staff. With a modern print art gallery on the top floor, its a place you can spend a day.Tony Roome