Scottish motorists pay significantly less than their English counterparts for car insurance, according to research published today.Price comparison website moneysupermarket.com analysed almost 1m motor insurance quotes over 12 months and found that Scotland has seven of the 10 cheapest areas in the UK for car insurance.Truro is named as the best place to live for the cheapest insurance quotes, while Penzance and Bury St Edmunds were the only only other places outside Scotland to make the list.The research found that residents in parts of Birmingham and Manchester pay the most to insure their vehicle. Areas in both cities accounted for six of the 10 most expensive places to base your car, and motorists in Manchester could find their premiums around £500 or 126% more expensive than those in Scotland.Liverpool, which previously had the dubious honour of being the worst place to base a car for insurance purposes, has just one area on the list.Steve Sweeney, head of motor insurance at moneysupermarket.com, said: "An array of factors can determine the price you will pay for car insurance, from crime and population levels in your area to where you park your vehicle. If your area is classified as 'high risk', insurers who don't assess motor insurance on an individual basis may adopt a blanket approach and many motorists could find their insurance is quite high to compensate for this."If premium costs were evaluated on a case-by-case basis, many motorists would receive quotes at a better price to match their individual circumstances."£356, TR1, Truro, Cornwall£375, KY12, Dunfermline, Scotland£380, KY6, Glenrothes, Scotland£380, DD5, Dundee, Scotland£381, AB15, Aberdeen, Scotland£383, IP33, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk£383, FK3, Grangemouth, Scotland£385, IV30, Elgin, Scotland£386, TR18, Penzance, Cornwall£386, DD2, Dundee, Scotland£873, M13, Ardwick/Longsight/Chorlton-on-Medlock, Manchester£840, B10, Small Heath, Birmingham£821, M8, Crumpsall/Cheetham Hill, Manchester£820, L7, Edge Hill/Fairfield/Kensington, Liverpool£819, BD8, Girlington/Manningham/Lower Grange, Bradford£819, B11, Sparkhill/Tyseley, Birmingham£814, B12, Balsall Heath, Birmingham£810, B8, Washwood Heath/Ward End/Saltley, Birmingham£809, E12, Manor Park, London£805, BT12, Falls, BelfastSource: moneysupermarket.com. Quotes based on a sample of 988,742, taken between September 2008 and August 2009.• Always shop around at renewal time. Don't assume your current provider is giving you the best renewal quote. Look at several car insurance comparison sites such as Comparethemarket.com, moneysupermarket.com and the Guardian's own to see what you can save.• Buy online. Many car insurers offer discounts to customers that shop on the web.• Reduce your mileage. When applying for insurance you have to estimate the number of miles you will do each year. If you aren't travelling much you usually pay less.• You'll get a better deal if you can reduce risk of the car being damaged while you're not using it. Keep the car off the road at night in a garage or on a drive to cut your premiums.• Make sure you have an alarm and immobiliser.• Pick a car with a smaller engine. The bigger and faster the vehicle the more it will cost to insure.• Up the excess. Agreeing to pay a higher excess, such as £500 instead of £100, can reduce your premiums. Don't forget you will need to pay this in the event of a claim, so be sure you can afford it.• Add an older driver. Young men adding their mothers to their policies have seen big savings as a result. Don't be tempted to put the policy in their name though. This is called fronting and could invalidate your insurance.• Make sure you get adequate cover. As you look for the lowest price, don't be tempted to scrap things you really need. Skipping extras you can't do without – such as legal fees cover – will be a false economy if you need to claim.