It's all the rage these days to suggest Gordon Brown look to the United States for inspiration, to see if he can summon up some Obama-style vision and charisma. Apart from the obvious difficulties (looks, personality, political culture, etc) Brown could do a lot worse than take a look in his own backyard – Scotland. For increasingly, Scotland is beginning to look like the progressive country that we hoped New Labour would produce.The Scots introduced a smoking ban a full year ahead of the English, and proved to their southern cousins that yes, it could work. They have free care for the elderly – an expensive but essential part of the welfare state, surely. People can have free eye tests north of the border. And now the Scottish executive has just announced the scrapping of parking fees at NHS hospitals.Hospital parking charges may not seem a huge issue to those men in Whitehall, who generally visit hospitals only on official business in their government cars. But to the thousands of people who attend hospitals every day, whether to visit sick friends or relatives, or to attend out-patient appointments, they are quite often the last straw.I recently rushed to hospital with a relative, grabbing only the car keys to follow the ambulance. As a result of NHS re-organisation, the perfectly good local hospital which has served a wide community well for years, is being downgraded. So after several hours in casualty, we were sent off to another hospital some 10 miles away. Again, I followed the ambulance in my car, arriving in the small hours of the morning to find I needed to pay parking charges.Not just small charges either – £2 an hour, every hour.After the best part of a week, when I and other family members were visiting for long periods of time, we had spent a small fortune on parking charges. We could afford the £12 a day, but there are plenty of people, particularly pensioners, who are more likely to be attending hospitals, who cannot.Apart from the fact that some hospitals are so overstretched that relatives are needed to feed, wash and dress patients, it is obviously better for the patients' wellbeing to have visitors. Yet health minister Ben Bradshaw has dismissed the idea of abolishing hospital charges here with a breezy "It is not a sensible use of limited resources." Well, it's all about priorities – but it seems to me that the Scottish executive have got their priorities right.Scotland is becoming an increasingly attractive place to live – and, they've even had better weather than the English this summer.