"Scotland is very like Provence," Sylvain Chomet declares, and waits a second for the ridiculousness of what he has just said to sink in. Who wouldn't be fooled by the lavender fields of Lanarkshire, the sun-bleached hills of Kirkcaldy or the olive groves of Auchtermuchty?Isn't Govan even a kind of Monte Carlo by the Clyde with scratchcards for roulette and Buckfast for Bordeaux? And what is a midge, if not a cicada that has yet to find its voice?"No, no, I am serious," Chomet insists, half in outrage. "Laugh if you like, but they are very similar. The light is exactly the same as in Provence. That is, when there is light in Scotland. And I am telling you, you only get this special light in these two places, nowhere else."Which doesn't quite explain why Chomet, having had Hollywood studios falling over themselves to accommodate him after the huge and unexpected worldwide success of Belleville Rendez-Vous (or The Triplets of Belleville, everywhere but the UK), decided to set up shop in Edinburgh, which has little or no tradition of animation and only a tiny pool of artists to draw on. He is not quite sure why either. But he did.Several million working hours later, the result is The Illusionist, the most beautiful love letter ever written to the city on screen: an elegiac, hugely moving meditation on fathers and daughters set in the dying days of musical hall in the late 1950s, when TV and rock'n'roll were taking over the world, but whose real star is incontestably Auld Reekie herself.The film will open the Edinburgh film festival next week, which is only fitting since it was the festival that first brought Chomet to the city eight years ago on the wave of critical acclaim for Belleville Rendez-Vous. It coincided with one of those once-in-a-century stretches of fine weather when Edinburgh and Scotland looked like something from a tourist board fairytale. Chomet fell under the spell. He and his English wife and producer Sally decided to move to North Berwick. "It was so, so beautiful. Like you were in heaven, or in this lost bit of the Caribbean."What he didn't know then was that if you took off your jumper on its inviting beach you risked pneumonia and that if you dared go into the sea, "you die! It is not just that it is freezing, the wind will get you on the way out if the water doesn't."Chomet had come to Edinburgh that summer with an old Jacques Tati script in his pocket. It had been slipped to him by Tati's daughter, Sophie Tatischeff, touched by his little nods to her father's Jour de Fête and Monsieur Hulot in Belleville. "I think Tati wrote the script for her. I think he felt guilty that he spent too long away from his daughter when he was working. Little girls turn into a woman in such a short period," Chomet says. "Tati had this feeling that he had missed something essential. It's an extremely emotional story, so personal that I think he was afraid to make it himself. Really, she gave me a precious gift and sadly Sophie Tatischeff died from lung cancer – like her father – before I could thank her for letting me have the script."Its story – of a magician forced to go further and further from his family for work as variety dies – tallies uncannily with the real Jacques Tatischeff's own feelings of being at odds with the brave new modern world. The son of White Russian aristocrats, Tati often employed clowns and acrobats from music hall on his films just to give them work. Like them, he felt he was a refugee from the past and the future.It was that first visit to Edinburgh that convinced Chomet to change the setting of the film to Scotland. "I liked the idea of the magician going to London from Paris to escape rock'n'roll, only to realise that is where it was coming from, and then being forced further and further north, doing garden parties and weddings." Eventually he ends up in the Hebrides, a sequence inspired by the coming of electricity to the island of Iona in 1959, which as in the film was celebrated with a ceilidh. "What they were celebrating really was the end of their culture and way of life."There the illusionist meets a young Gaelic-speaking girl who is just as lost and alone as he is. "He is reconstructing a family and the girl is craving a father figure. It all works perfectly," says Chomet.Setting the story in Scotland was one thing. Making it there was another. The biggest problem was finding the animators. Like the music-hall acts in the film, animators had become convinced by Hollywood that their time had passed. "A lot of animators, basically people who can draw, got scared by these wankers from Disney saying that 2D animation is dead, that it was only going to be 3D and Pixar from now on. It is just typical shit by people in ties who don't know what they are talking about. Are they saying that Aardman is dead, too, then? I mean how stupid are these people? Saying 2D is dead is like saying that a car race is the future of the Tour de France."We had trouble because the fantastic animators we found had got really stressed because they thought after our film there was not going to be any 2D any more. Some were driving buses or retraining. People really had been made to believe that the end had come. The truth is that animation is always mixing things up: pen and paper, stop motion, puppets, 3D. Suddenly this bizarre competition has been created. What it is, one more time, is this American reflex to kill off the competition, to say that you can only do it one way and destroy everything else that went before. The whole society is like that. They destroy what they have to build something new. They end up with no roots to draw on, nothing to compare their work with to see if it is good or not. American culture is in real danger of starving itself to dead. You just have to see what Hollywood is producing to see how narrow it is getting."Chomet's fury at Disney is the anger of someone who has fallen out of love. "Walt Disney invented everything, he absorbed all these guys who came from the eastern countries who brought their rich cultures with them. He found this brilliant way of making money out of a new artform." Chomet even worked for Disney before Belleville. "I learned an awful lot from them – how not to do it. The artists have no say any more. The suits decide everything now, and there are so many of them. It is like the dinosaurs, it has got too big and the brain is too small. With us, every cent we spend goes on the screen."Even so, it was to Disney that Chomet turned first for inspiration. "101 Dalmations had a big effect on me, and you can see it in this film." It is true: Chomet's London and Edinburgh draw on that palette, deepened with his own lugubrious take on Tati's comedy. But, most of all, what we see is the fantastical depth and detail of images, like the history of French bande dessinée (comic books) stacking up in the background, begging to be noticed. "That is what I come from," Chomet says. "That is my roots. We really researched Edinburgh of 1959 right down to recreating the famous chip shops of the time where everything, including the lobster, is battered. You know I miss Scotland a lot, but it is true the food is a bit special. This idea that you have to do violence to food before you eat it. Batter it up good and proper before you can eat it."Chomet moved back to France to live in Provence last July. "I still love Edinburgh and Scotland and the Scots, but after five years I wanted to see a summer. I just wanted to be able to plan a picnic. Is that too much to ask? You can leave someone and still love them. It is sometimes best to go when you are still in love, before it turns bitter, like a old chip." Yes, Scotland has left her mark – a greasy, salt 'n' sauce shaped one – on Sylvain Chomet.The Illusionist opens the Edinburgh Film Festival June 16 at the Festival Theatre. More information: www.edfilmfest.org.uk. It goes on general release on August 20.