When I started knocking on Highland doors in May 1983, two things struck me more than any other. First was the sheer depth of hostility towards the Tories in general. Second was the particular hostility towards Margaret Thatcher and her local ministerial spear-carrier, energy minister and incumbent MP of 13 years' standing, Hamish Gray. People would denounce them unequivocally, often in graphic terms. More than once the view was advanced that it was a pity the IRA had not succeeded in their ultimate objective when they bombed the Grand Hotel in Brighton. This is not the Highland way.And then, perversely, would come the throwaway, sign-off remark – to the effect of: "At least you know where you stand with Maggie – she hates us and we hate her."Therein, 30 years ago, lay the great Thatcher asset – and the electorally lethal Thatcher impact in Scotland. A strong, so strong, leader. Sharp definition, hard edges, no effort at fuzzy contours (David Cameron, take note). Yet a leader that a wide cross-section of Scots had come to despise. As I spread my wings in politics, I discovered many Thatcher voters down south who were the same kind of people who loathed her in Scotland. They were puzzled by the Scots' antipathy, given the Falklands war and the strong militaristic history of the Highlands and elsewhere.Like John Major in her wake, Thatcher was convinced that she understood the Scots – yet couldn't understand why we remained so stubbornly resistant towards the notion of understanding her. But we reckoned we got Thatcher only too well and didn't like what we saw, far less what we heard.That 1983 general election contained the telltale seeds of eventual Scottish Tory self-destruction. The Tories triumphed, of course, and lost only two sitting MPs – Hamish Gray and the social-security scrounger-bashing Iain Sproat, who vacated his marginal Aberdeen seat and headed for the Scottish Borders, only to suffer defeat there at the hands of the Alliance. By 1987, anti-Tory tactical voting had taken hold. A decade later they were wiped out in terms of Scotland-based Westminster constituency representation. Scottish – and by extension UK – politics has been skewed ever since.If the Falklands war was the making of Thatcher, then the poll tax was her achilles heel – not least in Scotland. That, plus (inevitable) de-industrialisation, coupled to her perceived overbearing and patronising manner. We were not unique in such a response but she failed to appreciate that Scots are balanced, canny folk – insofar as we have a well-developed chip on each shoulder. Scotland was her mission impossible.In the current wall-to-wall media welter, I caught the current leader of the Scottish Tories, Ruth Davison MSP, being asked if Thatcher was an electoral asset for her. She pointed out that she was only 10 years old when she ceased to be prime minister. Certainly, in 1983, it did not occur to me to criticise Harold Macmillan or Alec Douglas-Home on the doorstep as a sure-fire vote turner.The fact that the Thatcher question even gets asked confirms vividly just what an upas tree she remains for Scottish Toryism.