Last weekend I was doing phone canvassing for Barack Obama in the key state of Virginia which the Democrats won.Yesterday I was phone canvassing for Gordon Brown in the Glenrothes byelection. The two results are impressive. Might they herald the return of serious adult politics? Having come into parliament in a mid-term by-election in 1994, I am sensitive to the unique Britishness of byelections as political barometers. I cannot recall one so close to a general election in which the ruling party actually increased the size of its vote from 19,395 in 2005 to 19,946 last night.By contrast, the Tory vote went down from 2,651 to 1,381. Were I David Cameron I would want to know why the supposedly rebranded Tories cannot even hold their vote. Instead, after three years of Cameron leadership it is cut in half. In my borough of Rotherham, birthplace of William Hague, the Tories were beaten by the BNP in half the council seats contested in the May 2008 local elections. North of Notting Hill the Tories get weaker and weaker. In the 1950s half of Scotland's MPs were Conservative. When I was elected Tory MPs were to be found everywhere in Yorkshire. Where do the 150 seats the Tories need to form govenment come from?No-one should read Glenrothes into broader UK politics but far from de-toxifying the Tories the "new millionaires" front bench promoted by Cameron seems less and less relevant to the nation's needs. The almost comic pronouncement that Cameron with his huge personal household wealth was thinking about making Tory shadow cabinet millionaires give up their lucrative City jobs and other outside earnings underlines the extent of Tory disconnect from the lives of most people.In the US, the most damaging attack on John McCain was the revelation he owned seven homes. As with David Cameron's £21,000-a-week Aegean yacht holiday or "Oligarch" Osborne's meetings with Russian billionaires the Tories more and more give the impression of being the party of the rich, by the rich, for the rich.By contrast, Obama comes not from a poor background but one without wealth. Grinding academic work helped him to elite universities and then into politics. Obama comes from America's serious industrial Chicago – home to Studs Terkel, the chronicler of America's working and underclass who died just before the election.Chicago is also home to nobel laureates in economics, literature, science and medicine. After a succession of southern folksy Democratic presidents – Clinton, Carter, and LBJ – there is now a man from the windy north, from the city closest to Edinburgh in the USA. It is clear that we are quitting the age of GQ and Vanity Fair politics for a more austere, serious, sober era of politics. Gladstone rather than Disraeli; brains not bling; moral not meretricious; global not nationalistic. With luck we may be seeing the end of populism incarnated by the bombast of Alex Salmond, the ignorance of Sarah Palin or the style of Silvio Berlusconi summed up in today's Metro headline: "The Italian Gob" after he described Obama as "tanned". Not even William Hague's xenophobic populist cracks about Europeans can match Silvio's gob-like behaviour.Were I Nick Clegg I would worry that the Lib Dem vote fell from 4,728 in 2005 to a miserable 947 yesterday. This close to the seats of Lib Dem grandees like Sir Menzies Campbell. Clegg's repositioning the Lib Dems as the Tory Lite party instead of staying on the progressive side of politics in the manner of Paddy Ashdown and Charles Kennedy may prove a major error of judgment.Too much to read into one by-election? Of course. Yet we are at the end of the second long cycle of postwar politics. The first was the welfare state capitalism that petered out in the 1970 as Labour under Jim Callaghan or the Democrats under Jimmy Carter mis-read where history was heading.The second era based on globalised deregulated capitalism is collapsing in the midst of the economic crisis and America's rejection of the Bush-Cheney-Greenspan axis of greed and nation-first foreign adventurism.No one is yet defining the new era though of the various political responses on offer Gordon Brown's economic leadership seems most in touch with the zeitgeist.The next election is now Labour's to lose. It is now up to Labour ministers, MPs and union leaders to make sure the seriousness of the hour is met with a seriousness of politics and discourse.