What's going for it? A new decade, a new life. I can think of no finer place to start both. What a place. I don't think I've been anywhere quite so remote in Britain before. Miles and miles, hours and hours of driving. For you ignoramuses who have no clue where we are, look north to Glasgow, go past, keep going, keep going, north and west, almost to the top of the entire country, woah, too far. Back down a bit. Assynt is the two-headed peninsula just above Ullapool, a land of ancient rocks, golden eagles, deer as common as cows, and raw and strange-shaped mountains with poetic names – Quinag, Canisp, Suilven, Cùl Mòr – which, while breathtaking, are oddly less well known than the Scottish landscapes that routinely appear on tins of shortbread. My guess is they'd probably like to keep it that way. They're a feisty lot round here. In the 90s some local crofters sensationally seized back land snatched more than a century ago by the evil lairds in the Highland Clearances. Worth fighting for, this landscape.The case against I'll repeat: it's very remote. Wild, wild weather. Property is sparse; development tightly controlled.Well connected? Let's just say you will need a car. Roads are often single track. Rail is a 90-minute drive away in Kyle of Lochalsh; planes up to two and half hours away in Inverness. Bliss.Schools Lochinver primary "performs well overall", says HMIE, and Stoer and Achiltibuie are "good". Ullapool High School is "very good" at meeting learning needs.Hang out at The magnificent Drumbeg Stores for provisions. The Caberfeidh in Lochinver for a good night out. The Albannach up the road for Michelin-starred venison.Where to buy Settlements are small – Lochinver's as big as it gets – so property is thin on the ground. Much of the land is controlled by big landowners (contact a land manager such as CKD Galbraith, 01463 224343) or community landowners such as Assynt Crofters Trust (01571 855298) or Assynt Foundation (01571 844100). For advice, contact one of them, the Crofters Commission or an estate agent: try Ewan, Harris & Co (01862 810686).Market values Modern two-bed detacheds, around £135,000; a two-bed flat, around £80,000. A two-bed former croft, around £160,000.Bargain of the week... The afore-mentioned Ewan, Harris has a two-bed croft in Culkein, needing modernisation, for £140,000.Live in Assynt? Join the debate at theguardian.com/letsmovetoMargaret MacDonald "I got tired of towns. I moved to Inchnadamph 37 years ago – it's a small community, just five of us, so we all know each other well. But Inverness is only an hour and a half away for shopping, and you can get a mobile signal down by the loch."Chrissy Boyd "The mobile tea bar at Stoer Point next to Stevenson's lighthouse. It has one of the most specatcular views in Scotland, with dolphins, porpoises and whales commonly rounding the headland."• Do you live in Machynlleth, Powys? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, please write, by Tuesday, 12 January 2010, to lets.move@theguardian.com 