So unpopular is the council tax in Scotland that in some polls, 88% of people want it abolished. The penny has dropped even with Labour north of the border. Recently all three candidates for their Holyrood parliamentary leadership have indicated that they want it eliminated. However, true to Labour form, dithering holds sway and – astonishingly for leadership candidates – they are not sure what they want it replaced with.The abolition of the council tax, and the introduction of local income tax – LIT – was one of the SNP's keynote and most popular manifesto promises at the 2007 Scottish election. It is reckoned that 80% of households will be better, or no worse, off. Prior to the election, one of the socialist parties, of which there never seems to be any shortage, highlighted the case of a Labour now ex-MSP advocate (someone who practices at the Scottish bar) who had fee income of about 10 times the earnings of his constituents, but who was paying council tax at only two to three times the rate of the average constituency wage. In parlance for once common to both Socialists and Daily Mail headline writers, it was another example of fat cats winning under Labour. However, LIT is not a tax to crucify the rich, but a means of ensuring everybody pays their fair share according to their means. In fact only the top 10% of earners face higher payments. The council tax is an unfair tax and is the first cousin of the hated poll tax in the way that it is blind to earnings. The standard Labour criticism surrounding LIT is that attaches only to earned income, meaning that other income and assets (particularly of the wealthy) are immune from the taxman in the way that was not the case under a property tax. However, if that complaint can be made of an LIT at 3%, surely those voices, to be logically consistent, will be in the same breath criticising a national income tax at a 10 times greater rate. But there's an even more forceful argument – as my colleague Richard Thomson, the prospective SNP candidate for Gordon at the next general election, has demonstrated. The median level of unearned income in Scotland, according to HMRC is £160. Just over a million Scots rack up less than this, just over a million more. Making unearned income subject to 3% LIT would mean sending bills to over 1 million Scots for less than a fiver, while the small band of determined super-rich use their accountants to escape the tax.Another criticism of LIT is that the SNP have proposed that the 3% rate will be set nationally across all Scottish councils. Critics therefore argue that only the amount collected will be local, and not the rate levied. The Liberal Democrats, who otherwise espouse a policy very similar to the SNP's position, want councils to set the rate locally. My party counters that a national rate set for local collection is the easiest for administration, in tandem with PAYE. Labour also deploys the bizarre argument that the LIT will not raise as much from the taxpayer as the present council tax, claiming it would need to be at least 4.5% to achieve similar revenues. It seems to have escaped them that this is, in effect, an admission of how much they are squeezing low-earners and hardworking families under the current scheme – not to mention research by Labour-controlled Glasgow City council, which shows that 72% of Glaswegians would be better off under the SNP's LIT. The fact that Labour continues to argue against LIT can clearly only be good news for the SNP.In Scotland under Labour, council tax increased by 60%. Analyse the facts and the injustices pile ever higher; the present system permits a scenario where the council tax in Glasgow on a Band A property is broadly similar to a Band E property in Westminster, London!Lurking in among all these facts and arguments across the Scottish landscape is the shadow of Westminster government and Labour ministers apparently doing their utmost to be high-handed, haughty and generally unpopular. London Labour is trying to deny Scotland £400m currently granted to councils in council tax support should Scotland decide to proceed with badly needed reform in this devolved area. If Labour's London brigade thwart LIT they may win a battle until the general election, but will then lose the war, with Glasgow East-style earthquakes writ large throughout Scotland. As yet, no Labour MP has argued publicly that the Scottish government should be treated fairly regarding money already coming to Scotland. The clock is ticking. Ultimately LIT will come – the arithmetic in the Scottish parliament makes this likely. When it does there will, understandably, be a clamour for a similarly fair tax in England. And so we have another area where Scotland, acting independently, can demonstrate benefits for its nearest and dearest neighbours.