The Royal Conservatoire of Scotland (formerly known as the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama) is Scotland's national conservatoire. Eight hundred and seventy-eight students from 49 countries enjoy a high-level conservatoire experience in the performance and production of music, dance and drama. RCS has close working relationships with BBC Scotland, the National Theatre of Scotland, Scottish Ballet, Scottish Opera, the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, and a range of companies both in and beyond Scotland.RCS offers specialist courses such as composition, classical and traditional music, jazz, opera, ballet, musical theatre, acting, digital film and TV, technical and production arts, and contemporary performance practice. It is strong in performance-based research.The alumni list is impressive: Alan Cumming, James McAvoy and David Tennant, for starters. Glasgow is a fun place to be a student, and opportunities for performance are ample.Fees£1,820 for Scottish/EU full-time undergraduates and £9,000 for rest of UK (RUK) full-time undergraduates for 2015-16.Bursaries/ScholarshipsOn an annual basis, RCS disburses circa £1.3m in scholarships to incoming and continuing students on the basis of merit and financial need. As part of this total, RCS has established a specific fund for incoming rest of the UK students on a means-tested basis.AccommodationRCS aims to offer all first-year students a place in its contracted hall of residence, Liberty House, in the centre of Glasgow and within easy walking distance of RCS. Rooms are allocated on a first come, first served basis. Liberty House provides comfortable city-centre living; accommodation consists of en-suite study bedrooms sharing well-equipped kitchen and dining areas. The conservatoire is able to offer advice to students seeking accommodation in the private sector and subscribes to PAD, a database of properties available for let in the city. This database is operated by a number of higher education institutions in the city and may be accessed at accom.gla.ac.uk/pad. Contact welfare@rcs.ac.uk for further information.FacilitiesThe Malcolm Fraser-designed Speirs Locks Studios include dance spaces and spacious creative technical and design studios, plus a state-of-the-art sound-recording studio. The six professional performance venues stage more than 400 public performances a year by students, staff and visiting international artists.TransportEasily accessible from major approach roads. The airport is handy, as are the stations.ContactTel: 0141 332 4101Web: rcs.ac.ukEmail: musicadmissions@rcs.ac.uk / danceadmissions@rrcs.ac.uk / dramaadmissions@rcs.ac.ukAccommodation: libertyliving.co.uk