I remember when Stuart Murdoch sent me his first demo tape, before anyone had heard of Belle & Sebastian. It was called Rhode Island, and had a pretty boy fairy watercolour by Cicely Mary Barker on its sleeve. It looked a little like Stuart, I always thought.It was January 1996: I was 19, still living at home with my parents and escaping and surviving through music. I had first seen Stuart when I went to a local transvestite bar in Glasgow to listen to Edwyn Collins playing records. Collins was a big hero of mine. I was surprised that the large neon sign above the ladies room read "Wenches" and above the men's "Gladiators". And the boys were very glamorous. I was even more surprised to meet my elder cousin working as a cloakroom attendant. Stuart was dancing in his clogs to Janet Jackson. A girlfriend of mine thought he was cute. At that point, I wasn't listening to much music recorded past 1969 and was therefore a bit horrified.However, we officially met two weeks later in a toilet queue at Jason from V-twin's New Year's Eve party. We exchanged addresses, and a few days later a letter arrived - and a few days after that, a tape.It was exciting.That winter I'd been specifically entranced by Buffalo Springfield - I Am a Child, Expecting to Fly, Kind Woman, Hung Upside Down. It sounded like something I would have wanted to be a part of, had I been around Laurel Canyon at the time. Up until this point I had mainly championed the indie-schmindie bands of boyfriends and, as the girlfriend, had taken a back seat. I had always wanted to be in a pop group; I just didn't know that I was allowed to be.When I started listening to the songs on Stuart's tape, I could feel goosebumps. Songs like Mary Jo and The State I'm In, which would later appear on Belle & Sebastian's debut record, Tigermilk, sounded to me like they could fit quite nicely on to a Buffalo Springfield record. And that made everything all the more special to me.Then again, for decades, hipsters and musicians and aspiring musicians in and around Glasgow (and in many other places for that matter, I'm sure) have been referencing Buffalo Springfield. There does, though, seem to be a unique, unspoken bond between many Scottish alternative bands and the bands of the west coast of America.The particular Scots music to which I am referring, however, should not be confused with music by the ubiquitous Scottish music mafia that I feel misrepresents us as a nation so badly. I find it extremely nauseating when I'm at home and catch little snippets on regional television, week in, week out. Who likes that shit music anyhow?The music I'm talking about is an altogether more stylish affair. Kurt Cobain named his daughter Frances after the singer Frances McKee who was in one of his favourite bands, the Vaselines, from Bellshill, outside Glasgow. In fact, Nirvana covered several of Eugene Kelly and Francis McKee's songs. (Son of a Gun is perhaps the most famous one.) I remember my friend Colin playing me the Vaselines' Rory Ride Me Raw one evening. Eugene looked so cool on the sleeve with his John Cale haircut and biker boots. All the best bands have the best haircuts. Or at least they used to.I remember one time Jim McCulloch (from the Soup Dragons, also from Bellshill), Eugene and Stephen Pastel (the Pastels are a Glasgow band) telling me about how, in the mid-1980s, everyone used to go the Splash One Club in Glasgow. They said the girls even used to take their knitting. People would dance to Some Velvet Morning by Lee Hazlewood and Nancy Sinatra - I have no idea how folk must've danced to that. Very funny. But Splash One was where the whole west-of-Scotland alternative community formed. Without Splash One, where Bobby Gillespie and others would play Love and the Byrds, there would have been no Creation records, no Jesus and Mary Chain, no Teenage Fanclub.Look at the bands that came out of the Splash One scene, and you can see the empathy with America. Bobby's own band, Primal Scream, cross-fertilised their brand of alternative rock with garage, country, psychedelia, roots and blues. They also had good haircuts. Teenage Fanclub, too, have a huge affinity with the music of the west coast - just listen to their harmonies. Every time I travel across the pond, it is clear how dearly they are loved over there.And now I've completed my sophomore record with Mark Lanegan, from the Pacific north-west; my own personal Scottish-American connection. But that is another tale for another time.But does the existence of so many like-minded musicians in a small part of Scotland mean there's something uniquely Scottish about our music? To be honest, I really don't care about Scottish music - only good music. That is my passion. That is what moves and inspires and heals. And I never feel especially Scottish. I feel more like a citizen of the world. Nor have I ever felt part of any music scene - ever. It has almost always been the opposite. Ask many bands and musicians; if they were frank, I suspect a few of them may say somewhat similar. It may be journalists or authors who create tidy little "scenes". Nothing real is so pristine.I have been lucky enough to follow my nose, my heart and my dreams. I have met and continue to meet like-minded people in many magical corners of the globe, it is a good way to live and learn. Music has a language and power that can potentially transcend.I was practising with my dear friend Robyn Hitchcock the other day. He started talking about "jock rock". Most jock rock, he said, you can stamp yer foot or march to. All of us in the room were saying that we liked Franz Ferdinand. It's easy to march to the Franz. I asked Robyn, "How come I'm Scottish and I don't make jock rock music? I'd quite like to, you know."I can't remember what he said. I think I must ask him again. ·Sunday at Devil Dirt by Isobel Campbell and Mark Lanegan is released on V2 on May 5