It has to be said that the Labour MP for Glasgow South, Ian Davidson, is no oil painting. But he knows what he likes and he doesn't think £12.5m of Scottish taxpayer's money should be squandered on a picture of fat ladies with no clothes on. "I mean, it's not as if it's by Jock McTitian" he told BBC Radio Scotland last month of the masterpiece Diana and Actaeon, which has now been saved for the nation after the SNP government contributed £12.5m of the £50m purchase price from the Duke of Sutherland."Very few people have ever heard of Titian" observed Davidson, "Many will have thought he was an Italian football player." Art historians are divided on whether Titian ever did play for Italy, or Venice City, but they are reasonably confident that quite a lot of people have heard of one of the greatest figures in the history of art. Diana and Actaeon is also one of the most famous works ever painted – the "Mona Lisa of the Mound" as the Scotsman pithily put it. If Titian were a footballer, he'd surely be the Ronaldo of the Renaissance.The National Gallery in London contributed the same sum, and the rest was raised from foundations, individuals and the lottery fund. The galleries will take turns exhibiting the Titians for five-year periods, but there is a new row over London getting Diana for eight months of the year until 2012, largely to ensure it gets maximum exposure. As Diana has been on the Mound for most of the last 200 years, this seemed a reasonable concession. But it has given a new opportunity for philistine whingeing. But this is a result for Scotland. The SNP government got an absolute bargain here, and they know it. As part of the deal, the National Galleries of Scotland get to keep on extended loan the rest of the billion-pound Bridgewater collection, which includes three Raphaels, a Van Dyck, a Tintoretto and a Rembrandt. And that's a midfield lineup that even Davidson must have heard of. And all for a transfer fee which wouldn't buy you a serious international footballer. The tourist revenue alone will pay back the Scottish government's investment in a couple of years.There have been complaints north and south of the Border that £50m is a lot to pay for a picture. But Diana and Actaeon is worth between £100m-£150m, had the Duke of Sutherland put it on the open market. In other words, the state has jointly acquired an asset worth a hundred million more than it paid for it. Where else can you get an investment like that these days? Labour presumably thought that trashing the Titians would be a good populist issue when money is tight in the credit crunch, but they have handed a rare political gift to the SNP. The Nationalists have long been sensitive to accusations of narrow-minded parochialism. The "Scottish homecoming" celebrating the 250th anniversary of the birth of Robert Burns has been widely criticised for confining Scotland's cultural horizons to Sean Connery and golf.The Diana purchase allows them to claim, rightly, to have vision wider than the shortbread tin. They have secured one of the finest products of European civilisation for a knockdown price, and have an option to buy the companion work, Diana and Callisto, for a similar sum. Last year the SNP government showed similar canny foresight by investing £10m in the £120m d'Offay collection of modern art. Our football may be rubbish, but our art is increasingly world class.