Scotland has produced some shocks for Labour during the 2005 parliament, with the SNP coming first in the elections for the Scottish Parliament in 2007 and the European Parliament in 2009, and the loss of Glasgow East in a 2008 by-election. However, it has also had some good news for Gordon Brown with two strong Labour showings in by-elections in Glenrothes and Glasgow North East. The signs are that Scotland will be one of Labour's better areas in 2010. The SNP government remains broadly popular but voters regard Holyrood and Westminster elections as being different, and when they see the choice as Labour or Conservative government most Scots favour Labour. The Conservatives still seem a weakened force, particularly in elections which are not proportional. While they should do better than their existing holding of one Westminster seat, their Commons delegation could well still fit into a taxi even if the party wins the UK election. Marginal Dumfries and Galloway is their top target from Labour, but beyond that they have shadowy hopes for Stirling and Edinburgh South, and one or two more including David Steel's old Borders seat of Berwickshire, Roxburgh and Selkirk from the Lib Dems.While the SNP won a haul of constituency seats from Labour in 2007, the different political context and different boundaries make it much harder for them to gain much in 2010 and Labour should only suffer a couple of losses from this direction – Ochil, Dundee West and Kilmarnock & Loudoun being most plausible. Labour will be bidding to recover Glasgow East from the Nationalists.After a strong showing in 2005, the Scottish Lib Dems will probably see a general fall in their vote, with seats vulnerable to the Conservatives and the SNP (Argyll & Bute). However, local strength makes them challengers to Labour in some middle class urban seats like Edinburgh South and Aberdeen South.Ochil & South Perthshire has the distinction of sending its MP to Westminster with the lowest share of any MP in 2005 – 31.4 per cent of the vote. Labour's Gordon Banks won the seat with a narrow majority over the SNP, with the Conservatives not completely out of contention either. It is a mixture of the small towns of Clackmannanshire with some Perthshire countryside. It is quite possible that it will be won with less than a third of the vote again in 2010.Renfrewshire East was won on a huge swing in 1997 by the young Labour candidate Jim Murphy. Now secretary of state for Scotland, Murphy faces his most serious electoral test in this suburban seat just south of Glasgow as the Conservatives try to regain what was formerly their safest seat in Scotland and unseat one of Labour's Scottish leaders.Alex Salmond steps down from his Westminster seat at Banff & Buchan to concentrate on his job as First Minister of Scotland. His successor in this safe SNP seat will be Eilidh Whiteford. Whiteford is an academic expert on Scottish literature and a voluntary sector campaigner on poverty and carers. As a good Nationalist she hopes for a short stay in Westminster ending with independence rather than losing the seat, but will no doubt make an impact in the meantime.