In theory, St Andrew's Day might have been the ideal occasion for Alex Salmond to launch Scots along the path towards the independence referendum he aims to hold a year from now. But the warm glow that the national day properly brings to all Scots cannot disguise the bleak environment in which the Scottish nationalist first minister began his campaign. Only 24 hours before Mr Salmond unveiled his white paper on independence, a poll put support for independence at a record recent low of 20%, with only 25% saying they want an early say on the union. Even allowing for the vagaries of questions that rival pollsters ask, these figures show the scale of the uphill struggle that faces Mr Salmond if he is to turn the white paper into the separatist mandate of his dreams.Ever since 2007, however, Mr Salmond has repeatedly shown that he is not a politician to be underestimated. As first minister he has made minority government work for more than two years. His biggest asset is his ability to play a weak hand in the strongest possible way. Like all guerrilla politicians, he avoids battles on open ground, knowing he would lose, and prefers to accumulate smaller victories and to endlessly provoke his opponents. Mr Salmond knows that his best chance of persuading Scots to vote for independence is to lure the UK government and the pro-UK parties into overbearing responses that send offended voters flocking to the SNP. That ambition runs through the new white paper.Like the self-described Scottish national conversation that preceded it, the white paper is a sleight of hand performed in a hall of mirrors. It affects to offer a wide range of equal options about Scottish governance, including the enhanced Holyrood powers proposed by the UK government last week in the wake of the Calman commission. It purports to be taking part in an often quite dry and technical conversation about the best place of the Scottish parliament and the Scottish government within the UK's political and revenue-raising arrangements. It gives the impression of being relaxed about the outcome from a pluralistic set of alternatives. In reality its focus is Mr Salmond's wish to persuade the Scottish electorate to vote for a proposition on independence whose precise words the white paper does not even reveal, and whose implications are rarely spelled out and are sometimes contradictory.Mr Salmond knows that the anti-independence majority at Holyrood is likely to block his referendum bill next year. That is why he is crafting it in such apparently cuddly language. He hopes that the voters will be outraged by being denied a vote on such a reasonable proposition. He will then fight the 2011 Scottish election as the man who simply wants to give the electorate its say – and hopes that he then can transform the wish for a vote into the wish for independence. Either way, these plans designedly place Mr Salmond, the SNP and the independence question at the centre of Scottish politics just at a time when Scots' minds, like minds elsewhere, are focused more on recession.If that is what Scots want then it is what they will get. There is, though, a brave and responsible alternative. Gordon Brown could go to the House of Commons next week and ask it to pass a bill for a Scottish referendum on the union. He could ensure the question that was put to the voters in that poll was simple and clear – do you want Scotland to be part of the UK or not? – rather than the tricksier formulation that the SNP apparently plans. He could require the Electoral Commission to ensure the contest was fought on a level campaign playing field of costs and propaganda, rather than with the loaded dice that Mr Salmond might use. And he could call the referendum on the day of the UK general election, thus settling the issue for the foreseeable future. Mr Brown should be a braveheart. He should call the nationalists' bluff.