We provide locations and co-produce shoots for film and photography throughout the UK. People come to us with an idea or the backdrop or style they want for a shoot, and we put a location forward. Our clients include Glenfiddich, BMW, Chanel, H&M, Elle US and Vanity Fair.It was my husband’s. He’s a photographer and has travelled to many amazing places for work. When we got married, he moved to Scotland and was staggered by its beauty. He thought there was potential for a Scottish production company that played on the advantages of the local landscape. I didn’t have previous experience in the industry – I was an air stewardess for nine years before leaving work for four and a half years to look after my children, but I took a chance.The natural beauty of Scotland can be overwhelming at times, but most people are not aware of the huge variety we have to offer. Scotland is a small country, but there aren’t many places in the world with so much diversity – rocky cliffs, stunning beaches, lush green plains, rolling hills, beautiful seascapes, amazing architecture and cities steeped in culture. All in the one place and bathed in a quality of light that is famous throughout the world. On top of that, we have some fantastic, modern architecture that can look like it’s in LA or Cape Town.I really like one that we used in an American mid-west style shoot for Russian vogue. It’s on the coast, 30 minutes south-east of Edinburgh and has amazing red sandstone rocks – not something that you’d associate with Scotland.Everywhere I go I make notes on interesting backdrops. For example, some of our clients have an obsession with doors and steps so I always notice striking designs.Finding the time to do everything I want to do with it, while also looking after my family. But I’m learning to slow down occasionally. Our first enquiry from Crew Clothing was definitely a breakthrough moment for me. It was the first time I felt we were properly in business and it was such a great feeling to know that people wanted to work with us. On a more personal level, I felt the business had taken a step forward when I realised I didn’t need to oversee everything in the office on a daily basis. It was refreshing to witness every department working well together, and also independently, without me being there every step of the way. Undoubtedly our ever-growing client list – the calibre of global companies that we work with. I’m also proud of developing the Location Scotland team, who are a truly talented and dedicated group of people.We opened a New York office last summer and plan to continue producing great film and photography work in Scotland in collaboration with our partners in New York. We want to promote Scotland as one of the most versatile locations for any global brand campaign or creative project.Another focus will be increasing our locations database and developing our expansion into other areas of the UK. We want to be in a position to say yes if a client asks for our services outside of Scotland.Think about what you really want for your business and write a short plan of how you are going to achieve your business dreams. Be prepared to put in the hours and make sure you have some fun along the way.Marie Owen is the owner and managing director of Location Scotland (LS)