There must be a fundamental rethink of public services in Scotland, according to discussions at the Guardian Public Services Summit in Edinburgh.Taking place on Thursday, the day after Scottish finance minister John Swinney announced the spending review for Scotland's public services for the next three years, the Guardian summit explored the detail of how Scotland can face up to growing demand for public services in a continuing age of austerity. "The country will go bankrupt if we just carry on doing things as we do now," said one speaker.Swinney's budget outlined further cuts and efficiencies in the public sector, along with the sale of 25% of government buildings, to allow him to redirect money into £2.1bn worth of capital projects and protect public sector workers from compulsory redundancy. All the current policies on free prescriptions, free tuition for Scottish students, free personal care and a council tax freeze would be maintained.Overall, spending on student support will jump from £516m this year to £855m in 2014 – the largest growth of any Scottish government spending area.Rory Mair, chief executive of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, told the conference that there needed to be a focus on first principles. "If we don't solve the problem of inequality ... the pressure on public services will be even greater," he said. "It is not a loss of resources that will bring austerity, but increased demand." Mair said statistics about Scottish services, which show that, on average, people are doing reasonably well, disguise some appalling outcomes for a small minority.How radical should change be? Martin Sime, chief executive of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, argued that there should be a national Scottish framework for self-help, saying that helping people to help themselves, before expensive care or health intervention is needed is the only way to offset public spending cuts. "The government must step out of local and departmental silos," he said. Instead, public bodies should back self-directed support. "The orthodoxy that there should be more and better services will be challenged as never before," he said.Speakers acknowledged the challenges of change. "There will be conflict; there will be difficult conversations," said Hilary Cottam, founder and principal partner of Participle, which runs a number of innovative projects.The state must retain some authoritative roles – in mental health services, and in audit and accountability, for instance – other speakers pointed out.And there was widespread agreement that strong leadership was essential, with politicians and public managers working together to agree on the fundamental principles of public services, and the need to focus on people's needs. How far that will include new forms of delivery, including the private sector, social enterprises and voluntary organisations, in a country that appears very wedded to public sector delivery of services remains the subject of intense discussion.This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the Guardian Public Leaders Network free to receive regular emails on the issues at the top of the professional agenda.