WALESThis is a small but impressive collection of luxury rural holiday homes – with a slick website to match – from gorgeous cottages for two to wow-factor grand houses, the largest of which sleeps 10. It has 14 properties in Wales (plus three in the West Country, one in the Peak District and one in the Cotswolds). Clearly appealing to couples wanting to get away from it all, its smaller properties – for two or four – get booked up quickly, with Christmas and New Year selling out fastest. For the larger pads, summer (13 July-31 August) is the most popular time of year but there is still availability. It's worth noting that Sheepskin has a set price for each property throughout the year. Of its portfolio, the places that always sell out are Cider House, east of Abergavenny (sleeps two, £645 for seven nights throughout 2012), Hafod Glan Gwy near Hay-on-Wye (sleeps two, and is £625 for seven nights throughout 2012) and Tailor's Cottage near Betws y Coed (sleeps two to four, seven nights for £1,065). • sheepskinlife.comSensitively restored and gorgeously stylish are the watchwords for Under the Thatch's selection of places to stay in Wales, which range from gypsy caravans to a sea captain's house overlooking Cardigan Bay. The Eco-Barn (sleeps eight, from £782) is a luxury conversion looking out over the Dyfi Valley in mid-Wales. It mixes green credentials with chic interiors, and has some dates still available over the summer holidays. Or try the bohemian charm of the 1920s Tin Bungalow, in Martletwy, Pembrokeshire (sleeps four, from £747), which is still available throughout the summer holidays. • underthethatch.co.ukFor dramatic views of the Brecon Beacons and Black Mountains, Brecon Beacons Holiday Cottages is a good bet – and you'll pay the same rent whether it's high or low season. For large groups, Pen-yr-Heol is very popular – a beautifully restored 17th-century traditional Welsh long house that sleeps 20, and is perfectly placed for walks in the Brecon Beacons national park. It sits in half an acre of land and has a small river flowing at the back (fenced off for small children). It is still available for most weeks from 21 July through the summer holidays, and costs £1,530. • breconcottages.comRural and coastal cottages throughout the region are offered by Wales Holidays. Popular properties include Riverside Cottage (sleeps five, and for just £572) that's part of a barn conversion, with views over the Banwy Valley in mid-Wales – it's still available from 21 July-17 August. Or head for Anglesey and the chance of some royal-spotting – there's a detached stone cottage (sleeps four, costs £836) on a working farm near Moelfre, which even boasts Celtic ruins and an ancient burial mound within its land. It's available for three weeks from 20 July. • wales-holidays.co.ukQuality Cottages have close to 300 properties across Wales. Nearly half of those are within five miles of the sea, and the rest are in equally sought-after locations – the Brecon Beacons, Snowdonia and around the waterways of South Pembrokeshire. Ty Glan Afon, a traditional Welsh cottage with inglenook fireplace and woodburning stove, is set above the Mawddach Estuary, surrounded by woodland. It sleeps six and has some weeks available in August, at a cost of £1,026. • qualitycottages.co.ukAs the name suggests, this company's collection (of more than 550) is spread along the Pembrokeshire coastline. Properties include Bangeston Farmhouse (sleeps 12), an environmentally sustainable building (rainwater is harvested and solar panels heat the water) with smart interior, 500 metres from East Angle Bay and the Pembrokeshire coastal path. A week in peak season costs £1,890. Kisongo (sleeps eight) is a traditional cottage near Newport, with funky modern interior. A week in peak season costs £1,321. • coastalcottages.co.ukSCOTLANDOffering 700 properties across Scotland, Cottages and Castles has a great spread of remote hideaways, and an impressive selection of places for large groups. If you're willing to splash out, gorgeous 17th century Dalcross Castle (sleeps 17, £9,285), near Inverness, sits among immaculate landscaped gardens and is available through the summer holidays. Sweep down the stone spiral staircase to dine in splendour in the great hall. Tiaras not included. Slightly less pricey but equally spectacular is Easterheughs Castle (sleeps 10, available 28 July-31 August, £3,100), high above the Firth of Forth – enjoy breakfast on the timber decking gazing out across the water. • cottages-and-castles.co.ukIf getting close to nature without giving up your creature comforts is your thing, Forest Holidays could have the answer – it offers luxury cabins set deep in woodland glades on Forestry Commission land, with lots of forest activities for kids that you can book separately, including forest trails to follow, and "Dusk Watch" walks led by a forest ranger. There are two sites in Scotland, both in spectacular settings: Strathyre Cabins, near Callander, overlook pine-fringed Loch Lubnaig, and Argyll Cabins are in Argyll Forest Park on the shores of Loch Long. The cabins always book up quickly for the school holidays, but there's still availability at both sites for the summer. In Strathyre, a two-bed Silver Birch cabin with hot tub (sleeps four) costs from £1,137 during the summer holidays. Or go for a sumptuous three-bed Golden Oak cabin sleeping six – a week at Argyll costs from £1,562 for the same period. • forestholidays.co.ukIt's all about beautiful locations with Scottish specialists Unique Cottages, and at very reasonable prices. Swallow Cottage (sleeps four), in Onich, near Fort William, is a lovely conversion of an old stone farm building, close to Loch Linhe with the mountains of Morvern beyond it, and walking and climbing at nearby Glencoe. It still has some availability at Easter, from 14-21 April (£375) and for the whole of the summer holidays (£550). Or there's the Clockhouse (sleeps four, £465 in high season), near Earlston on the Scottish Borders – this idyllic converted coach house sits on a 45-acre country estate, and guests are welcome to use the tennis courts there. It's free each week of the summer holidays except 4-11 August. • unique-cottages.co.ukFor a really get-away-from-it-all break, Islands and Highlands Cottages have some great places in picturesque locations. Popular properties include the one-bedroom Old Croft House on the Isle of Skye (sleeps two, £500, some availability through the summer holidays), a traditional stone cottage set within a crofting community, with views across to the Red Cuillin and Blaven mountains. Also on Skye is the Old Chapel of Ease (sleeps two, £950, availability throughout the summer), a quirky converted church in a stunning location, with stunning views over the loch. • highlandholidaycottages.co.ukOwned by Hoseasons, Scottish Country Cottages has a huge range of properties across Scotland, and they all have a VisitScotland grading, so you know exactly what you're getting. Five-star Kyles View Barn (sleeps six), near Argyll, has views over Loch Riddon and the Kyles of Bute, and is a five-minute walk from Fearnoch Bay. Activities on offer nearby include horse riding, sailing, fishing and climbing. A week during the summer holidays costs from £963-£1,031. Or try a touch of manor house splendour with a holiday cottage in the grounds of Kinmount House, between Dumfries and Carlisle, and just a few miles from the coast. An architect-designed conversion of part of the Victorian servants' wing, five-star Annan House sleeps four (available through the summer holidays, £791-£848), and guests can make use of the indoor pool (shared between eight holiday cottages). • scottish-country-cottages.co.ukFor more holiday cottages and villas see guardiancottages.co.ukIf you have come across any useful websites or have any tips on self-catering for fellow readers, post a comment below.