 4.21pm BST That's it from me for the day. Thanks for all your comments. 1.33pm BST Efforts by Ruth Davidson, for the Conservatives, and Willie Rennie, for the Lib Dems, to land blows on Salmond over his numbers on the costs of a yes vote failed to inflict much of a bruise on the first minister, who welcomed the chance to quote once again the damaging criticisms of Treasury calculations by the experts whose names were cited in it.Professors Patrick Dunleavy and Robert Young were just the kind of people Salmond would like to meet, he said: no wonder, when they provide him with ammunition such as Dunleavy's quote that the Treasury estimation of £1.5bn start-up costs for an independent Scotland was "bizarrely inaccurate".Rennie was, of course, correct to say that Salmond had not answered the questions about what figure the Scottish government would put on the costs of setting up an independent state. Asked if he would publish a 2012 assessment, he instead talked about yesterday's report on Scotland's economic future. But Davidson's mention of Dunleavy derailed the attack and Salmond was able to walk away relatively unscathed. 12.34pm BST First minister's questions have finished. I will post a summary shortly. 12.33pm BST Gavin Brown, for Scottish Conservatives, asks if Salmond can name any councils that have been incentivised by the business rates incentivisation scheme.This scheme was brought in to incentivise local authorities, says Salmond, and the government wants to see it working. He is sure Gavin Brown, as a Tory, would want to back John Swinney's efforts on this, he adds.Updated at 1.04pm BST 12.31pm BST Patrick Harvie, Scottish Greens MSP, asks more about the land reform report.Salmond says he is enthused by the land purchase fund for communities: the target is to have 1 million acres under public ownership by 2020.Updated at 1.07pm BST 12.30pm BST Claire Baker, Scottish Labour MSP, asks about the land reform review group report and its recommendations for greater transparency over land ownership.Salmond says the government supports the direction of travel on this report but not every detail.Updated at 1.08pm BST 12.26pm BST Dave Thompson, SNP MSP, asks about rural postal delivery services.Salmond says the sell-off of the Royal Mail was wrong. The universal service obligation is important, he says, and those of us who opposed the privatisation are very concerned to get assurances that it will continue.Updated at 1.08pm BST 12.24pm BST Salmond has not actually answered the question, Rennie says.Salmond talks about the promise in his report yesterday of £1,000 "for every man, woman and child".He doesn't answer the start-up costs question. 12.23pm BST Willie Rennie, leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, is up now. He wants to know about start-up costs, too. The Scottish government produced some figures in 2012, he says. Can we see them? Why won't the first minister show them?Salmond says the document published by "his lot" yesterday – the Treasury report – has been thoroughly rubbished.Nobody in Scotland believes they will see this so-called UK dividend, Salmond says.The Scottish government's report published yesterday has projections for the next 15 years, he says. 12.19pm BST Salmond brandishes the Treasury report. Professor Dunleavy's name is in there, he says. He reads it out.It was the UK government who introduced Dunleavy, who then said the Treasury had overstated the start-up figure by 12 times:I've never met Professor Dunleavy but he sounds like the kind of person I'd like to meet.Danny Alexander then said he was relying on figures from Professor Robert Young, who also distanced himself from the Treasury report.Professor Young is someone I'd like to meet as well, says Salmond, to rumbling laughter. 12.16pm BST But, says Davidson, the SNP would have more credibility dismissing the Treasury figures if it could provide a figure of his own.He has no intention of telling the people of Scotland how his "paperclip economics" add up, she says. 12.15pm BST Salmond enjoys this question. It gives him a chance to talk about Professor Patrick Dunleavy's disowning of the Treasury figures – he called them "bizarrely inaccurate". 12.14pm BST Ruth Davidson, leader of the Scottish Conservatives, is up now.John Swinney, the finance minister, was asked 11 times on the radio yesterday about the start-up costs of an independent Scotland and failed to answer, she says. Could Salmond provide a breakdown of these costs? 12.13pm BST Treatment in the NHS has improved under the SNP, says Salmond. Staffing is up, patient satisfaction is up. He reels off statistics that he says show the NHS is performing better than when Labour was in office. 12.11pm BST Lamont: He is more at home in the imagined world after a yes vote than in the real world under an SNP government.Salmond should get on with his day job, she says. 12.10pm BST Lamont cites the case of a woman called Mary, who was forced to pay for private healthcare to remove a breast lump.Salmond says a look at the Patient Opinion website gives a better balance of opinion of the thousands of patients who are receiving excellent care. 12.09pm BST Some background reading on reported problems in the NHS in Scotland from recent days:Fears over 'extreme pressure' on NHSNHS Scotland misses waiting times targetScottish health minister under fire over waiting times 12.06pm BST If you're looking for complacency, the government of which Lamont was a minister was complacent in 2006, Salmond says.The minister in 2014 is putting things right, he adds. 12.04pm BST Salmond says the SNP government has performed better than Labour did when Lamont was a minister. But he says the government can always do better.He says patient satisfaction levels are higher than they were under Labour.Updated at 12.04pm BST 12.02pm BST Johann Lamont, Scottish Labour leader, begins with a question about the NHS. Why does Salmond still have confidence in his health secretary, she asks?Alex Neil survived a vote of no confidence earlier this month.Lamont accuses Salmond of "disgraceful complacency".Updated at 12.03pm BST 11.53am BST Good morning and welcome to live coverage of first minister's questions, the last before the official start of the regulated referendum period tomorrow.This week has seen first minister Alex Salmond battle with claims from the UK Treasury that an independent Scotland would mean £1.5bn in start-up costs, a figure he described as either "a horrendous blunder or … a deliberate and deeply dishonest attempt to deceive".We can surely expect to see some questions on the rival – and contradictory – reports put out yesterday by Salmond and chief secretary to the Treasury Danny Alexander. As my colleague Severin Carrell reports:The first minister claimed that voting yes would leave every person in Scotland £1,000 better off in 15 years' time, as the country profited from a booming economy and rising employment that would outstrip the UK.Alexander sought to outbid Salmond by claiming that a no vote would earn every person in Scotland a "UK dividend" worth £1,400 a year for the next two decades, underpinned by the security and greater wealth promised by the UK.﻿We've also seen revised projections for oil revenues:The Scottish government made a series of concessions in their latest analysis. They revised earlier, more optimistic oil forecasts downwards by up to £12bn for the next three years after their last analysis overestimated North Sea revenues by £1bn for 2012-13.You can read yesterday's live blog here﻿ and a full report on yesterday's developments here.My colleague Ami Sedghi has crunched the data on Salmond's £1,000 promise versus the £1,400 UK dividend here.And you can follow our reporting team on Twitter: @SeverinCarrell and me, @Claire_Phipps.