Dumfriesshire, Clydesdale and Tweeddale Local-born solicitor David Mundell has been the Tories' only Scottish MP since 2005, beating Labour with a 1,738 majority. Labour represents most of the seat at Holyrood but Tweeddale is Lib Dem. A weekend TNS-BRMB poll predicts Mundell will lose despite high-profile visits from David Cameron. A split Labour-Lib Dem vote could see the Tories survive, though. Vitally important for face-saving purposes – without a single Scottish MP does Cameron have a mandate to govern Scotland, or even a candidate for Scottish secretary?Inverness, Nairn, Badenoch and Strathspey If Labour support in Scotland remains buoyant Nick Clegg's election campaign mastermind Danny Alexander could lose this seat. The vast seat was a Lib Dem gain from Labour in 2005 but it's long been seen as a genuine four-way marginal. The SNP have fielded an able Highland councillor and most of the seat is held by the SNP's community safety minister at Holyrood.Renfrewshire East This former Conservative seat was won in 2005 and held against expectations by rising star, Scottish secretary Jim Murphy. On paper the seat (packed with wealthy suburbs) is a Tory win but the Lib Dems may be more realistic challengers. Murphy's performed well in the televised Scottish leaders debates and hopes profile, constituency effort and the lack of a Scottish Cameron bounce will help him hang on – scuppering reported plans to replace the Scottish Labour leader, Iain Gray, at Holyrood.Livingston Not listed as a key marginal, but Robin Cook's old seat has been held since 2005 by Jim Devine, the disgraced Labour MP claiming legal aid to defend himself against fraud charges. The Labour newcomer is defending a 2,600 majority over the SNP, who already hold the Holyrood seat and the local council in this former-mining constituency turned white-collar, new town.Edinburgh South Was solid Conservative from 1945 to 1987, when Labour's Nigel Griffiths won. Everyone assumed it would return to the fold, but Griffiths – one of Gordon Brown's most prominent supporters – held on. He stood down after rows over expenses and a sex scandal leaving his successor to defend a majority of 405 in Scotland's most marginal seat against "auld enemy" and the resurgent, second-placed Lib Dems.Glasgow East The SNP 2008 by-election win in Labour's working-class heartland stunned Britain. But even the Nationalists agree, Thursday will probably see a win for Labour's former justice minister Margaret Curran who needs a 0.7% swing.