This is a moment of transition for defence policy. The world is going through a period of immense change. New and emerging threats demand new policy responses. Global trends, from climate change to rising new economies, are recasting the global power balance and reshaping the security landscape.This is also a defining moment for Scotland. Scotland has two governments: one Tory, offering austerity of opportunity at home; the other nationalist, offering poverty of influence abroad. Both have defence plans that will limit our ability to achieve our ambitions on the world stage. I want us to expand Scotland's influence, but we can only do so at the heart of Britain with a strong British defence policy.The SNP do have a clear defence policy, which is to support the government's defence review. They have described it as a "blueprint". Despite suggestions otherwise, however, there's no evidence to suggest the SNP's position towards Nato has changed. They say they would work with Nato but their policy is to do so from outside the alliance.In Afghanistan I recently met troops from across Scotland. Each of those I met served with pride in the UK armed forces and they served as part of Nato, an organisation born after the second world war and at the beginning of the cold war, which is now finding a new purpose. Nato has a proud record of standing up to oppression, whether in Kosovo answering the world's calls to end the butchery, in Bosnia preventing the slaughter of thousands of European Muslims, or in Afghanistan tackling the Taliban regime. Nato helped in the Pakistan earthquake and Hurricane Katrina relief. These are just a few reasons why countries are queuing up to get into Nato. There is only one mainstream party wanting to leave: the SNP.It is peculiar that the SNP rely on a catch-all comparison that says a separate Scotland will be like Denmark and Norway. Both nations have actively contributed to major Nato operations, including Afghanistan. While the SNP decried Nato's action to save thousands of Muslim Europeans as "unpardonable folly", the Danes and Norwegians were fighting bravely alongside allies to protect the lives of innocents.The SNP want the separation debate to ask one question, but there are so many going unanswered. How will Scotland get its way in the world if we leave the UK, the one country with the unique influence of being in the EU, Nato, the Commonwealth and the G8? How does it help the world's poorest people to walk out on the country with the second largest donor of aid money – co-ordinated by 500 Scots at the Department for International Development head offices in East Kilbride? In the worst financial crisis since the depression, how do we strengthen Scotland's businesses by separating from the third largest economy in Europe? How can we be a force for good by getting out of the UK, the fourth biggest military budget on the planet? We are currently one of only five countries out of 198 in the world with a permanent seat on the UN security council. No country in peacetime history has ever given up this degree of influence and Scotland shouldn't be the first. Separation is a powerful idea, but a 19th-century idea, entirely unsuited to the complexities of influence in the 21st century.Separation threatens one of Scotland's greatest strengths. The Clyde has built ships for 300 years. If Scotland leaves Britain the Clyde and Rosyth would be in a foreign country to the Royal Navy, which has never built a warship in a foreign yard. If the SNP gets its way it would have achieved what the Tories and the emergence of east Asian shipbuilding has failed to do – sinking Scottish shipbuilding. Under a Labour government no warships will be built abroad: our frigates and destroyers will be built in the four nations of the UK.In today's complex world we need strong defences at home and overseas. That is under threat from the two governments we face. A country of exploration and innovation, of heritage and history, I want Scotland and the UK to have the power to persuade and the ability to act in the world.• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree