So Gordon Brown has decided not to sack Lady Scotland as the government's senior legal officer despite her being fined £5,000 today for hiring an illegal immigrant.Good. Let's hope that, this time, the prime minister doesn't dither and change his mind under pressure from the stone-throwing tabloids.Scotland, the attorney general, has apologised for hiring Loloahi Tapui as her housekeeper without making adequate checks or keeping copies of the documents she did see.The UK Border Agency accepted that she did not knowingly employ someone whose visa ran out years ago.As I noted here the other day, of the two couples in this tale, three of the four people – Scotland, her barrister husband and Tapui's British solicitor husband – are all lawyers who ought to have been more careful to secure her residential status, a relatively easy thing to do for someone with a British spouse.So only the non-lawyer in the case has lost her job. But should Scotland, who helped pass the relevant legislation as a Home Office minister and is the cabinet's legal adviser, lose hers, too?Phone-ins and chatrooms have been crowded since this morning's announcement of the administrative (not criminal) penalty, with people complaining that it's one law for the rich, another for the poor. Is that true in this case? I doubt it.The laws against employing illegal immigrants are designed to deter people who do it systemically – either in business or their own homes – to gain cheap, malleable workers who can't complain much.I don't think that motive will have applied to either party here, do you?So what it's really about is whipping up negative feeling about immigrants, legal or not, and the jobs they do in our economy, often because we won't do them ourselves (or at least not for the money on offer).In a free society, immigration rules are always hard to enforce. Labour has been guilty of passing many ineffectual ones: window-dressing as a substitute for effective administration.But too many efforts are made to trip up ministers of all parties and get them sacked for essentially trivial reasons – the kinds of mistakes people in all classes in our complicated society make.I don't think we can expect the attorney general to have spotted a dodgy passport.Here in Bournemouth, the Liberal Democrats' home affairs spokesman, Chris Huhne, has called Scotland's position untenable, as has his Tory counterpart, Chris Grayling.The Lib Dem leader, Nick Clegg, sounded more cautious – good for him. Leave that sort of stuff to the rottweilers.Politicians should be sacked or forced to resign for proper reasons, as Peter Mandelson was once (but not twice) and David Blunkett was on neither occasion. The record is usually mixed.This is not such an occasion. Labour is short of competent lawyers (they make so much money in private practice today). Scotland is a competent female, black lawyer. A second chance is called for. But don't do it again.