The Scottish government is to set up an online system to give healthcare professionals access to a key snapshot of patient information.It is aiming to remove the need for clinical staff to log on to multiple IT systems to get obtain all the information needed for treatment. The system is expected to cover more than a quarter of the Scottish population. The government said that the move, which it has backed with £4m in funding, follows the creation of a similar system that is already in use in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area, which covers around 1.2 million people. The new system will be used by doctors, nurses and other healthcare professionals across primary care and acute care at a consortium of four Scottish health boards which approached the Scottish government with the idea: NHS Lothian, NHS Fife, NHS Dumfries and Galloway and NHS Borders.A spokeswoman for the Scottish government said that other health boards could adopt the principle to develop their own systems.Northgate Managed Services has been named as the preferred bidder to deliver the service. Health secretary Nicola Sturgeon said: "Investing in new technology is bringing real benefits for patients and staff across our health service. The £4m investment being announced today means healthcare workers across four boards will have access to the same snapshot of information on patients."That not only helps make patient care quicker and safer, but also makes patient information more secure. It saves time for staff - and making care more efficient is always good news for patients."Martin Egan, NHS Lothian's director of e-health, said the portal was widely supported by clinicians and the prototype proved that it can integrate with the different systems used across the four health boards. "It will deliver secure and accurate real time patient information, improving patient care and reducing our dependence on paper records," he said. The health boards are finalising their business cases to take the programme forward.The announcement follows other recent investments by the government in the Scottish health service including £1.4m on a computerised screening system, the launch of a online health checker for people turning 40 and a new round of funding for health boards. This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the Guardian Healthcare Network to receive regular emails on NHS innovation.