The Sunday Herald in Glasgow dared yesterday to pose the question: does Scotland need the Daily Record?Some 90 editorial jobs are to be axed at the Record and its sister title, the Sunday Mail, by their publisher, Trinity Mirror (last week's news report here, my comment here).The Herald said the cuts - which amount to more than 37% of the journalistic staff - "have thrown the spotlight on the health of the Scottish press", and asked "media experts if the cuts will harm the health of the nation itself."Philip Schlesinger (academic, Glasgow University) thought "the deep cuts" were "another nail in the coffin of the Scottish indigenous press" and called on the Scottish parliament "to wake up... and discuss the crisis..."He argued that "indifference to decline is sheer irresponsibility. Plurality is seen as key for Scotland's broadcasting. It is no less a principle for the future of Scotland's press."Stewart Kirkpatrick (editor, Caledonian Mercury, an online newspaper): "The brutal truth is that the newspaper model is broken. It has had its day... digital innovation is the only thing that will save Scottish journalism. "It is the only thing that offers a realistic future to the hundreds of hacks who have lost their jobs... The net is a fantastic medium for journalists to set themselves up as independents..." (See more of his argument here).Charles McGhee (ex-editor of The Herald and honorary professor, Glasgow Caledonian University): "One could argue that the Record and Mail could have been less fawning and more constructively critical in their support of one political party, Labour, but that's not really the point at issue.If mass-market newspapers such as the Record and quality titles like this one and The Herald and The Scotsman (and let's not forget the doughty local press also caught in the current crisis) are no longer able to cover the business of government, from Holyrood to the town hall, then everyone eventually suffers."Iain Gray (Scottish Labour party leader): "There may be a deluge of information with the internet, Twitter and 24-hour TV news cycles, but newspapers are still the best source for in-depth coverage, analysis and investigative journalism...The Daily Record has iconic status in Scottish life. It may not be the mighty paper it was, but then none is...We should all fear the decline of Scottish newspaper industry because of its vital role in a healthy democracy, holding government to account...As a Labour politician I am naturally concerned. In what has always been a politically partisan market – albeit skewed to the right – the Record and the Sunday Mail were the lone Labour voices.Such political imbalance was, I would argue, never healthy. It is hard to see it getting better. That's not good for newspapers and it is not good for Scotland."Alex Salmond (Scotland's first minister) believes the Record and Mail "should be part of a vibrant and flourishing media sector in Scotland". He added:"While I may not always have seen eye to eye with the Daily Record's editorial stance over the years, I recognise the important contribution it and its sister title have made and continue to make to our national life...Scotland needs as much homegrown news, current affairs and sports coverage as possible – whether in print, online or on the airwaves – and a vital, healthy Daily Record and Sunday Mail should be part of that media mix."Brian McNair (academic, now professor of journalism at Queensland University):"The decline in the Daily Record began a long time ago, before the credit crunch, and before the internet really began to challenge the print business model.The Sun's steady rise over a period of two decades, and the Record's decline, reflected decline in Labour's core demographic in the west of Scotland, and the fact that Murdoch's red top was, to be honest, a better product.The Record simply hasn't been up to the challenge, and these job losses are the latest evidence of that...Will the paper's predicament affect the health of Scottish political culture and debate? I doubt it."There was also a contribution in the Sunday Herald from me, coincidentally not too dissimilar from McNair's.