When Abdelbaset al-Megrahi boarded the Libyan jet as a free man in August 2009, Scottish ministers said his release was proof of their country's humanity.Kenny MacAskill, the Scottish justice secretary, said the former Libyan intelligence officer had barely three months to live, terminally ill from inoperable prostate cancer, according to the Scottish prison service's medical experts. Condemnation from the US was vigorous. Hillary Clinton, the secretary of state said it was "absolutely wrong", while relatives of US victims of the Lockerbie bombing denounced it as "vile".MacAskill said: He repeatedly quoted messages of congratulations for showing mercy from Nelson Mandela, senior Scottish church leaders and some British relatives of the Lockerbie bombing."In Scotland, we are a people who pride ourselves on our humanity. It is viewed as a defining characteristic." Megrahi blew up Pan Am flight 103 above Lockerbie in December 1988, claiming 270 lives. His release has been the most controversial and bitterly disputed act by any minister since Scottish devolution 11 years ago.Many still dispute the medical evidence MacAskill relied on. To the Scottish government's embarrassment, Megrahi is still living at home with his wife and mother in Tripoli, his survival reportedly prolonged by chemotherapy which he was denied in Greenock prison, and by the psychological relief of being released.Scottish Labour and Tory politicians have constantly pressed for clearer medical evidence to justify the official advice that the three months was "a reasonable prognosis". Cancer experts have derided that conclusion, insisting that 18 months is more reasonable.So Megrahi's release immediately provoked doubts about the Scottish government's true motives. Many cited Tony Blair's desperation to secure lucrativeoil and engineering deals for UK firms in Libya: a connection made explicit by the latest WikiLeaks cables. A US senate committee is holding an inquiry into BP's intensive lobbying for a prisoner transfer deal with Libya as it bid for an $800m (£506m) oil deal. Salmond has denied any Scottish involvement or profit from BP's contracts, but clear evidence has emerged of Salmond's secret attempts to attract Qatari investments for his government's cash-starved construction programmes. The Qataris, it became clear, had intensively lobbied ministers in Edinburgh to release Megrahi. But MacAskill in turn produced letters showing the Qataris had been rebuffed and, as yet, no Qatari money has flowed to Scotland.There is a more complex theory: many seniorlegal experts, civic groups and British relatives of Lockerbie victims believe Megrahi was innocent, and would have been freed on appeal. They think he was freed chiefly to prevent the Scottish legal system from the humiliation of being blamed for the worst miscarriage of justice in British criminal history. Megrahi was released only after he dropped his appeal against his conviction just a few days before MacAskill announced his compassionate release. Megrahi's lawyers insist that there was an explicit threat: unless his appeal was abandoned, he would die in jail.The Scottish criminal cases review commission returned his case to the appeal courts because it uncovered significant new evidence suggesting he was wrongly convicted. One intelligence report which is central to that theory remains secret.Some suspect all these pressures weighed heavily on MacAskill. But no concrete proof has yet emerged to confirm any of these suspicions; Salmond continues to insist MacAskill made his decision wholly independently of any outside pressure, bribes or more sinister motives.But with the SNP facing losing power at next May's decision, and with the risk that Megrahi's funeral will be turned into a triumphant celebration already causing consternation for British diplomats, this decision will haunt both men into their retirement.