The Queen is a bit like a Bismarckian sausage. Everyone, well almost everyone, loves the product, but the manufacturing process really doesn’t bear examination. Yesterday, the Palace fleetingly revealed a glimpse of the substructure of the monarchy, and more specifically the extraordinary assets held in the monarch’s name from which she derives her income. It was a dazzling masterclass in democratic charades.The crown estate turns out to mean your favourite beach, a great many offshore wind turbines and a McDonald’s, along with oh, Australia, Canada and some other smaller nooks and crannies of the empire. They don’t contribute much rent, but they do give her a bit of a party when she visits. Most of the revenue from this vast portfolio goes to the Treasury, in a deal agreed only four years ago, and which is up for renewal next year. That could vary the percentage of the profits of the crown estate (see above) from the current 15%. Related: Scotland decides to stop funding Queen via Scottish crown estate The suggestion that an elderly couple will have to move out or live with a leaking roof and useless central heating is tear-jerking stuff, although in the bigger picture less so, particularly in the context of a) the bedroom tax, b) government plans to redefine poverty, and c) an annual income of £35m. Also the elderly couple in question can choose any one of their other four palaces: Holyroodhouse, Windsor Castle, St James’s Palace, Clarence House and Kensington Palace. Several of them, Londoners will realise, are close by Buckingham Palace. But that is a cheap and predictable political jibe. There is a much more serious point to all of this.Buckingham Palace is splendid. That is what it is for. It has a magnificent approach, off Trafalgar Square and through Admiralty Arch along the Mall, a mile-long processional avenue – the perfect setting for the rich panoply of monarchy. The vista is only interrupted by the Victoria Memorial, erected in 1913 to perpetuate an image of imperial majesty that made George Bernard Shaw blush, and “long for a trip in a bombing aeroplane”. This was less because of any republican sympathies than because he thought it, like most other statues of the queen-empress, a terrible misrepresentation of a small but stylish lady.It became a royal palace in the early 19th century. Not a great time for the idea of monarchy, or at least not until after 1815. By the 1800s, what had started in the 1790s as a piece of run-of-the-mill royal extravagance, had been converted into a handy weapon in the propaganda campaign to entrench established power. Nothing new in that, except that of all the surviving monarchies in the world, only in Britain does the royal family still occupy so completely the dominant royal building of the capital.Just ponder, for a moment, the strange synergy of architectural decay. Last week the Palace of Westminster, this week Buckingham Palace, probably the most globally recognised architectural symbols of the United Kingdom. Both were designed and built in the first part of the 19th century with a very clear sense that they needed to be the physical expression of a power that was not necessarily quite as securely founded as the palaces’ architects were instructed to suggest.They were built in revolutionary times to represent an unbreachable continuity. They were bulwarks against change then, and now, 200 years later, they continue to represent institutions that have not changed enough.The real story out of yesterday’s factory tour is not that the machinery needs upgrading, but that there is one part of the realm (see the royal website for a helpful answer to the question, “what is a realm?”) that has had a brilliant idea about the next step. Scotland.As a PR-savvy royal aide said yesterday, legislation now going through parliament will give the SNP management of royal assets in Scotland. That means it could, in theory, hold on to all the profits. At yesterday’s briefing Sir Alan Reid, keeper of the privy purse, suggested that this meant there could be a “complication” over future funding.The SNP has been bounced by this revelation into insisting it has no intention of cutting off its share of the sovereign grant, which funds the royal household. The Queen is safe in their hands. That’s fine. The point is that if it wanted to, and if Scottish voters wanted to, then it could.If Scotland can do it, why should the rest of the UK not have the same power? Using it would be an entirely democratic choice. It’s no more likely to happen any time soon than it is that Her Majesty pops out to Tesco for sausages. But it would feel good to have the choice.