Inkspot and Silverleaf76/78 South Street, Bo'ness EH51 9HA, 01506 204450This bright and cheerful shop really feels as if it's a part of its community. As well as a good 4,000-strong selection of bestselling and general titles, it stocks locally handmade gifts and cards, and acts as a ticket outlet for events in the district. The children's section has shelves arranged at different heights for each age group and the informal atmosphere helps put young browsers at ease. There's also a small stationery section, and plenty of books on the history of the town and area.Aye-Aye Books350 Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow G2 3JD, 0141-352 4900Named after the world's largest nocturnal primate, this quirky bookshop in the Centre for Contemporary Arts offers fiction, poetry, cultural theory, radical writing, artists' books, magazines and exhibition catalogues. There are books by and about Scottish artists, as well as music and world cinema DVDs. It's only open from Wednesday to Saturday, but also sells its eclectic wares online.Hyndland Bookshop143 Hyndland Road, Hyndland, Glasgow G12 9JA, 0141-334 5522This small, stylish shop sits perfectly among the chic boutiques and coffee shops of well-heeled Hyndland. It offers a fine selection of fiction, poetry and travel writing, and some surprising choices alongside bestsellers. An extensive selection of films contains the best of arthouse, modern classic and world cinema, and prices are reasonable. There's also a very cute black Labrador to add to that aspirational West End vibe.Milngavie Bookshop37 Douglas Street, Milngavie, Glasgow, G62 6PE, 0141-956 4752The family-run Milngavie Bookshop has been a local institution for more than 30 years. The stock is broad, with a special emphasis on children's books and local interest titles. It also sells cards, maps and stationery, and has a popular cafe. It's heavily involved with the annual Milngavie book and arts festival, and has a lively programme of events involving local authors.Achins BookshopInverKirkaig, Lochinver, Lairg, Sutherland, Highlands IV27 4LR, 01571 844262Possibly the most remote bookshop in mainland Britain, Achins sits in gobsmacking scenery between Suilven mountain and the sea. It focuses on Scotland, particularly the local area, and has a good selection of hill walking, fishing, and history titles. There's a cafe, too – which, unlike the shop, is only open between Easter and October. Given that glorious setting, you might want to call first to check it's open.Ceilidh Place Bookshop 14 West Argyle Street, Ullapool IV26 2TY, 01854 613773At the end of the A835, there's a bookshop with rooms for you to sleep in. The Ceilidh Place is an extraordinary complex including a gallery, bookshop, hotel, bar, cafe and performance space, set up by the actor Robert Urquhart in 1970 and now run by his widow Jean, a member of the Scottish parliament. The bookshop, which began as a shelf of titles in the lobby, is open year-round for works on modern Scottish literature, art, outdoor activities (especially kayaking and mountaineering), ecology, cookery and natural history. There's a strong poetry section, books in Gaelic, children's books and titles from small Scottish publishers such as Sandstone Press and Big Sky Press. This is a magical place: overnight guests can buy books from breakfast time to when the bar finally closes.Stromness Books and Prints1 Graham Place, Stromness, Orkney KW16 3BY, 01856 850565In 1976, Tam McPhail took a job here to tide him over. Now, 35 years later, he's the owner of an idiosyncratic bookshop that's the antithesis of the slick bookselling chains on the high street. Recently, McPhail changed his opening time to 10.30am so he could walk to work, he doesn't organise events ("The book is the event," he says) and despite the name, he doesn't sell prints. His stock, in one small room, includes bestsellers but the focus is on interesting books for interesting people. The shop, which has been a tea room and a bakery in previous incarnations, is right on the road. There is no pavement, so McPhail dubs it "Scotland's only drive-in bookshop". Some regulars actually do pull up and buy at the wheel.Analogue Books39 Candlemaker Row, Edinburgh, Midlothian EH1 2QB, 0131-220 0601Run by husband and wife Russell and Julie Ferguson, this diminutive shop concentrates on art and design books, displayed like objects in a gallery rather than overwhelming rows of spines. It's a refreshing, friendly mix of artists' books from small presses and more mainstream titles, selected for their beauty. The shop also sells prints by local artists alongside cutting-edge titles in illustration, graphic design, fine art, fashion, and architecture, plus cards, magazines, journals and stationery. It used to be an antique shop, owned by a woman called Joy. Rather sweetly, they've left her name over the door as a sign of what lies within.Edinburgh Bookshop 219 Bruntsfield Place, Edinburgh EH10 4DH, 0131-447 1917This is the kind of bookshop we'd all like to have in our neighbourhood. It's a classy, beautiful space – all high ceilings, glass tables and original art on the walls – housing around 4,000 books, with a strong selection of Scottish titles and an exceptional children's section, which has a bright mural. The emphasis is on unusual, intelligent and topical selections of new titles to give the stock a clever, eclectic mix. If Radio 4 was a bookshop, it would be like this. It's a buzzy place, with regular author events, often featuring local writers such as Ian Rankin or Alexander McCall Smith, book groups for adults and children, and book swap evenings.Fruitmarket Gallery Bookshop 45 Market Street, Edinburgh EH1 1DF, 0131-225 2383This is one of Scotland's best contemporary culture and art bookshops, with an unrivalled collection of titles on art, design, photography, fashion, and architecture from small, independent presses, as well as mainstream publishers. It stocks limited edition artists' books, magazines and journals, alongside contemporary stationery and gifts. There's also a popular children's section of illustration-led books. The stock is shaped by what's on in the gallery, and all profits feed back into the creative programme.Linlithgow Bookshop 48 High Street, Linlithgow, West Lothian EH49 7AE, 01506 845768There's an impressively broad range of titles in this general bookshop, housed in an atmospheric 16th-century building in the historic town where Mary Queen of Scots was born. Given this connection, it's not surprising that Scottish-interest and local history titles feature prominently. Since moving most of its children's stock into a dedicated shop further up the high street (see Little Owls, below), this shop has expanded its stationery and gifts section, with an emphasis on Scottish items. Knowledgeable staff keep locals coming back.Little Owls103 High Street, Linlithgow, West Lothian EH49 7EQ, 01506 844645A gem of a children's bookshop, hugely popular with locals. The premises are divided into three areas for Little Owls (pre-school and under-fives), Bright Owls (primary school age) and Night Owls (11-18), with a great selection of books, toys and games in each. There's a busy programme of events, from graphic novel workshops for teenagers to a pre-nursery storytelling and singing group. The shop has a gift for engaging young readers, and making choosing books fun at any age.Transreal Fiction46 Candlemaker Row, Edinburgh EH1 2QE, 0131-226 6266A fixture on the Edinburgh science fiction and fantasy scene for the past 14 years, Transreal recently moved into new premises. The understated white-painted shopfront on Candlemaker Row belies the bold, enthralling worlds that lie behind it. The shop takes its name from the term that Rudy Rucker coined to describe his brand of speculative fiction, and stocks several thousand titles from British and foreign authors. Transreal often stages exhibitions during the Edinburgh festival. Previous shows have seen an invasion of knitted tentacles and photographic portraits of writers.Valvona & Crolla19 Elm Row, Edinburgh EH7 4AA, 0131-556 6066Founded in 1934, Valvona & Crolla is Scotland's oldest delicatessen and a must-visit for fans of Italian food. But as well as its edible delights, the shop carries around 100 titles on cooking, food, Italy and Scotland. It's a bespoke range of titles reflecting the company ethos: distinctiveness and quality, plus a strong sense of place. Don't go looking for bestsellers you could find elsewhere: this is owner Mary Contini's personal selection of books that delight her. And as you'll know if you already shop in the deli, she has pretty impeccable taste.Word Power 43-45 West Nicolson Street, Edinburgh EH8 9DB, 0131-662 9112The novelist Ali Smith once described Word Power as a "giant-defier" and that's very much what this radical bookshop sets out to be, taking on contemporary culture and politics from a leftist perspective, while also offering a refreshing alternative to the large bookshop chains. It was opened in 1994 by James Kelman, a Booker prize winner, and takes a distinctive approach that places titles from small or independent presses and radical writing from individuals side by side with those from more well-known names, such as Michael Moore and Naomi Klein. Its focus on politics, feminism, the environment and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender issues continues to promote voices from beyond the mainstream of publishing.Bookshop16 Allan Street, Blairgowrie, Perthshire PH10 6AD, 01250 876004The Bookshop's owner, Louise Gow, used to be a librarian and has always had a passion for art. You can see both of these threads united in her flamboyant seasonal window displays, which are often the talk of the town. The mood inside is informal and fun – the antithesis of a soulless online book retailer, and a reflection of Gow's colourful personality. Her shop carries all the usual subject areas, and has a popular children's section, as well as a small secondhand zone. Gow's fox terrier puppy, Molly, can often be found in the shop, when not posting her choice for book of the week on the store's Facebook page. The shop also sells cards and gift-wrap, and music from the Naxos label.J & G Innes 107 South Street, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9QW, 01334 472174A family business for four generations, this stationer, bookseller and gift shop occupies one of the more extraordinary buildings in the heart of St Andrews. It was the first home to the St Andrews Citizen newspaper in the 1890s, and features oak-lined walls, stained glass windows and a statue of St Andrew on the side of the building. In this impressive setting, the books section highlights golf, coffee table books, local interest, railway books, and children's fiction in particular. There are lots of book-related gifts and classy stationery, plus a lively programme of events featuring local authors.Watermill BookshopMill Street, Aberfeldy, Perthshire PH15 2BG, 01887 822896Over three floors of a beautifully restored and converted listed building, the Watermill houses a gallery, homeware store, bookshop and cafe. But it's the award-winning bookshop that's at the heart of things and claims a sprawling space across shelves made of reclaimed timber and on old bits of mill machinery. Particular strengths include contemporary fiction, the outdoors, Scottish interest, cookery and children's books, which have a dedicated room. The cafe serves local, seasonal produce and good coffee, and doubles as the space for a busy programme of events featuring prominent local authors.Yeadons of Elgin 32 Commerce Street, Elgin, Moray IV30 1BS, 01343 542411Yeadons, one of Scotland's oldest bookshops, was established in 1887 by James Dawson Yeadon and in its time has had some well-known customers: Ramsay MacDonald was a regular. But when Vicky Dawson bought the shop in 2007, this faded north-east institution was almost bust. So the fact that it was, by 2009, independent bookshop of the year in Scotland after a major refit and relaunch is a cheering tale and a small miracle in the current economic climate. Dawson, who has more than 20 years' experience in the book trade, sells a great range of general titles in a stylish, light and airy interior, and also specialises in high-end stationery and writing accessories, such as French scented ink, leather-bound notebooks, and wax seals in gorgeous colours.Yeadons of Banchory 20 Dee Street, Banchory, Aberdeenshire AB31 5ST, 01330 822221This more contemporary branch of Yeadons may be smaller than the original, but the attention to style is the same, with the shop furnished with custom-built shelving, wooden floors, and vintage furniture from the 1950s and 60s. It offers a good general selection, with many local interest titles, in a beautiful Royal Deeside setting.South ScotlandAtkinson Pryce Books 27 High Street, Biggar, Lanarkshire ML12 6DA, 01899 221225There's a homely, domestic feel to this shop, with armchairs by the fireplace and staff referring to the main space as the "sitting room". The shop carries around 3,000 books, but its policy of ordering just one of most titles ensures that there's plenty of choice, including a strong representation of Scottish interest books and a good-sized children's section, which also contains a toy box and suitably sized table and chairs. Events are an intimate affair, seating just 22 people, and involve readings and literary lunches with authors. The bookshop also takes part in the town's annual arts festival, during the final weeks of October, running workshops for would-be writers and book illustrators.Forest Bookstore26 Market Place, Selkirk, Scottish Borders TD7 4BL, 01750 22763History and modern style meet in this serene bookshop and gallery space, which sits in the early 19th-century courthouse where Sir Walter Scott once presided as Sheriff of Selkirkshire. The shelves are heavy with books on art, the environment and beautiful modern editions of literary titles, alongside a good selection of classics, cookery books, gardening titles, Scottish interest, poetry, children's books and craft. The shop also stocks cards and stationery, and showcases the work of local artists in its gallery.Latimer Books5 Mill Wynd, Kelso TD5 7HP, 01573 225776Just off the main square in this handsome Borders town, Latimer Books is a great little shop. Run by a couple who used to work in the hotel trade, it combines their passion for all things bookish with exceptionally good service. Their approach is to make this a shop emphatically about books, with a great selection of titles across most main subject areas and a zippy ordering service. They do sell audio books, music, Ordnance Survey maps and cards, but this is really a book lover's sanctuary and a fine place to browse. Regular author events promote local writers.Main Street Trading Company Main Street, St Boswells, Roxburghshire TD6 0AT, 01835 824087Owned by the former marketing director for children's books at Bloomsbury, Rosamund de la Hey, and her husband, Bill, the Main Street Trading Company sells coffee, food, beautiful gifts and homeware, but books are at the heart of things. The light and airy shop carries around 7,000 titles with an emphasis on children's books, fiction, cookery and biography. There are clever touches: the young adult section, for once, isn't lumped in with children's books. The shop also hosts book clubs and regular author events with writers such as Maggie O'Farrell, who described it as "a bookshop so perfect you might have dreamed it". This approach recently bore fruit with recognition as the Scottish independent bookshop of the year for 2011.Solway Books 14 St Cuthbert Street, Kirkcudbright, Dumfries and Galloway DG6 4HZ, 01557 330635Keith Chadband used to drive to work along London's gritty Old Kent Road, but these days his commute hugs the glorious Kirkcudbrightshire coastline. His bookshop offers new and secondhand stock in three large rooms, with new titles focusing on local interest and history, paperback modern fiction, children's books and reference. There's an emphasis on local authors such as Aline Templeton and Mark Frankland, and lots of maps and guides for walkers and cyclists. Free parking is available – a bonus in a town that gets clogged with holidaymakers during the summer months. Kelsey's Bookshop 29 Market Street, Haddington, East Lothian EH41 3JE, 01620 826725This bright and friendly shop in the handsome market town of Haddington stocks a wide range of new titles in fiction, food and drink, gardening, reference and children's books, but its speciality is local history. Staff know this field particularly well and aim to stock all relevant titles, including some from very small local publishers. The shop, which has been going for over 20 years, now has a vibrant cafe and also stocks art materials.Bookpoint147 Argyll Street, Dunoon, Argyll PA23 7DD, 01369 702377There's a huge selection of books at this bustling shop, which has been open for more than 35 years. Its range of 9,000 titles is especially strong on Scottish writing and history, ecology, adventure sports, the sea and sailing, and there is also a well-stocked children's section. A book club meets each month and you can expect other events featuring well-known authors, such as Emma Thompson, as well as local writers launching their first books.