What's going for it? There's a different light up here. Cooler, icier. When you get to Inverness' big country, Britain seems to have more in common with Iceland and Lapland than Exeter or Llandudno. The northern lights are as common as muck. There's a landscape of epic magnificence 15 minutes away - the Highlands one way, the Cairngorms the other. Admittedly shifting up (or down) here is one to file under "major life change", but faint heart, eh? The place has had a booming few years, usually scores high in quality of life surveys and, dammit, there are dolphins in the Moray Firth. I'm off.The case against Remoteness. It's a few hours' drive to anywhere else the same size. A fair heft of gloomy weather and dark, dark winters (but light, light summers). Many delivery firms don't count Inverness as "UK mainland" and slap on extra charges.Well connected? The airport, just outside town, flies to Birmingham, Gatwick, Manchester, Belfast, Southampton, Luton, Bristol, Edinburgh and more Highlands and islands. Rail to Edinburgh (210 mins, every two or three hours), north to Wick (four hours) and west to Kyle of Lochalsh (135 mins). Two direct trains a day to London (eight hours); trains every hour or two to Aberdeen (135 mins).Schools Primaries: Lochardil, Holm, Hilton, Crown, Central and Muirtown have a "broad and balanced", "good" curriculum, says HMIE; Merkinch has a "good ethos". Secondaries: Charleston Academy has a "good ethos", while Higher results in Inverness Royal and Millburn are "well above national average".Hang out at... Hootananny on a Friday night. Or a Tuesday. Or a wet Saturday afternoon. Where to buy South and east's traditionally posh, with villas lining the river on both sides, and leafy streets of stone Victorian semis. Some lovely stone terraces skirting south of the city centre, and west of Kenneth Street on the west side. Decent modern suburbs. Lots of new-build, too. Check out the commuter belt lining the Moray Firth, with its extraordinary views. My money's on the Black Isle's pretty towns, like Cromarty and Fortrose. Market values Five- or six-bed Victorian villas, £450,000-£550,000. Modern detacheds, £200,000-£450,000; semis and bungalows, £170,000-£250,000. Terraces, £130,000-£300,000. Flats, £80,000-£260,000.Bargain of the week Nice, Victorian three-bed terrace, needs upgrading; £120,000, with Your Move (01463 221166). • Live in Inverness? Join the debate at theguardian.com/money/propertyCaroline Warburton "You have easy access to mountains and beaches; summer evenings stay light until well after 10pm. The Kitchen on the river does great lunches."Owen Smith "The best thing? For many years there have been no private schools." Donald Shiach "The Eden Court complex - two theatres, two cinemas, a performance space, restaurant and bar. Plus it's only 45 minutes to the ski slopes." Karen Furness "A lovely, clean, relaxed city with a village feel. But getting anywhere is hard work if you don't drive. My first bus on a Sunday isn't until 1.30pm!"• Do you live in Bristol? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, please write, by next Friday, to lets.move@theguardian.com