Apparently the decision to launch the Scottish government's much-anticipated white paper on independence – at the Imax in Glasgow next week, rather than at Holyrood – has infuriated the opposition. Such fury seems to be the default position of the Tory-Liberal-Labour alliance.But whatever their contrived reactions, the 500-page document is seen as both historic and pivotal. It's certainly historic, but pivotal? In this regard it is not the politicians that matter. Alex Salmond knows this, and will be releasing the document in stages over the coming weeks, with plans to have a series of public forums to discuss it. It's a populist and democratic move.Salmond's real target audience is the large swath of "don't knows" unconvinced by either side and mesmerised by the daily entreaties of doom (only today Scots were warned they'd never see Doctor Who again after independence), and still sceptical of the Yes campaign.But an event this weekend points to a different source of energy that may yet influence the referendum result. As the Westminster parties shift relentlessly rightwards, a new alternative is emerging. Glasgow is to host the second of the Radical Independence conferences. With the slogan "another Scotland is possible", the event quickly sold out – all the unionist parties combined would struggle to fill a similar venue. According to the organisers, the hope is that independence will be the catalyst for a new type of country. A "radical independence declaration" will be read out, rejecting neoliberalism and putting social justice and equality at Scotland's core.This event is part of a wider movement, from the Scottish Common Weal movement – "a vision for a better Scotland" based on the conviction that we will get better outcomes for both society and individuals if we emphasise mutuality and equity rather than conflict and inequality – to the cultural imagination of the National Collective, which aims to "imagine a better Scotland" by bringing together inspirational artists of all forms. Groups such as The Art of Hosting are helping people share and communicate, asking: "How do we create the conditions for deep, systemic change in Scotland? How can we help the emergence of a new way of living by listening to the voice and spirit of the people?"A number of books published in the past year pick up these themes, such as Andy Wightman's The Poor Had No Lawyers, a contemporary classic on land ownership, and Lesley Riddoch's Blossom, which explores culture, gender, power and psychology to understand the democratic deficit in Scotland.If the official Yes campaign has to play it safe, these others have no such qualms. They represent a collective longing, a barely expressed desire for participative change. The outpouring of blogs, film and photo projects is another example of this new participatory direction. Alongside these, Women for Independence and Democracy Max are exploring ideas such as citizens' assembly, openness and transparency in information.The white paper only gives formal context to this wider, unfolding movement for change. In this sense, the Yes campaign has already won, because it has created conditions where hundreds of thousands of people are thinking critically about their culture, their governance, power systems and their own future.What's the response from the other side? Like the French chef who can make beefsteak out of a leather glove, Alistair Darling has done well with his Better Together campaign. There was, until now, no need for a mass campaign, a grassroots organisation, nor any need for creative thinking. The message was simple (despite everyday experience from food banks to bedroom tax): "everything's fine". It remains the world's first manifesto for mass inertia, the world's shortest political programme, which can be distilled into four tiny, hopelessly limiting letters: "UK:OK".Daily reality, and the relentless programme of austerity unionism, suggest otherwise. The tide is turning, and the white paper will help unlock the floodgates of change.