 A fortnight ago, Creative Scotland blew any goodwill it had built up with the announcement of its latest funding review. Of the 74 arts organisations that had received flexible funding, grants of between £55,000 and £300,000 covering two years, 49 will now have to compete on a project-by-project basis. Among them are award-winning theatre companies Vanishing Point and the Edinburgh-based site-specifists Grid Iron.Chief Executive Andrew Dixon has blogged in explanation : "We have confirmed secure funding for 25 organisations, three of them as Foundations and 22 as Annual Clients with budgets set aside for three years. The other 49 organisations have secure budgets until April 2013 and will have access to bid into £11m of lottery budgets each year." The alternative, he says, was losing 20 per cent of those companies outright. Despite a government cut of £2.1m, the increased lottery money means that more funding will be available.But the question being asked is, "At what cost?" And it's being asked by many people. "I've found noone – artist, producer, journalist, writer, musician – who is in favour of these changes," writes playwright David Greig in an open letter posted on his blog . Calling for a complete suspension of the plans, Greig suggests that a great deal of opposition is going unvoiced "because [artists and producers] fear they will be left exposed in future funding decisions."At her personal blog, the Scotsman's theatre critic Joyce McMillan lays out what she calls the review's "three deadly sins". First, she stresses that lottery money can only be used for one-off projects, so Creative Scotland's hand is somewhat forced. However, the eradication of flexible funding has, she believes, moved those 49 organisations from "a condition of modest security, into a condition of complete insecurity".McMillan argues that the new plan demonstrates "a kind of undead Thatcherism … and imposes a crude ethic of sado-competition – "this will make you sharper and more competitive" – on areas of society where co-operation, synergy and mutual respect clearly matter more." McMillan goes on to say that Creative Scotland has tinkered where it ought to have rethought and increased the creative control of funding bodies over artists themselves.Meanwhile, Simon Tait's latest diary-entry for Arts Industry speculates on the future of the Department of Culture, Media and Sport, writing that should Jeremy Hunt resign in the wake of his Leveson Inquiry appearance. Tait suggest two alternatives. First, that the DCMS "cannot be disbanded until after the Olympics," meaning "a new secretary of state will have to be installed" and granted a decent tenure. Alternatively, though, he also proposes the possibility that Hunt's resignation triggers its immediate abolishment, with responsibilities divvied up over the Jubilee weekend. Well, stranger things have happened.