Before Monday, Liam Fox had only admitted to meeting Adam Werritty on trips to Sri Lanka and Dubai earlier this year, and then only after much media scrutiny.There had been speculation about meetings in Singapore too. But in the Commons, the defence secretary told MPs that he and Werritty had met abroad on 18 occasions in the last 16 months, and promised that the details would be published after he had finished his statement.The full list emerged after 7pm and gave remarkable details about how Werritty has tracked Fox across the globe as Fox has conducted official business.The 33-year-old was in Singapore in June last year when Fox was giving a speech at the International Institute for Strategic Studies. He met him in Abu Dhabi and Dubai days later. The following month they met at the US Central Command base in Tampa, Florida, for an "informal dinner" at a steakhouse with General John Allen, who replaced General David Petraeus as head of Nato forces in Afghanistan earlier this summer.Further meetings followed in Bahrain in December last year, in Hong Kong in January this year, and in Israel in February. Fox and Werritty went on a skiing trip together that month in Switzerland. In March, they met in Dubai, and in April he was on holiday with Fox and his wife in Abu Dhabi. In May, they were in Washington together, and shared a flight home to the UK on a private jet, listed as a trip "on party donor's aircraft to attend the President Obama state visit".Later that month they met in Washington and Hong Kong, and they were back in Washington again in July.The list shows that Werritty also accompanied Fox and his family during a two-week holiday in Spain in August.Fox asserts that the meetings with Werritty were all private, social functions, and had nothing to do with the business he was undertaking as secretary of state. And he insists Werritty has not financially benefited from these meetings, or his friendship, either. Nonetheless, the MoD list acknowledges that Werritty was present in both a personal and business capacity at a meeting between the UAE government and British military in Dubai last December.Fox did not go into these details in his statement to MPs, saying only that "as a matter of transparency I would like to inform the house I have met Mr Werritty in a social capacity in the margins of 18 trips overseas, including my annual leave".In the interim report from the MoD's chief civil servant, Ursula Brennan, she says, with some understatement, that "the defence secretary's overseas visits are complex, often involving brief stopovers en route from one location to another". She says that "maintaining a proper degree of separation (between downtime and official engagements) is necessary for reasons of propriety".Brennan seems to indicate she is not happy with the way Fox may have blurred the lines, even if accidentally. "The department needs to ensure that a clear distinction is made between party political, personal and government business to avoid the occurrence of actual or perceived conflicts of interest," she says.She also notes the "potentially grey area" where personal meetings can stray into government business – which should not happen without a civil servant present.As part of her ongoing review she has commissioned a trawl for "email and electronic evidence" at the MoD on all of Fox's trips abroad, including his holidays, when Werritty is known to have been there. She is trying to establish "who else was on these trips and who attended which formal and informal events".In response to a Freedom of Information request, the Guardian discovered last week that Fox had met Werritty at the MoD on 14 occasions in the last 16 months. This provoked the furore about the access he had been given, and the potential for breaches of national security. But it emerged that there were even more visits than those declared under FoI, though no explanation was given about why the initial figures were inaccurate.In her report, Brennan sets out that Werritty "was present on 22 rather than 14 occasions", and that she cannot yet exclude the possibility that there may have been more visits. And though Brennan says she feels confident that most of the visits to the MoD were "largely personal conversations … and that the department did not provide Mr Werritty with classified papers or briefings", the sheer number of visits caused surprise across Westminster.Fox has conceded that at least one of the 22 visits, many of which took place in the Pillared Hall coffee bar in defence headquarters, was inappropriate. This involved Fox and Werritty meeting the forthcoming British ambassador to Israel. Brennan says that, "Dr Fox acknowledges that it was not appropriate for Mr Werritty to have attended such a meeting at the MoD." In all, she has found - so far - there were only four occasions out of the 22 when Fox met Werritty with others in attendance.In Fox's statement to the Commons, he said that three of these related to Sri Lanka and one was with someone "known socially to both of us" - presumably, the British diplomat.Fox characterised Werritty's visits as "short social meetings". Despite having a large staff to support him, and all the security protocols that come with running one of the biggest and most sensitive departments in Whitehall, Brennan hints at the chaotic nature of Fox's engagement diary – saying that she has still to confirm the times and dates of all the times Werritty entered the building. She has asked for "security control logs" to give her a definitive number.When the list of all the meetings they had together was published last night, it emerged that Werritty's first meeting with Fox at the MoD occurred on 20 May – just after the general election. He met him again on 21 May.It was during one of their MoD meetings in June that Fox told his friend to stop using business cards with the portcullis emblem saying he was one of Fox's advisers, he said.Fox told the Commons he first learned Werritty was using them earlier that month, and at their next meeting, "told him to stop using his business card stating he was my adviser". Brennan explains that she raised the issue with Fox on 23 August at a routine meeting, the day she returned to the MoD after her summer break. She had read about the cards in a story published in the Guardian on 19 August."Dr Fox confirmed that he had already dealt with the problem and that it was wrong for Mr Werritty to have used such a card," she states. Brennan says she checked Fox's claim that he had asked Werritty to stop using the cards two months earlier with one of his special advisers. "He recalls that immediately after this the defence secretary and the special advisers held a meeting with Mr Werritty at which Dr Fox told [him] that this was unacceptable and he must stop issuing the business cards."Answering questions in the Commons, Fox was asked if it was true that the former chief of the defence staff, Air Chief Marshal Jock Stirrup, had warned him about his closeness to Werritty. Fox said he did not recall having that conversation.Fox did not add anything new to his account of his controversial June meeting with Dubai businessman Harvey Boulter, maintaining it was organised after Werritty bumped into Boulter in a restaurant. He insisted that he had never discussed the issue of 3M boss George Buckley's knighthood with Boulter and suggested Boulter was unreliable because he had initially implied that the knighthood was discussed but he later insisted it was not.Ursula Brennan made it clear that Fox's officials had been unaware of the meeting and that she was unhappy about that. In her interim report she said: "If there is a risk that a personal meeting may stray into government business, the private secretary should ensure that an official be present."Fox's insistence that the Boulter meeting was arranged after a chance encounter is undermined by correspondence seen by the Guardian which suggests talks had taken place between Werritty and Boulter about setting up a meeting with Fox as early as March. The June meeting was the second time the defence secretary had met the Dubai businessman. The two men met in Dubai in early April when, by coincidence, Fox was in town and was able to shake the private equity boss's hand.Fox says he did not discuss either commercial or defence matters during private meetings with Werritty. "He had no access to classified material nor was he briefed on classified matters." The defence secretary does acknowledge that at the Dubai meeting on 17 June there was a general discussion about a communications encryption technology called Cellcrypt and how it might work for the MoD. Beyond that, there was "no discussion of … any classified information".Brennan says senior MoD civil servants believe that Werritty's 22-plus visits to the department were largely personal. But since others were present at only four of them she has only Fox's word for it. She says civil servants are confident they did not provide Werritty with classified papers or briefings.Boulter says that the call encryption technology he discussed with Fox in Dubai was sensitive and that he would not have done so if he had known Werritty did not have security clearance. In particular he says he discussed the possibility of providing it for UK troops in Afghanistan which would have been highly sensitive information.Brennan says that during the course of her review she learned that Fox or his office had provided some diary details to Werritty, in connection with visits where Werritty was to be present. She said: "Dr Fox has accepted that it is not appropriate to ask officials to provide ministerial diary information to a third party."Questioned about providing diary details to a friend Fox was unapologetic. He claimed it was reasonable for ministers to let friends and family know of their movements in order to make arrangements to meet up socially. He does promise to stop meeting Werritty socially when abroad on official business.