Peter Ong, head of the Singapore civil service and permanent secretary for national security and intelligence co-ordination, has given the inaugural lecture in the new Global Public Leaders series.On Monday 27 November, Ong addressed an audience of international senior civil servants and public managers in Singapore on the topic of public services reform. The full video of his lecture is available here.Ong was appointed head of the Singapore civil service in September 2010, moving to the post from his position as permanent secretary in the finance ministry. The Singapore public service has built a reputation for professionalism and efficiency and, more importantly, of integrity. It is widely regarded as one of the most efficient bureaucracies in the world, with a high standard of discipline and accountability.In an interview with Singapore in-house civil service magazine Challenge in 2011, Ong said that the operating environment for the Singapore public service is becoming more complex, with volatility the norm and citizens' expectations growing rapidly. In common with other administrations around the world, the Singapore public service has to deal with issues that are not single, but require public servants to work across different agencies. Such issues might include Singapore's relationship with superpowers such as China, or planning for land use in a way that balances economic development with environmental issues.Ong has devoted his career to public service, having worked in six Singapore ministries since graduating in economics; his departments include home affairs and defence. But Ong has said that, even at this stage of his career, he is still learning.He views technology as a key enabler of inter-government information sharing, but his key focus remains on the 120,000 people employed by the Singapore public service and developing their sense of pride and professionalism in the job they do for Singapore's citizens.• To respond to this, or any other article on the Guardian public leaders network, email public.leaders@theguardian.com. You must be a member of the network to submit articles for publication. • For the latest public leadership updates, follow us on TwitterWhy not join our community? Becoming a member of the Guardian public leaders network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and leadership. You can sign up – for free – online here. 