"What do you want to be when you grow up"? That is probably the most common question I was asked in my childhood from any family member, friends of family and adults in general. I enjoyed answering that question. The possibilities were endless. But I also wondered why adults liked asking that question. Did they like keeping up with our fleeting, crazy answers, or did they need to reminisce on 'what could have been' for themselves?As I went through the next 19 years of conscious adult life, I understood that it was the latter. Something (call it the education system, parents or the economy) during our 'educated years' has 'uneducated' us from our sense of selves. It promoted conformity instead – often towards prescribed paths to making a living, not designing a life.While a certain level of conformity is needed for national progress, the danger of blind and excessive conformity is one of unfulfilled lives. Six years ago, as a rebellious young adult, I left Singapore because of this. Singapore is a city nation whose wealth and modernity have been attained in an impressive four decades (it is predicted to be the wealthiest nation in the world by 2050). Some would argue that it funded its speedy national progress through a general loss of individualism. I would argue that it is an innovative nation trying to find a balance of both.Ever since then, I have been obsessed with cracking the conundrum of what it takes to enable individual honesty in its highest form – to oneself; and the ecosystem factors needed to enable that to flourish in not only a permissible way, but a celebrated way. While the self part mostly revolves around self-introspection, the ecosystem part is much more complicated. Self-emergence, I found is highly dependable on the outer surrounding: family, school, neighbourhood, city and country.During my MBA year as a Skoll Scholar at the Said Business School in Oxford, I had the opportunity to mainstream the field of social entrepreneurship. Working closely with Pamela Hartigan at the Skoll Centre for Social Entrepreneurship, I realised that an environment that allows people to come alive includes a concentration of intellectual content, stimulating conversations, role models, permission to experiment, tolerance for different personalities and ideologies, and a community of like-minded people.This was further heightened when I came across The HUB in San Francisco. It was then a 10,000 sq ft space in the old San Francisco Chronicle building. In that space were about a hundred entrepreneurs and non-profit leaders, impact investors and ecosystem builders, co-working on their own ideas, building ventures that have positive impact on the world. Some were chatting animatedly, others were attending start-up workshops. At one corner, an investor was being pitched to, and at another, a team was having a conference call with Ghana. Collectively, it was a kind of energy that could make anyone believe that anything is possible, and that it is fine to live by your passion and do some good for the world, even at a young age. I soon found out that The HUB is a global network of community, co-work space and events platform for individuals and teams who are using entrepreneurial approaches for sustainable impact. It existed in 30 cities, but there was none in Asia. Shocking.After 400 coffee chats and eight months of endless hours of space-finding, fund-raising and community-building, Asia's first HUB was founded in May 2012, in Singapore. I picked Singapore because of its hunger to be innovative and more so, to be a hub for social innovation. Also, if done well in Singapore, the region will follow. More personally, I wanted to address the pain point I felt in Singapore six years before.The doors of The HUB Singapore have been opened for five months to a throng of what we call 'purpose-driven individuals'. They range from technicians to social entrepreneurs, film makers to bankers, Googlers to Linked-Iners. It is not a space for any one discipline, but for any discipline. The 'intention' becomes the main filtering question to be a Hubber – not status, educational qualifications, wealth or profession. The 5,400 sq ft space in the middle of Orchard, Singapore's main lifestyle and entertainment street, has quickly become the home for the outliers. At 200-membered strong, companies, foundations and government agencies are starting to come to The HUB for entrepreneurial ideas, to meet with 'Hubbers' and to have a casual chat over Chris' coffee. The best part is that we are working with the government (National Youth Council) and this is how potential large scale change can happen.The vision is for the community to grow to 1,000 members in two years. That is 0.0002% of the five million strong population. A drop in the ocean, perhaps, but most movements, ecosystems and innovations start with a small group of individuals.The HUB Singapore seeks to be that micro-ecosystem where individuals can pursue their passions and be celebrated for it. On a national level, it is that incubator of new thinking models, unconventional career paths, novel solutions and big ideas, a safe place for both failures and successes. It is where new options are experimented daily because the common curse of conformity is the assumption that choices are finite to the availability of existing choices, when the advancement of progress and humanity relies on choices that have not yet been imagined.Grace Sai is the co-founder of The Hub Singapore, a community and space for purpose-driven individuals, and the founder of Books for Hope, a social enterprise in the field of childrens' education. Grace will be speaking at the Emerge conference this weekend (27-28 October)This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To join the social enterprise network, click here.