The country is groaning with so much bad news every day, it's a wonder anyone still lives in Ireland.This morning there were quite a few items for the pain addicts among us to choose from, but the worst has got to be the news that the country is going to miss the International Monetary Fund recovery targets for the next four years by around €5bn. Ajai Chopra, head of the IMF mission, flew to Dublin last Friday for the quarterly review and it looks as if everyone, including the Washington-based fund, has got it wrong – this week they almost halved their forecast for GDP growth in Ireland this year from 0.9% to 0.5%. And that's worrying because it's only a fraction of the 1.7% growth forecast by the department of finance whose figures informed last December's hellish budget.We all know what this means – Chopra is in charge and unless there is some Hungarian-style standoff between Ireland and the IMF, the disparity in figures can spell only one thing – more austerity, more pay cuts, more direct and indirect tax. See today's Irish Independent for more detail if you're a glutton for punishment. So that's why even the vaguest of hints by Allied Irish Banks yesterday of a new debt forgiveness programme for struggling mortgage customers made so many headlines today instead of its appalling loss of £10bn in 2010 – as guest blogger economist Stephen Kinsella said: that's the equivalent of a few brand new hospitals.Still, the executive chairman of AIB, David Hodgkinson, is no slouch – he spent the best part of 40 years working for HSBC – and has led banks around the world through severe property crashes.When he arrived last October he was immediately on fire-fighting duty, with a second bailout ordered by the IMF, and a scandal over bank bonuses, as well as coping with his day job: to come up with a survival plan for the bank along with new management practices and prudential controls. "I have never worked with quite as many problems as AIB had, particularly with property," he said. 'Do you know how hard it is to rent in Ballsbridge?'I caught up with him after the annual results news conference yesterday and he was remarkably upbeat about the future. "Do you know how hard it is to find a place to live here in Ballsbridge?" he says by way of explaining a recovery in landlord's yields.He admitted that his experience of trying to find a home in Dublin 4, one of Dublin's wealthiest districts, may not be typical, but he is still optimistic. He thinks Dublin, where house prices have fallen by as much as 53%, may have hit the bottom. But he is less convinced about areas outside the capital."Property in Dublin has stabilised. Properties are getting to investable yields. With gross yields of 6%, that may be worth buying again, but in some places it's going to take longer."He said he had worked through five property crashes – three in Hong Kong, one in Singapore and one in Saudi – but that Ireland's crash is probably the worst he has seen."It is the longest property boom I have seen. It went from the early 90s, then it stopped for a little bit and then the low interest rates from Europe made it even worse, and it just kept going," he said. He says Singapore had a similar crash in the 1980s but it "bounced back within 18 months". This is no cause for optimisim, however: he is quick to note one key difference between Singapore and Ireland – land. In Singapore and Hong Kong, property values were driven skyward because of the lack of development land."The problem for Ireland is Ireland had plenty of space and built in areas where demand might not recover," he said in reference to the country's notorious ghost estates. One in 10 buy-to-let customers in arrearsThe bank has made provisions to write off about €600m in mortgage debt this year alone and acknowledges the buy-to-let market is cause for deep concern with one in 10 customers behind payments for more than 90 days.Hodgkinson says "there was a kind of collective madness," in Ireland during the boom with businesses and individuals chasing property investments like the gold rush. "So when the crunch came it was very serious."Like the other banks in Ireland, AIB has two problems – it over-lent to customers for over-valued properties, but it also loosened its credit policy and started offering in tracker mortgages to head off upstarts such as Bank of Scotland that arrived in Ireland in the 2000s on an aggressive mortgage "land-grab".AIB said yesterday that 54% of all its mortgages were trackers – all of which are loss-making as they are linked to the record low ECB base rate.Those who are struggling with mortgages were given some solace by the revelation that the bank is looking at debt forgiveness initiatives.But in reality this is just rhetoric. All the bank is really talking about is practices already adopted by other banks, including loan holidays, interest-only repayment periods and loan extensions.AIB, which is costing the taxpayer more than €20bn in bailout funds, certainly won't be in a position to offer what might be better described as "debt burial" – a US-style system where customers can hand back the keys and walk away from their homes safe in the knowledge the debt won't follow them. "It does depend on the situation of the customer, how transparent they are with us on their financial affairs and how deep a hole they're in," said Hodgkinson, confirming that debt rescheduling will be offered on a case by case basis.Talk of "inter-generational mortgages", however, is a bit concerning – this was something the banks conjured up at the peak of the boom allowing first-time buyers to buy over such a long time that their children would end up with the mortgage. But what was significant was that AIB, like Bank of Scotland, has said it is willing to work with landlords in the buy-to-let sector. This is something that the likes of KBC have steadfastly refused to do. KBC boss John Reynolds said in February: "We lend people money over a long period of time and we expect to get it back over a long period of time."Asked would AIB be willing to restructure/write-off debt for buy-to-let mortgages, Hodgkinson said: "That is one of the options, yes." Landlords, form an orderly queue now."My opinion is that both Ireland and AIB have serious issues to beresolved," he added. "But I am convinced they both can and will recover. In AIB we are learning the lessons from past mistakes, but we must not get bogged down in despondency."