Dating back to 1975, the original congestion charge scheme started as a cumbersome, manual system of colour-coded paper licences that motorists had to buy and display at police checkpoints to enter a restricted zone. In 1995 it went electronic, with smart cards in cars registered by overhead gantries. The government has long stressed that the purpose is purely traffic management, with entry to the zone typically costing one or two Singapore dollars (50p-£1) – nominal for a country where high road taxes and certificates make car ownership very expensive.With a national population half that of London, Norway seems an unlikely place for congestion charging. But its two largest cities, Oslo and Bergen, introduced tolls for ring roads in the 1980s, explicitly as a money-raising exercise. Public opposition gave way to grudging acceptance, with the development of an automated system and low operating costs and a political commitment that revenue was entirely devoted to roadbuilding and improvements.Ken Livingstone's brainchild, the congestion charge went live in February 2003. Bus use went up significantly, and road safety and journey times improved. Public opinion, which had been marginally against introducing the charge, quickly swung round substantially in favour. However, the 2007 western extension into plusher residential districts proved unpopular and was scrapped after Boris Johnson took over as mayor.Trials in the Swedish capital in 2006 had dramatic results, cutting traffic by 20-30%, and in 2007 a referendum approved making the scheme permanent. Drivers pay a modest 10-20 krona (95p-£1.90) depending on times of day to enter or leave the capital on weekdays, and evenings and weekends are free. A similar electronic cordon is now planned for Gothenburg from 2013.New York's mayor, Michael Bloomberg, was keen to implement a scheme along the lines of London's. In 2007 his proposal for a weekday charge for vehicles south of 86th Street in Manhattan garnered surprisingly positive press and public backing. The city council voted in favour, but plans were blocked by the state assembly and eventually dropped. Although toll roads are widespread, no city congestion charge yet exists in the US, although San Francisco looks the most likely with pilots pencilled in for 2015.