"This is the most anonymous cabinet I can remember," growled an old friend I bumped into on the Christmas geniality circuit yesterday.Since he is a former Whitehall official who worked for six prime ministers, I take his views seriously."Nonsense," I replied. "Name me four members of John Major's cabinet in 1997." When he came up with Virginia Bottomley, I suggested the explanation might be that a man of his age probably fancied the then-health/heritage secretary.Chummy is half-right, of course. Apart from Major, the shattered survivors of the long march of Thatcherism by 1997 still included Hezza, the indestructible Ken Clarke, Michael Howard and Douglas Hogg, of later moat fame.But Roger Freeman, Ian Lang, Mickey Forsyth, Gillian Shepherd, Paddy Mayhew, William Waldegrave, assorted Pattens, Michael Portillo?They have slipped down the memory holes as Trollope's fictional politicians did, as we all do. I hear Portillo is on TV sometimes nowadays, a fate more anonymous than it used to be.So it will be for most of the current crop. But I reminded my friend that they still include Brown himself, Alistair Darling and Jack Straw – the three survivors of Blair's first cabinet – Peter Mandelson and Harriet Harman too, though they both had a cabinet career break.Alan Johnson is well known. David Miliband will be around for a long time – it's not just Hillary Clinton who thinks so.But my old Whitehall chum (he first poured drinks for Harold Wilson) bailed out before those two were on his radar, so they don't count.I mention this to underline the fragility of memory, the flexibility of what passes for conventional wisdom. Does it get worse in the forgettable age of 24/7 media – or am I just getting old and grouchy like my friend(s)?Thus Wednesday's pre-budget report was savaged in most of yesterday's newspapers. But it's a safe bet that, by New Year, the conventional wisdom will have moved on and the reasons for attacking it been changed utterly.The BBC's Nick Robinson reported this morning that there were rows between No 10 and No 11 over the shape of the budget, amplifying Patrick Wintour's lead story in today's Guardian that Alistair Darling would have preferred to have raised £4.8bn from a 1% VAT hike rather than a 1% NICs hike, but was ground down by the chap next door.Nothing unusual about that. Most PMs and chancellors fight and eventually fall out, as Mrs T did with all hers and Tony Blair famously did with his at least half the time.There is usually some right on both sides. Darling is unusual in having seen off Brown's barely-concealed desire to replace him with his consigliere, Ed Balls.Good. I've always been a fan of Darling, a modest man who is tougher than he looks, though I never cultivated him: too loyal to the team (to both Blair and Brown), too discreet, not egotistical enough to be a good source for hacks.As I've noted here before, one of my children works for the chancellor nowadays, which complicates things: another reason to keep a prudent distance.As one colleague put it when telling me last night about his daughter's new career: "I can't tell you that, Dad, it's a secret."Both Darling and Sam White were circulating among officials, analysts and journalists at last night's Treasury reception. I spoke to them both, albeit briefly, but mostly to economic writers from other publications whom I rarely see.That's where Robinson picked up this morning's BBC report, I'd guess, chatting with all and sundry. No 10 will instantly have sussed that from a glance at the diary.Most of the hacks I spoke to – like most I read earlier in the day – seemed agreed that Darling's pre-budget report didn't do enough to tackle the debt mountain or reassure the money markets, on whom we depend to fund the debt.For their part, ministers present defended what they'd done: both the uncertainty of the economy's recovery and the political timetable point to the need to delay the savage cuts that await public services – far bigger than the tax hikes that await us all.After an initially calm reaction in the City on Wednesday, investors decided to panic yesterday – herd instinct again – and sold British Treasury gilts. The FTSE rose a little; the money has to go somewhere.We'll see what happens next. One erudite pundit I've known for decades assured me that the credit agencies that clipped Greek and Spanish credit this week will reduce the UK from a triple-A rating to a double-A soon enough.Another economic pundit who sits even further up the media food chain, whom I'd only just met, told me that they won't. "If they downgraded Britain they'd have to downgrade the US too – and they can't do that," he chuckled.So much for the wisdom of credit agencies, the people who slumbered as the investment banks blew their collective gasket. Correction: as the banks, the regulators and the British government ran amok in their different ways.One thing that was striking in last night's chit-chat was the affection, even respect, for the aforementioned Darling, a calm man with a very awkward inheritance. It was offset by hostility to Brown, some of it among people who used to be big fans."I believed Gordon for the first five years," admitted someone who should have been warier. The BBC's Robert Preston, absent last night, is in that camp too.His Brownite book, Brown's Britain (2005), did not read well at the time and reads less well by the day.There are plenty in that position. Not me, as it happens. Forced to choose between what Brown or Blair, I was saying I usually went with Blair – or neither.But I did argue that Brown had earned his chance to succeed Blair and, fingers crossed, we'd have to see how it turned out.In 2007 there was no alternative – still isn't, really, and that's why he's still there. But the verdict of the hacks drinking Treasury Special Brew was that history will be very hard on Chancellor Brown.I asked one of my economic pundits who was to blame for the current financial crisis."Brown by a proportion of 70% to 30%. He lost control of public expenditure. If we'd entered this recession with a small surplus, say 1%, instead of a structural hole of 6% to 7%, we'd be in much better shape," he replied.As a non-economist, I'm much more inclined to blame the bankers, as regular readers know. My City reporting chum leans the other way, of course. "I'll go no further than 60:40," he conceded.Me, I stick to my guns. The spectacle of the bankers threatening to go off to Switzerland or Singapore (my God, have they ever visited Singapore?) in a fit of righteous anger over Darling's threat to their bonuses surely tells us quite a lot."They're like the miners in 1983; they still don't get it," genial Digby Jones said when I bumped into him elsewhere this week.Today's Guardian carries an interesting report from the French quarter of South Kensington – so handy for the Lycée – suggesting why French bankers won't be going home, even without Brown's claimed victory in persuading Nicolas Sarkozy and Angela Merkel to tax their bank bonuses too. Too much red tape, too miserable at home, said some.Do bear that thought in mind before emigrating or jumping off a bridge. The Times's Anatole Kaletsky, a pundit I respect, argues gloomily that Darling has bombed the banks to all our disadvantage.But one of the nice things about Kaletsky's columns is that every new year he writes one admitting everything he got wrong. It's a habit that should be legislated into statute as the Pompous Pundits Penance Act.If you want a shrewder assessment as to why the City's golden decade may not return – it has little to do with the Darling bonus bomb – try Gillian Tett's column in today's Financial Times. Markets will move where the wealth is. The wealth is moving to Asia, she notes.Like Kaletsky, Tett's clever. She's also better looking (am I still allowed to say that?).