Ian Jack (Narendra Modi: India's saviour, or sectarian leader with blood on his hands?, 18 April) is awestruck by the "certainty and enthusiasm" of a few Gujarati businessmen in his neighbourhood for a Modi victory. He omits to mention another vibrant group of idealists among the Indian diaspora. Their enthusiasm about the newly formed Aam Adami party, helping (in Jack's words) "to root out the corruption of politicians and public officials and clarify the country's purpose", is so strong that a significant number of them have resigned their well-paid jobs and gone to India to campaign for its victory. Only they are taking on the corruption in all political parties, including Modi's BJP. In the recent Delhi assembly elections the contribution of Aap supporters from UK, the US and Singapore was a game-changer.Jack's claim that "an investigation by India's supreme court cleared Modi of deliberately permitting the violence" on Gudjarat is a misinterpretation. The supreme court ordered an investigation by the special investigative team and also appointed an amicus curiae to independently assess the team's findings. The amicus disagreed with the team's conclusion that there was not enough prosecutable evidence. Two supreme-court-ordered investigations with opposite conclusions. How does that clear Modi? Only a trial can prove his guilt or innocence.Emeritus professor Gautam AppaLondon School of Economics• Ian Jack writes of Narendra Modi that "a comparison of the likely loser and winner in the election should gladden the heart of anyone who believes in upward social mobility", pointing out that Modi was once a tea-seller. Yet surely candidates' values and policies are more important than their social backgrounds? Mussolini was of humble origin, the son of a blacksmith. Idi Amin, too, came from a poor background, beginning as an assistant cook in the army. Violent extremism is unacceptable, regardless of the early life of those who espouse it.To Mr Jack it may appear that shopkeepers in north London who support the far-right candidate represent the ordinary people of India. The numerous people left destitute by Mr Modi's actions (or failures to act) in Gujarat – from slum-dwelling Muslims whose homes were destroyed in 2002, to those Hindu peasants whose land has been seized for the benefit of big business – may disagree.Savitri HensmanLondon• Returning from India last week, I thought it was clear that ordinary Indians feel a change is necessary after decades of Congress party rule. The social inequalities are stark; everyday corruption is rife and frustrations evident in hardworking people. Resentment towards the massive investment benefiting Delhi at the expense of poorer regions is openly expressed. Indians deserve better government and Modi offers a promise of a better future. Hopefully western governments will give him a fair hearing and establish a productive working relationship. The necessary changes will not be easy and will require time to embed. Caution and compromise coupled with effective leadership could result in a fairer, more prosperous outcome for the youth of this great country.Sally BatesCotgrave, Nottinghamshire