Your very balanced editorial (24 March) suggests that, on the whole, the people of Singapore are grateful to Lee Kuan Yew for a clean, intensely ordered state dedicated to economic growth in an American-style city of towers. Well, they may as well make the best of it, as they had no say in the matter. Politics has not been kind enough to the few who inherited dictatorships and turned them into democracies (most obviously, Gorbachev and Juan Carlos), and far too kind to the larger number, mostly dating from the de-colonisations of the 60s, who inherited democracies and turned them into dictatorships. Lee Kwan Yew – known for his liking for hangings and floggings – is egregious among these, if only for being so long lasting. Under his successor (who – by pure coincidence, obviously – happens to be his son), there is no sign of liberalisation, and we can only hope for the longer-term future.There is room for genuine argument about the development of Asia. But spare us eulogies for this unpleasant character.Roger SchafirLondon• I was fascinated to read your long obituary of Lee Kuan Yew. You concentrated on his formidable intelligence, his tight control of politics and his belief in the role of the state – all of which have resulted in the clean, prosperous city you can visit today. His commitment to the “greening” of the city has led to avenues of trees, lots of green islands for solar power, all estates surrounded by parks, tower blocks with green walls and plans for the conservation of water. I learned about these things on a trip to the botanical gardens on a couple of visits there. It seems there is much to be used as an example to other urban conurbations, even though the cleanliness and absence of litter and the orderly layout of municipal flower beds might be accompanied by fines and repression of individual freedom. It was a long-sighted plan by LKW in 1968.Christine ColeNorthampton• I think Philip Bowring almost completely misses the point in his obituary of Lee Kuan Yew. Never mind the civil-liberty issues – for the vast majority of Singaporeans, Lee made their country a beacon of prosperity, civil order, safety, world-leading, easily affordable healthcare and free education, good housing for all and full employment. Which leader of this country, past or present, can match that record? And Lee may have created a new royal family, but at least they work – unlike another family I can think of.Tony HartFormby, Merseyside• The letter above from Roger Schafir was amended on 31 March 2015. An earlier version said Henry Kissinger had described Lee Kuan Yew as a “nasty little man”. In fact those are words that Kissinger is said to have used to describe Deng Xiaoping.