The best city stories from around the web this week look at plans for an unusual retirement home in Singapore, find out how to creatively undermine unwanted city statues and imagine the future of a regenerated Athens.We’d love to hear your responses to these stories and any others you’ve read recently, both at Guardian Cities and elsewhere: share your thoughts in the comments below.How can cities combine greener living with the rise of ageing populations, while generating economic growth at the same time? Singapore seems to have come up with one solution, in the form of a vertical urban farm doubling as a retirement home. It’s called Home Farm, and it’s a place where elderly residents grow their own vegetables – through vertical aquaponic farming and rooftop soil plantings – in the pursuit not only of more active, sociable lifestyles but also of income. In turn, as Christa Avampato writes in Seedstock, the project aims to strengthen Singapore’s food security. Still, the architects have pre-empted potential criticism. “Home Farm is not a forced seniors’ labour camp,” explains Stephen Pimbley of SPARK Architects, “we are simply presenting the opportunity for part-time work.” Well, we’re glad that’s cleared up.For decades, industry in the Palestinian city of Hebron was dominated by one thing: shoes. In a photo gallery feature, Al Jazeera takes a look at the now-declining shoe industry in the city, meeting those who still work in it. “In the ‘golden days’, at least 35,000 people were working in more than 1,000 workshops across the city,” writes Tareq Abu Felat. There are now only 300 workshops, open part-time, thanks to the mass importation of Chinese goods.Across South Africa, cities are still decorated with statues and monuments that stand as symbols of apartheid and colonialism. This week, however, saw the fall of one in Cape Town, as the statue of Cecil Rhodes was removed amid cheers and celebrations. Writing in Cape Town Partnership, Sibusiso Tshabalala and Nadine Botha present eight creative things to do with other remnants of the past. Their suggestions range from shrink-wrapping statues in neon pink – as took place last year in Bloemfontein – to projecting transformative animations or using paint to turn them into comic book characters. Poor Brussels. Its urban design is so ridiculed that the term “Brusselisation” is used to describe messy city planning around the world. But how did this happen? CityMetric looks into the city’s poor planning past, characterised by its postwar tendency to demolish historic buildings, replace them with “ugly” ones and add a whole lot of roads to the mix. As Frances Robinson explains, the chaotic nature of the city creates strong reactions among its citizens – but the results often form a humorous, valuable and illuminating commentary on life in Brussels.Over the last few years, Athens’ city centre has fallen into decline, resulting in shut-up shops and buildings in disrepair. But a new regeneration plan is hoping to turn things around. As Feargus O’Sullivan writes in CityLab, the “Return to Athens 2015-2020” programme plans to refurbish 1,800 older buildings, replace cracked pavements and install better lighting in order to attract more tourists and locals back into the area. But is the programme ignoring the value of life in the city centre as it is? “Much of the area to be renovated already throbs, retaining exactly the sort of vibrancy residents of other cities look back to with longing.”Is a retirement home urban farm a good idea? Will Athens lose its soul in regeneration? Share your thoughts in the comments below