Inevitably there's a diamond jubilee angle in the BBC's coverage, which runs throughout the week. With the Queen scheduled to visit, assorted horticulturalists have been contriving floral tributes. Nicki Chapman and Toby Buckland will meet some of these, and florist Simon Lycett will produce a homage to Constance Spry, who did the flowers at the coronation. In a later instalment, Alan Titchmarsh meets a public figure who rivals Elizabeth II for indefatigability: Cliff Richard. Andrew MuellerThis new series promises to take speed dating to a whole new level (the basement, perhaps?) Contestants meet prospective partners as they make their way up to a luxury penthouse bar. Each time the door opens, a singleton will present themselves. But as they reach the next floor, they must choose whether to stick with the partner or turf them out to make way for a new one. In between floors, they get to know each other by playing ice-breaking games. When they reach the penthouse, a further dilemma ensues – do suitors accept their date or gamble for a cash prize instead? Modern romance indeed – or maybe 'twas ever thus. Will Best presents. David StubbsChannel 4 has spotted a gap in the cooking show market. Yes, apparently somewhere between fish crusades and lad-mag brunching we really do need a new premise. Granted, a modern Chinese cooking show is an appealing idea, but does Gok Wan really need any more work? In the first of the six-part series Wan applies his signature "You can do it, babes" approach to Cantonese cuisine. Somewhere in among the irksome Papa Wan nostalgia and shoe/food comparisons there are some tasty-looking recipes. Clare ConsidineA documentary that tells the story of 12 catastrophic weeks in the Pacific theatre of the second world war. This isn't only an exploration of the December 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor, which forced the US into the war, or of the battle of Singapore, during which 80,000 allied soldiers became prisoners of war. Instrumental in these events – argues this piece – was the treasonous flow of information from British personnel to the Japanese command. John RobinsonAfter a strong start, this season of Game Of Thrones has meandered slightly, with some storylines – Daenerys in Qarth, Jon Snow in, well, the snow – seeming curiously flat. But a recent near-revolution in King's Landing changed the pace and it feels thrilling once again. Tonight, Robb Stark discovers a betrayal. Rebecca NicholsonCuriously dry epic documentary about New York's 400-year history, showing in sequence every day this week. We start with the city's beginnings. It's 1609 and Henry Hudson has just discovered it while trying to find China. Then we swoosh up the Hudson river towards the Manhattan we know today. It's built on the efforts of a bunch of money-hungry Dutch men flogging animal pelts for profit. New Amsterdam was, says one commenter, where modern capitalism was invented. Historians, folklorists and writers chip in with a bit of colour but there's an intimidating 14 and a half hours to get through. Julia Raeside