Sustainability, says Cheng Hsing Yao of Singapore's Centre for Liveable Cities, is like an iceberg. Underneath the hard exterior of a city's infrastructure, such as green buildings or energy-efficient power grids, a whole host of factors from extensive master planning to urban governance support it.From the thinktank's perspective, says Cheng, governance is key. One of the fundamental roles of government is to provide a broader framework whereby the private sector can participate actively in the building of harmonious cities, where the spatial, social and environmental aspects of a city are of equal importance."The private sector wants clarity, certainty, some predictability. So, the government has to come up with the overall vision; create plans and policies that make that vision attractive to the private sector; and make those plans and policies transparent and credible," he says in an interview.In Singapore, one way the government achieves this is by opening sustainability projects to public tender, thus ensuring that such projects are benchmarked at a level feasible for private companies.A 2011 tender for the development of a major desalination plant, for example, was deliberately scoped to allow private sector participation – it was won by water management company Hyflux. Similarly, the design and development of the city-state's latest integrated resort Marina Bay Sands, which has received accolades for its eco-friendly practices, was carried out privately but according to the government's vision for the site.There is, of course, still more room for private sector participation above and beyond following the governmental lead. Cheng, an architect by profession who previously spent 13 years with Singapore's Urban Redevelopment Authority, cites green buildings, which have caught on in the city-state because developers see them as a way of selling projects. The infrastructure is widespread, but the mindset still has to catch up: there is room for improvement in the way these buildings are managed."To me, you can do good and do well at the same time," he says. "It is not a bad thing to try to align private profit objectives with the greater good. When we introduce guidelines and legislation, we level the playing field and encourage the private sector to participate much more easily."The public sector must take the lead not just at the infrastructural and policy level, he adds. The next step: leaders at the city level will increasingly become more like CEOs, taking on a managing role and influencing the cities' push towards sustainability. Already, eco-cities are springing up across Asia and sustainability proposals are pouring out of major urban centres such as Shanghai, Kuala Lumpur and Hong Kong."We are entering an era of cities. This is where the action is taking place, where a lot of economic and intellectual powers are concentrated. People move to cities because the opportunities are there. Urbanisation will take place at the edges of the cities – when we talk about China urbanising, for example, it's not an overall transformation but an expansion of existing cities and the growth of towns into cities."As this continues, leadership, institutional strength and the ability to think in the long term – rather than focusing solely on short-term development – will determine how sustainable a city can become.But there is also a major mindset change waiting in the wings, Cheng adds, and in the context of Asia, this is the concept of what constitutes an eco-city to begin with. Conventional models prescribe a village-like, self-sufficient ecosystem, but this cannot be applied in developing parts of the world, where policymakers at all levels face a whole suite of complex socio-economic challenges ranging from widespread poverty to resource scarcity.Instead, what is needed is a compact, high-density model that utilises economies of scale for resource and energy efficiency – such as many cities in Asia are already implementing."A lot of people would criticise Singapore as a country for being non-self-sustainable," says Cheng, who has himself been involved in the planning of one of these eco-cities, the Sino-Singapore Tianjin Eco-City. "But in 2010, we proposed at the Venice Architecture Biennale that if the whole world followed Singapore's model, only 0.5% of the Earth's area would be needed to house the population."Ultimately, he says, the relevant question for public and private sector alike is not whether a city or country can achieve some benchmark. "Being sustainable is about socio-economic as well as environmental development. It's almost like a journey. We need to ask ourselves: are we as sustainable as we can be?"Mint Kang is a writer at Eco-Business.com This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox