Every Singaporean alive today has a relationship with Lee Kuan Yew. Love him or hate him, none of us had a choice; the force of his personality made itself felt in almost every aspect of Singaporean life.I remember a day in high school, in our social studies class, when the teacher asked us who the senior minister was. “Lee Kuan Yew,” we replied with confidence. “Well, who’s the health minister?”Silence. Not many of us kept up with national or current affairs in those days – we were 15, convinced that politics had little to do with us.“Lee Kuan Yew?” one girl said. It wasn’t totally clear if she was joking.“The education minister, then,” the teacher asked despairingly.“Lee Kuan Yew!” Related: Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew, 'a true giant of history', dies aged 91 We were just cheeky girls messing with a longsuffering teacher, but the truth was we didn’t really know who the ministers or members of parliament were. Lee Kuan Yew was the only name we knew with certainty; the only politician, it seemed, who mattered.While current ministers seem more approachable – almost sweet, with their Facebook posts and Instagram selfies – Lee Kuan Yew loomed over Singaporean politics; stern, fierce and ruthless. “Between being loved and being feared, I have always believed Machiavelli was right. If nobody is afraid of me, I’m meaningless,” he said in 1997.It feels odd now that he’s gone. For better or worse, his actions have shaped Singapore like no one else’s. It will take a long time to truly be able to disentangle the man from the country, and to see the impact one had on the other.As expected, the outpouring of grief has been intense. Many people are, truly and sincerely, upset. The plaudits have also been pouring in. With every effusive tribute to the man, the lionisation of Lee Kuan Yew grows. In death, his reputation, choices and contributions are amplified even more than they already were, making it harder to see the man behind the icon.I spent my childhood years learning about how much he had done for the country. “Founding father of Singapore” was a phrase drilled into my head, as if our nation would have been cut adrift, lost and helpless, without him. “He did what needed to be done for us to succeed,” I was told. Gratefulness was an emotion we felt obliged to show – many, rightly or wrongly, still feel it today.It wasn’t until I was in my 20s that I began to learn what those vague things that “needed to be done” were – arrests and detentions without trials. Defamation suits, expensive court cases and bankruptcy (for his opponents). Opposition politicians such as Joshua Benjamin Jeyaretnam and Chee Soon Juan, brought low for daring to disagree. My teenage years were spent getting to know our champion; I am now learning more and more about the man with the hatchet.It’s hard to say where Singapore would be if it hadn’t been for Lee Kuan Yew. I’m not convinced that we would definitely have been worse off. I’m not even persuaded that the arrests and detentions were wise, much less vital to our survival. Knowing what I know now, I feel uncomfortable calling him the “founding father of Singapore”. I believe Singaporeans would have been capable of finding ourselves even without him.The idea of Lee Kuan Yew is intertwined with so many of my thoughts about my country that I often find myself getting mixed up between the two.The whole “father of Singapore” image has often been taken far too literally, but Lee Kuan Yew’s governing style was nothing if not paternalistic. And through that paternalism Singaporeans were tamed – the early vibrancy of activism in the 1950s through to the 1980s curbed and domesticated till Singaporeans saw politics as a danger best left to the clever elite. We are only now, 50 years after independence, beginning to emerge from the political passivity a “father knows best” government urged us into.Was that what Singapore needed at the time? Would we have been worse off if Lee Kuan Yew had not done what he did? There is no way to know for sure.I never knew Lee Kuan Yew intimately enough to be able to say that he was a good man, but I think I can say that he was a great politician – the likes of which Singapore is unlikely to see for a long time. One cannot dismiss his contribution to Singapore: there were many, and we have seen progress that has been the envy of our neighbours in the region.What’s left for us now is to find the answer to this question: where should we go now?