Officials in Zimbabwe have dismissed as "hogwash" reports that President Robert Mugabe is close to death in a Singapore hospital.Speculation about the 88-year-old's condition spread like wildfire after his absence forced the postponement of a cabinet meeting. But Sydney Sekeramayi, the state security minister, told the NewsDay newspaper: "It's just the wish of our detractors. The president is alive and well." Other media reports quoted Webster Shamu, Zimbabwe's information minister, as saying: "It's a lot of hogwash."Two senior officials from Mugabe's Zanu-PF party also denied the report, which originated on a small news site, the Zimbabwe Mail, claiming that Mugabe was "battling for his life" in a Singapore hospital. They said he was on an Easter break with his family."The president is well and away on a private holiday to help his daughter prepare for postgraduate studies, but we are expecting him home this week," one of the officials told Reuters. "But some sick and malicious people are spreading false stories about him being seriously ill while others are saying he is dead or dying out there."The two officials confirmed Mugabe was in Singapore but declined to give any further details. Asked whether the president had also used his 10-day trip for a medical checkup, one said: "We are not going to be engaged over rumours, speculation and wishful thinking."The president is reportedly in Hong Kong, on his way home. One of the officials said he was expected to chair a rescheduled cabinet session on Thursday.Mugabe has been in power for nearly 32 years, making him one of Africa's longest serving leaders. His health is a subject of ever-intensifying speculation. Witnesses have described him as looking ill and falling asleep at meetings. A June 2008 US diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks suggested he was suffering from prostate cancer. His increasingly frequent trips to east Asia are widely assumed to include specialised medical care.But in an interview on state radio for his 88th birthday in February, Mugabe joked: "I have died many times. That's where I have beaten Christ. Christ died once and resurrected once; I am as fit as a fiddle."The latest scare appears to have been triggered by a terse government statement saying a weekly cabinet meeting set for Tuesday had been postponed to Thursday.As is now also common with rumours over Nelson Mandela's health, the story quickly hit Twitter like a runaway train and spread to international media. Among the first to urge caution was Trevor Ncube, a leading Zimbabwean publisher, who posted: "Please note that the source of the Mugabe rumour story is not a reliable one."By Monday night, the Zimbabwe Mail had published a fresh story, headlined "Ailing Mugabe returns home Wednesday". It quoted a member of the Zanu-PF politburo as saying: "The president is on his Easter holidays, like everyone else. He returns to his post this week, at the same time as those who are asking about his whereabouts from their holiday hideouts."Mugabe is the only leader independent Zimbabwe has known. Questions over his health gain added urgency because of perpetual uncertainty about who will succeed him. .On Monday night, Andrew Meldrum, a former Guardian correspondent who reported from Zimbabwe for over two decades, blogged on the Globalpost site: "Over the years there have been so many rumours about Robert Mugabe's ill health and impending death that journalists in Harare have become used to urgent phone calls from their editors who claim they have it on good authority that Mugabe has died or is on his deathbed. They clamour for a story of the dictator's demise."I've received many of those phone calls myself and have made many late-night calls to hospitals, doctors, members of Mugabe's cabinet and his Zanu-PF party, trying to get confirmation or denial of the reports of his death."And then Mugabe shows up, jaunty and outspoken, dashing the reports … until the next set of rumours surface … I remember when everyone was convinced that he suffered from inoperable throat cancer, when actually he was hoarse from a series of speaking engagements."