Blogging looked like fulfilling Andy Warhol's prophecy that everyone would get their 15 minutes of fame. Xiaxue, however, has been famous for five years, and has turned into a full-time professional blogger, attracting around 300,000 visitors per month. Singapore's National Library Board has added her to its electronic archives. She may have passed her peak – marked by her Best Asian Weblog award in the 2005 Bloggies – but there's no sign of this lippy former student/waitress going away. Xiaxue ("snowing") has described herself as "just a normal girl who got rather lucky". Her real name is Zheng Yan Yan, aka Wendy Cheng, and she's now 24. She started blogging in April 2003, and could easily have sunk without trace. Instead, she became, briefly, a celebrity blogger for The Straits Times newspaper, a Maxim columnist, and co-starred in a sort of reality TV series, Girls Out Loud. She now does a fortnightly series, Xiaxue's Guide To Life, which runs on Munkysuperstar's web-based TV channel, clicknetwork.tv. There are quite a few on YouTube.If you want to know about blinging your long nails with crystals, getting a tongue piercing, losing weight, cooking live crabs, shopping for slutty clothes or fitting out your totally pink Princess Room on the cheap, Xiaxue is your girl. She'd be an ideal Big Brother contestant.Part of Xiaxue's appeal is that she's offensive, by Singapore standards. "Singaporean (Chinese) guys," she wrote, "like girls who keep quiet and nods in agreement to everything they say, rather than a girl who speaks up for her own opinions. They like girls who are weak, diminutive and vulnerable, not girls who are strong and can protect themselves." They must also dress modestly and be virgins.Xiaxue – perhaps corrupted by reading California-based Sweet Valley High books – is the opposite of this Singaporean ideal. She's bitchy, swears, wears "chio" (pretty but provocative) clothes, writes in intimate detail about things like panty liners, and flaunts her American boyfriend, Mike. It provokes hundreds of comments.She also generates controversy by attacking other bloggers. One famous post dealt with the Top Seven Most Disgusting Bloggers in Singapore, including Xiaxue. She attacked herself for being a fake, short, fat and ugly. "She is so hao lian [arrogant] of her stupid angmoh [caucasian monkey] boyfriend," she wrote. "SPG!" Sarong Party Girl: the ultimate insult.Some of Xiaxue's posts are labelled as advertorials: she's paid to write about products, review restaurants etc, and she also got a free "nose job". Since she's always writing about the things she does and the products she buys, these aren't much different from her usual slang-packed, heavily illustrated (and skilfully photoshopped) posts. You can take it or leave it. As you'd expect, most of Xiaxue's readers – around 70% – live in Singapore or Malaysia. For the rest of us, she's a virtual tourist spot, providing an uncensored, unmediated and somewhat voyeuristic peek into a different society. Every nation should have its own Xiaxue, and perhaps they do. We just don't know about them.