The label given to Mario Monti of technocrat is about to come unstuck. Since coming to the headquarters of the Italian government to try to pick up the pieces left behind by Silvio Berlusconi, the professor has shown a fine nose for politics and an ability to take the low blows. Whether you welcomed or feared the arrival of a technocrat who had never faced an electoral vote, the same question now arises: Is Monti a technocrat in the guise of a politician or in fact a politician, someone minded to influence public life, but without the vices and evil arts of the trade?At the end of 2011, with the country facing a terrible economic situation, Monti was appointed senator for life and then as prime minister by the president of the republic, Giorgio Napolitano, with the urgent demand to bring order to chaos and regain the confidence of the markets and of Europe. That was, and remains, his main aim. Despite the challenges, Monti takes every opportunity to stress the need to regenerate Italian politics, to make it credible and to earn the trust of its citizens. He does not want to go down in history as the fireman who extinguished the fire, but as the leader who restored pride in being Italian.That's no easy task. The Berlusconi era was not only characterised by the tangible impoverishment of Italy, but above all by its civic impoverishment. During his tenure, corruption and gangsterism became the norm. Hospitals, railway stations and even historical monuments attest daily to the shameful mismanagement by politicians, and also to how little Italians respect the public sphere. Monti, whose term is due to end in 2013, intends to break that trend. His fight against tax evasion and the "black money" that makes up around 17.5% of GDP follows one simple theme: "Those who defraud the IRS are thieves, who put their hands in the pocket of those who do pay."Is this the reasoning of a boring teacher, just a technocrat? Day after day, Italians are discovering that Monti's grey appearance and dense rhetoric hide an ironic manner and a skilled manager of the media. His predecessor dyed his hair, wore lifts in his shoes and resorted to dirty jokes. Berlusconi needed to clown around to shine at European summits. Monti chooses to exert his influence without clashing with Merkel and Sarkozy. Even so, the one-time European commissioner and former adviser to Goldman Sachs must still establish that his calls for fairness and a declaration of war on tax-dodgers are not only words., that his aim is to bring a real change to Italian politics and not just play musical chairs.