Spain has slumped 10 places to rank 40th in a global index of perceived official corruption after a spate of scandals hit its ruling centre-right party and the royal family, watchdog Transparency International (TI) said.The Corruption Perceptions Index for 2013 found Spain to be the second biggest loser of points along with Gambia, Mali, Guinea-Bissau and Libya. The only country to tumble further was Syria, which is almost four years into a civil war.Spain's five-year economic slump, which has forced it to adopt tight austerity laws, exposed how cosy relations between politicians and construction magnates had fed a disastrous housing bubble.The former treasurer of the governing People's party (PP) told a judge he had channelled cash donations from construction magnates into leaders' pockets, and was found to have stashed €48m (£40m) in Swiss bank accounts. Iñaki Urdangarin, the king's son-in-law, was also charged this year with embezzling €6m in public funds."What the economic crisis has done is allow more public debate about corruption … It is being exposed more and that affects perceptions. In Spain every sector – politics, the royal family and companies – was implicated in graft at a time when the country is really suffering," said Anne Koch, TI's director for Europe and Central Asia.The scandals also highlighted a lack of accountability in political parties and even the watchdogs charged with keeping them clean. This prompted lawmakers to react to public outrage and draw up Spain's first freedom of information law.Spain had been the only European Union nation without a law guaranteeing citizens a right to information on how public funds are spent, but Koch said the new law was inadequate.TI ranked 177 countries in 2013, placing New Zealand and Denmark joint first. Those two countries were also deemed the world's least corrupt in 2012, as well as Finland. Somalia, North Korea and Afghanistan again tied for last place.The Berlin-based institute measures perceptions of graft rather than actual levels because of the secrecy that surrounds most corrupt dealings. Greece remained the European Union state with the worst perceived level of corruption, although its four-point gain to 40 points helped it rise to 80th place from 94th in 2012.The biggest improver was Burma, which emerged from 49 years of military rule in 2011. The south-east Asian state gained six points, moving it up the rankings from 172 to 157.Among the large global economies, the United States ranked 19th and China 80th, both unchanged from last year. Russia improved slightly to joint 127th place, from a previous 133rd, and Japan slid one spot to 18.Allegations that leaders of Spain's PP, including prime minister Mariano Rajoy, took backhanders, and the investigation into a member of the royal family are particularly damaging to Spain's reputation as they involve such central institutions, according to Fernando Jiménez, a lecturer in political sciences at Murcia University. "The problem in Spain is the political reaction … Very few people resign here," he said.He contrasted the Madrid government's slow response to the illegal financing scandal in the PP with Germany, where cabinet ministers stepped down after comparitively less serious allegations that they had plagiarised their academic theses decades earlier.On the same day the damning corruption figures were released, Madrid welcomed figures showing the number of people registered as unemployed in Spain fell by a little under 2,500 in November - the first drop in that month since the current system was introduced in 1997. The decline provided further evidence that the Spanish economy might be picking up after more than two years of recession, which only ended in the third quarter.Spainhas around 4.8 million people out of work, representing about 26% of its total workforce. Only Greece has a higher unemployment rate in the 17-country eurozone.