I like to cut people’s hair. When I was nine years old I used to spend a couple of hours a day washing and cutting hair at my parents’ salon and still, today, I’ll do everyone who lets me – like Salma Hayek, who is one of my best friends. I’ve done her hair when the power went out in her house, with just a candle. That one really trusts me.Nothing can beat a conversation with a child. The biggest feelings I have ever experienced come from the way my children [Leo, 4, and Luna, 2] look at me. Being a mother is seeing life from a different point of view, as if you were a child again. Even your relationship with nature changes; it’s like you can see a tree through new eyes.Every day, and every year, you get to know yourself a little better, but never even close to knowing all the mysteries about yourself. Sometimes after a painful experience you can look back and start to become friends with the memory of it.Ageing is something to celebrate. When I started getting asked: “How do you feel about ageing?” I would always pass. How can someone ask you that when you’re 25? There are only good things about it. That’s very much the way we see it in Spain.You can never say thank you too many times. It’s never too much. Gratefulness will always bring you good things.I have some fantastic photos that I will never show to anybody. When I saw the video for Michael Jackson’s “The Way You Make Me Feel” [in 1987] I loved the woman in it and tried to look like her. I had the most crazy perm.To get to the end of the month was hard work for my parents. We only had the basics, but we had so much love that I’m very grateful for the upbringing I had.I went to America with a return ticket. I thought I was going there for three months [to film The High-Lo Country in 1998] and then I’d go back home. Then I got another part.I love my country, Spain, and I choose to live there, but I’ve always felt like a citizen of the world.It’s the fear of fear that can paralyse you the most. Fear is our worst enemy. It can affect so many decisions, so I always strive for it to not take my freedom away.I wear my father’s ring. I used to have my grandmother’s ring, but it got stolen and you can’t replace that with anything else.As children, my sister Monica and I would lock ourselves in the bathroom with magazines and draw pictures. I don’t feel I’m an expert designer now [the pair have designed collections for Mango and Agent Provocateur], but maybe we were rehearsing for this.I hear so many stories about how naughty I was as a child that maybe there is some truth in it. Penélope and Monica Cruz are designers of Agent Provocateur’s diffusion line, L’Agent by Agent provocateur. A swimwear line launches in November (lagentbyap.com)