Next in the series of interviews with government communications leaders is Simon Montague, director of communications for the British embassy in Madrid.With more than 13 million Britons visiting annually and an estimated 800,000 living here all or part of the year, Spain has the busiest consular network in the world, handling 24% of all cases globally. The arrival of new ambassador Simon Manley in late October is a fresh opportunity to communicate self-help advice that can keep our citizens out of trouble.Lost and stolen passports are a major problem, so this year we shot a video to encourage young British visitors to Benicássim and other music festivals to look after their stuff so that they spend their time having fun, not with us. The festival organisers hosted the video on their website and it has had 16,000 views on YouTube – almost as many as the number of Brits who actually attended. So we succeeded in getting to very large numbers even if, frustratingly, the number of lost passports didn't fall; that was due to other factors around the festival itself.   Some Britons living in Spain have run into serious property problems, often through no fault of their own. Britons purchase 4,000 homes per year here and to help future buyers avoid similar issues, we provide a wealth of useful advice on gov.uk on property buying. We've launched another video on YouTube revealing how unprepared many potential buyers are, and we have staff from Spain at the twice-yearly A Place in the Sun shows in the UK, where around 80% of the people we talk to say they will follow FCO advice when buying.I'm pleased to say we have the biggest social media audiences of any British Embassy in Europe. Here in Madrid we also have the FCO's European digital communications team, which advises some 50 posts across Europe on their social media activity. We have a high hit rate in placing opinion pieces in the Spanish press and news stories in the 100 or more English-language expat media channels across Spain. TV filming has enabled us to get consular messages across via holiday programmes and documentaries on BBC, ITV and Channel 4. Digital communications colleagues here in Madrid, press colleagues in London, and Communication Director magazine – a sort of Harvard Business Review for communications in Europe and better than any UK publication. I'm fascinated by how social media is moving us from one-way messaging to a two-way conversation in which there is no longer one "truth" – it is constantly mutating.The UK debate on an EU referendum and our future relationship with Europe has led to questions from Spanish commentators on the likely outcome and the UK's commitment to the EU. So a top priority for the embassy – diplomats and communicators alike – is to reassure the Spanish government, opinion formers and media that the UK continues to be fully engaged in the EU, has credible ideas for reform that will benefit all Europeans, and wants to be part of a Europe that is more open, competitive, flexible and democratically accountable. The EU debate in the UK is widely re-reported in the Spanish press and can create perceptions that do not reflect the coalition government's actual position.• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com. To get our articles on policy and leadership direct to your inbox, sign up to the Guardian Public Leaders Network now. Looking for your next role? See our Guardian jobs site for senior executive jobs in government and politics. • For the latest on public services leadership, follow us: @Guardianpublic