The New York Times called Burgos "an ancient city with a fresh face and culinary buzz". It's a medieval city two-and-a-half hours north of Madrid, and its cathedral is one of Spain's jewels. The fresh face comes in the form of the Museum of Human Evolution (see below) and a first wave of boutique hotels. And the culinary buzz was generated by Burgos being gastronomic capital of Spain last year. Most of the 17 rooms in Hotel Vía Gótica (hotelviagotica.com/en) have balcony views over the Arlanzón river to the cathedral and the city gate. Inside, bold, modern decor, includes photographic murals over the beds and compact bathrooms in frosted-glass boxes in the rooms. The location is ideal for exploring the city.Burgos is famous for three specialities: blood sausage (morcilla), sheep's cheese (queso de Burgos) and Ribero del Duero wine. Classic cuisine is of the hearty variety – suckling pig, beef-and-potato soup – but young chefs have introduced a lighter note. Saúl Gómez offers a cosmopolitan menu at his Blue Gallery (Paseo Comuneros de Castilla 19, +34 947 057451) with dishes such as dashi soup, tataki duck and Singapore crab. And at Tàbula Gastro & Bar  Patxi Álvarez and Elena Pérez serve stuffed pig's ears and tuna tartar. The Bodegas Portia , a 40-minute drive away in Gumiel de Izán, offers excellent Ribero del Duero wines in a Norman Foster-designed building. In town, Calle del Huerto del Rey, north-east of the cathedral, has dozens of bars, as does Calle La Puebla. La Buena Vida Urban Café (Calle San Juan 39) is one of the most stylish hangouts, playing anything from jazz to electronic music to a young crowd, while Cervecería El Morito (Calle Sombrerería 27), between Plaza Mayor and the cathedral, is a local institution offering traditional tapas and raciones.Burgos has its 13th-century cathedral, Las Huelgas Reales monastery and Cartuja de Miraflores abbey, but the Museum of Human Evolution, designed by award-winning architect Juan Navarro Baldeweg, steals the glory. And 10 miles to the west, served by shuttle bus from the museum, is the Sierra de Atapuerca, a Unesco world heritage site and location of some of the most important human fossil finds.