Zaragoza lies in a desert valley beneath the foothills of the Pyrenees, 90 minutes north-east of Madrid and three hours west of Barcelona. So, it snoozes in the hot midday sun and gets animated in the cooler evenings. Though not on the tourist trail, it has its cultural moments – the 18th/19th-century painter Francisco Goya lived here, and there are numerous Goyas scattered around the city. The Basílica del Pilar (pictured right) is a place of pilgimage for Spaniards, who come to plant a kiss on the pillar on which Mary is said to have appeared to James while he was preaching in 40 AD. In October, the city shakes off its desert stupor with a week-long party, the Fiestas del Pilar.Hotel Catalonia El Pilar (+ 34 976 205858, hoteles-catalonia.es) is considered a tourist attraction as well as a place to stay, as it's in a turn-of-the-century Modernista apartment block with floor-to-ceiling windows and wrought-iron balconies. There's an old open-frame lift and breakfast is served in the stone-walled former coal cellar. Rooms tend to be on the functional side of the design spectrum.The city has one Michelin-starred restaurant, La Bal d'Onsera , where Josechu Corella offers a menu featuring artichoke salad, poached egg with grilled onions and pumpkin, mushroom risotto, stewed beef with creamy mashed potato and russet sorbet, for a very reasonable €30 a head. The regional speciality, which you will find on most tapas menus, is migas: breadcrumbs fried in olive oil and served with all kinds of toppings. Museo de la Tortilla is a lunchtime-only cafe serving 23 types of omelette, including pig's ear and brain varieties.The El Tubo district is where Zaragoza goes to slake its desert thirst come nightfall. Recommended stops on the tapas crawl include Bodegas Almau, founded in 1870, and with an excellent wine selection. Almau won the city's best tapa competition in 2012 with its dulce de anchoa – bread, soft cheese, anchovy, tomato jam and grated chocolate.The Museo Ibercaja (10am-2pm and 5pm-9pm, free) is housed in a Renaissance palace, refurbished first as a bank and then as a museum, and has more than two dozen Goya etchings and 14 of his paintings, including a self-portrait. (In the Basilica del Pilar, you can crane your neck to take in famed Goya frescos on the ceiling above the choir.)• This article was amended on 27 May2014. An earlier version referred to Goya as a 17th century artist.