5.15pm: It's time to wrap the live blog up for the day, and for 2011 as a whole. Many thanks for reading, and commenting -- especially all those heroes and villains nominations today.I will be back next week to cover the latest developments in the eurocrisis. Until then, very best wishes for 2012. Good night!4.55pm: Stephen Burgen, our man in Barcelona, has more details of the €6bn of tax rises and nearly €9bn of spending cuts announced in Spain today.There are across-the-board income tax increases and for home-owners, a one-year freeze on public employee salaries, a freeze on the minimum wage of €641,40 and cuts in subsidies to trade unions and political parties. Pensions, as promised, will rise by 1% next month, and the cut-off point for unemployment benefit is to be extended for a further six months. In addition, the public sector working week is to be extended from 35 to 37.5 hours and public sector vacancies won't be filled except in health, education, state security and the armed forces for an unspecified time.Cuts in subsidies to political parties are expected to save €29m while the reduction in trade union and other representative bodies' funding will save €55m.We also have details of the "progressive" income tax rises. It will mean a 0.75% increase on salaries of €9,500, rising to a maximum increase of 7% on incomes above €300,000. Property tax, roughly equivalent to the English council tax, is also going up on all properties that are "above average value".Among smaller changes, a plan to allow new fathers to take up to one month's paternity leave has been delayed until 2013. Stephen argues that the reforms suggest new PM Mariano Rajoy is delaying making deep reforms to Spain until next year:The cuts announced are more slash and burn than structural and the government is still ducking the issue of employment reform. No Spanish government ministry escaped unscathed. The biggest cuts are reserved for the ministry of works, which must save €1.6bn, while the foreign, industry and finance ministries must each save €1bn.There are also budget cuts of €485m at employment, €439m at the inland revenue, €409m at the health ministry, €401m at agriculture, €340m at defence, €163m at the interior ministry and €48m at the justice department.4.39pm: Europe's stock markets have closed for the final time this year, and many have registered hefty losses in 2011.The German Dax has fallen 15% this year, while France's Cac lost 17.8%, with financial stocks suffering particularly badly.Across Europe, bank shares fall by 33.8% - that's measured by the Stoxx Europe 600 Banking Index.As reported at 12.39pm, the FTSE 100 has shed 329 points, or 5.5%, this year (the London stock market enjoyed a festive half-day session).4.05pm: Nominations for heroes and villains of 2011 continue to come in -- so please all accept my thanks.ArseneKnows names the media as villains of the year, for:almost without exception, supporting policies that see up to 50% of young people in European countries unemployed.Many of my colleagues have written about the UK's youth unemployment crisis, but it's undoubtedly an issue that needs even more attention (especially now that younger adults have become the biggest users of an insolvency procedure called debt relief orders [DROs])nocolours argues that I've asked the question at the wrong time, writing that:There are no heroes, just some work in progress.Villains, well they are the lot from 2008 and before. How could you be a villain in 2011 when the train crash had already happened. Euroleaders, strictly those in the blessed EMU, have made a valiant attempt though.jmurphyc's hero was "The private sector. For picking up the slack.". Kickinthenads made the similar point, saying "Heroes? Easy: small business owners."On Twitter, Yrotitna suggests:@yrotitna Villains: all the ratings agencies for playing silly games, David Cameron for infantile behaviour, George no plan B Osborneand@yrotitna Heroes: Los indignados in Spain, everyone at Occupy LSXGuardian reader doctorzoidberg also praised the Occupy movement for "bearing witness to the theft and falsehoods visited on western populations by crony capitalists, and for creating a platform for the debate about how to change."Coolhandluke77, though, put Occupy in the Villains' camp.(if you're just joining us, you can see earlier round-up's here and here, and a typically lively debate in the reader comments).3.29pm: The office of Italy's president, Giorgio Napolitano, has officially responded to claims that German chancellor Angela Merkel told Napolitano in October that Silvio Berlusconi should be eased out of office (see 1.07pm for full details)They confirmed that the telephone call had taken place, on October 20, but denied the Wall Street Journal's claim that Merkel asked for Silvio Berlusconi's head.Our Rome correspondent John Hooper explains:Napolitano's office said the chancellor "did not raise any domestic Italian political issue, let alone advance a request to change the prime minister. The only subjects of the conversation were the measures that had been, and were to be, taken for the reduction of the deficit, the defence of the euro and in the matter of structural reform."Well, the first part of the statement is clearly a denial. But it is more than a little undermined by the second part, which raises the question: what was Merkel, a head of government, doing ringing up a head of state to discuss in detail the economic policy of the Italian government? Was she also calling King Juan Carlos for a chat about how Zapatero was getting on with his spending cuts?Sarkozy and Obama are also heads of state, of course, but they are different because they have direct control of their respective governments. Napolitano's powers are largely ceremonial.But he does wield immense soft power and two rather important hard powers. He can dissolve parliament and choose the next prime minister.Though denied, I suspect the Journal's story will be widely believed in Italy. And it has put back centre-stage the issue of sovereignty, crucial to any discussion of the euroThe leader of Berlusconi's party in the Chamber of Deputies, Fabrizio Cicchitto, said that, independently of the truth or otherwise of what had been reported, it was clear Merkel and Sarkozy had an "attitude of hostility", not so much to Berlusconi as Italy "in line with the divergent interests between the various nations that unfortunately characterise the situation in Europe today as they have in the past."But Cicchitto also detected a plot – by the Wall Street Journal. He said the article was designed to destabilise Europe "given the clash of interests there is between the US and European [economic] areas and the hostility powerful American forces have always felt towards the euro."3.19pm: The tax rises and spending cuts announced today in Spain are being introduced as extensions to the 2011 budget (which was introduced by the previous administration, before it was ousted by Mariano Rajoy's right-wing Popular Party in November's elections).That means that the Spanish people face the prospect of more austerity measures being announced in just a few months, when the 2012 budget is drawn up. It is meant to be agreed by the end of March next year.3.05pm: The news that Spain missed its deficit target for 2011 has not caused much alarm in the financial markets. The yield on Spanish 10-year bonds is broadly flat this afternoonat 5.15%, compared with Italy's 7.05%.That's because Spain's national debt, at 66% of its economy, is rather less of a worry than Italy's 120% debt-to-GDP ratio. Spain's primary problems are its huge unemployment, and the slump in its property sector. It's not clear that either are addressed by today's cutbacks.2.27pm: Spain is aiming to raise at least €6bn next year through "progressive" taxes on its wealthiest citizens, treasury minister Cristobal Montoro declared. Full details of this plan weren't released, though.That's on top of the €8.9bn of public spending cuts planned for 2012 (see previous post) as prime minister Rajoy tries to bring Spain's deficit in line.Rajoy's deputy, Soraya Saenz de Santamaria, has explained that the cuts are essdential to reduct Spanish borrowing. She told reporters in Madrid that:We're facing an extraordinary and unexpected situation, forcing us to take extraordinary and unexpected measures.1.53pm: The Spanish government has revealed details of prime minister Mariano Rajoy's austerity measures. The first important development is that Spain's 2011 budget deficit will come in at 8% of GDP, not 6% as previously forecast.It has also been confirmed that public sector wages will be frozen, along with plans to raise taxes for top earners "over the next two years".Update:Spain plans to cut €8.9bn from public spending in 2012, across all government ministries. That suggests that the burden of Rajoy's deficit reduction plans will be spread broadly evenly between spending cuts and tax rises, but with more emphasis on the cuts (Spain was aiming to save around €16.5bn next year)1.36pm: Hungary continues to defy the International Monetary Fund – earlier today its parliament passed a controversial law that will give the Budapest government more control of the country's central bank.The vote means that prime minister Viktor Orban will be able to appoint more officials to central bank's monetary policy committee, potentially giving him significant control of interest rate policy.The move is a worry because the IMF has indicated that it is unwilling to accept Hungary's request for more financial support unless Orban changed course.1.07pm: There's a fascinating tale in the Wall Street Journal today, about how Angela Merkel helped to push Silvio Berlusconi out of power.The WSJ reports that European leaders grew increasingly exasperated with the Italian prime minister through this summer and autumn as he failed to grasp the scale of the financaial crisis. Finally, on "a chilly October evening", chancellor Merkel telephoned Italian president Giorgio Napolitano, to warn that the selloff in Italian debt threatened to crush Italy, and the eurozone with it.As the WSJ explains:Her phone call that night to the 16th-century Quirinale Palace, once a residence of popes, now home to Italy's octogenarian head of state, President Giorgio Napolitano, trod on delicate ground for a German chancellor. Europe's leaders have an unwritten rule not to intervene in one another's domestic politics. But Ms Merkel was gently prodding Italy to change its prime minister, if the incumbent – Silvio Berlusconi – couldn't change Italy.A month later, Berlusconi was gone, after Italian bond yields shot above 7% and his parliamentary majority shrivelled away. Among other gems, the article also reveals that Merkel repaired her relations with France's Nicolas Sarkozy by giving him a teddy bear (for his new baby), and that Spanish finance minister Elena Salgado won a bottle of fine wine from her German counterpart, Wolfgang Schäuble, after betting that Greece would not hold a referendum over its membership of the euro.You can read all six parts of the Journal's History Of The Euro Crisis, which began in September 2010, here.12.39pm: The FTSE 100 just closed for 2011 at 5572 points (up 5 points on the half-day).That's a fall at 327 points for 2011, meaning the blue-chip index is worth roughly £85bn less than a year ago.As my colleague Nick Fletcher points out here:The decline accelerated during the summer as the scale of the eurozone's problems became apparent, with Italy and Spain following Greece onto the sick list and politicians seemingly unable to come to an agreement on how to tackle the situation.After touching 6105 in February, the index reached its nadir of 4791 in August, before recovering some ground on optimism a solution could be reached.11.43am: Our list of eurocrisis heroes and villians grows longer …Below the line, ohjesusmygoodness pins the villain badge on the Financial Times, the Wall Street Journal and the hedge funds industry for acting as prophets of doom during the crisis*batman11 harks back to Alan Greenspan, the former head of the Federal Reserve, for sowing the seeds of the crisis:He did a lot of the groundwork, convincing the west of the need for unfettered and unregulated financial markets. His influence helped repeal the laws that had stopped an earlier repeat of the 1930s depression. He also developed the interest rate mechanism for controlling an economy; previously directly targeted aid had been given in times of trouble. Low interest rates could be sold as a way of helping the economy, while keeping his KGB agents awash with cash for their destructive endeavours against the west. Bernanke is just a puppet who was groomed by Greenspan to take over his role.Addicks123 isn't convinced that George Osborne deserves hero status (as suggested by BankingIsMyDayJob), arguing that:Osborne has failed to grasp that austerity doesn't work – well maybe it does, but not when you want to simultaneously achieve growth. This is as stupid as trying to gain weight by starving yourself. It didn't work in the 1930s when Hoover tried it, it failed in the 1980s when Thatcher tried it and as with the 1980s we are dealing with the same consequences – declining living standards, social unrest and youth unemployment.And on Twitter, Kieran Dunne 11 suggests:@KieranDunne11 villains of 2011 were, and will continue to be, the Franco-German banks. Hero, well, was there one?AussieAnalyst has two ideas:• The Greek People, for standing firm for their democratic principles and rights and in the face of deep and cutting austerity measures.• The UK government for standing up for the UK and her people by not succumbing to the enormous pressures placed on it in joining the latest EZ Debt Crisis Proposal.Many thanks for all the suggestions so far (and there's still time to include more).*Some might put live blogging in this category too, but in all honesty we're just trying to keep up with the crisis rather than inflame it …11.06am: While much of Spain is on holiday, its new prime minister is currently holding a cabinet meeting to approve the first stage of his austerity programme.Mariano Rajoy, who won power in a general election last month, is expected to announce billions of euros of savings – through spending cuts and economic reforms. The plan will be designed to reassure the financial markets that Spain can get its finances in order.But with the unemployment rate above 20% (and youth unemployment around 40%), Rajoy faces a terribly difficult challenge. He said last week that at least €16.5bn needs to be cut from government spending in 2012.The austerity plan will include a public sector pay and recruitment freeze, and a small cost of living increase for pensioners. The sitation is complicated because Spain's 17 autonomous regions will not report their own budget balances until next spring – thus, the exact state of Spain's public accounts is unknown.10.50am: IHS Global Insight released their forecasts for 2012 this morning. Here's a few predictions:• Eurozone GDP to contract by around 0.7% overall in 2012, with declines in the fourth quarter of 2011 and the first half of 2012 followed by only gradual recovery.• We expect the ECB to respond to the likely eurozone GDP contraction in the fourth quarter of 2011 and the early months of 2012 by cutting interest rates further.• Eurozone consumer price inflation still seems poised to imminently embark on a sustained downward trend that takes it below 2.0% by mid-2012 as weakened economic activity and high and rising unemployment reduces underlying price pressures and base effects become increasingly favourable due to the waning impact of the sharp increases in oil and commodity prices in late-2010/early-2011.And what might 2012 have in store for the pound? IHS's Howard Archer says it may all depend on which currency looks like "the best looking horse in the glue factory".If eurozone sovereign debt turmoil continues or worsens, the pound is likely to firm further. However, if there a dilution of concern over the eurozone, then sterling is likely to come under increased downward pressure from a greater focus on the poor UK economic fundamentals. Not that the economic fundamentals for the eurozone or the US are that great.10.25am: The euro is ending the year with another unwelcome milestone – it just hit a record low against the Australian dollar (€1=AUS$1.2718)Against the US dollar, the euro is bobbing around $1.293, having hit a 15-month low yesterday.The City consensus is that the euro will fall in value in 2012, having been surprisingly robust in 2011 (a year ago, one euro was worth $1.33).Marc Chandler, chief currency strategist at Brown Brothers, told CNBC that Europe's troubled banking sector will weigh heavily on the euro in 2012.It's a very thin market, but people are preparing for the worst next year.Update: the euro also hit a new ten-year low against the Japanese yen today.10.15am: A date for the diary – France is planning to sell €7bn-€8bn of government debt on 5 January 2012. That will be a significant test of market confidence in Europe's second-largest economy, which is proudly ending the year with its AAA-rating intact.Next week will see plenty of action in the sovereign debt market – with Britain planning to sell £3.75bn of five-year gilts on 4 January and Germany auctioning €5bn-worth of bunds on the same day.9.51am: We're already getting some great suggestions for euro crisis heroes and villains of the year.In the reader comments below, BankingIsMyDayJob awards hero status to George Osborne, Mario Draghi, Giulio Tremonti, Mervyn King and Ireland.In the villains' corner, BankingIsMyDayJob put Angela Merkel, José Manuel Barroso, Olli Rehn, John-Claude Trichet, and Greece.andrewtc suggests a third category, "zero of the year". Namely "Ed Milliband who absolutely failed to say anything sensible or decisive or provide any alternative throughout the whole year".Allebert puts Silvio Berlusconi among the villains:He is a joke – can't take anything seriously – he represents, however, a pretty good picture of why Italy is going "business failure" – I'm thinking of all the sex scandals and his broadcasting company which he did not sell. He is a complete moron!On twitter, @jollyenglishman also suggests Italy's departed prime minister, but reckons he's not all bad.@jollyenglishman Silvio Berlusconi is surely the greatest hero and villain of the #Eurocrisis. A perfect blend of politics and pantomime."Hero" may be slightly pushing it for the King of Bunga Bunga, but he certainly provided some light relief in a dark year …9.20am: European stock markets aren't alone in suffering this year. In Japan, the Nikkei index closed at its lowest end-of-year level since 1982.The Nikkei fell by 17% during 2011. Not all due to the eurozone crisis – March's devastating earthquake and tsunami drove share prices lower, with the nation's manufacturing base badly affected by the disaster.9.12am: Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany's finance minister (and potential candidate for eurozone hero/villain of the year) is in defiant voice today, ruling out a break-up of the eurozone in 2012.In an interview with German newspaper Handelsblatt, Schäuble declared that the fate of many nations was bound together by the euro, therefore:The leaders of the eurozone will do everything possible to prevent it from falling apart.To achieve this, Schäuble said, it is essential for eurozone members to follow through on their pledge to pump €80bn of fresh capital into the European Stability Mechanism:The sooner we have the €80 euro capital injection together, the better … It would be the strongest signal that the member countries of the eurozone to their common currency are, under all circumstances.He also pledged that Germany will not be "the brakeman on this issue" – other countries must pay their share.Schäuble was dubbed "the most dangerous man in the world" by the Daily Telegraph's Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, for his insistance that troubled eurozone countries should undergo sharp fiscal cutbacks. But Schäuble's determination that Germany should not shoulder the full bill for fixing the euro crisis has also been applauded back home.8.54am: UK gilt yields just hit a new record low. In quiet trading, the interest rate on Britain's 10-year government bonds slipped as low as 1.932%.US and German 10-year bonds are trading at even lower yields than gilts, though – at 1.90% and 1.84% respectively. Italy's yields remain above 7% (all data via Tradeweb).Yields move in inverse proportion to the price of a bond, so low yields indicate that investors are placing a high premium on UK debt (although the rush into safer government bonds also reflects fears of sluggish economic growth, as Larry Elliott explains here).George Osborne has regularly cited Britain's low borrowing costs as proof that his fiscal consolidation plan is justified. David Miller, partner at Cheviot Asset Management, argues that the chancellor is right, saying that:Overall market movements this year have shown Britain to be a beacon of sanity in Europe. We have a stable government with a plan to reduce the deficit, an empowered central bank, and a floating currency. This is not a bad combination for surviving difficult times.8.41am: 2011 has been a bad year for Europe's stock markets. Trading has begun, and the FTSE 100 is limping towards a hefty loss for the year. It's currently down 25 points at 5541. The French and German markets are also slightly lower.London's blue-chip index has fallen by around 6% this year, having ended 2010 at 5899 points. Most of the damage was done in August, when shares tumbled as the true extent of the eurozone crisis became clear.So what can we look forward to in 2012? More volatility appears to be the consensus. Beyond that, some tipsters are remarkable coy. As stock market historian David Schwartz puts it in the Sun today:It could go up by 1,000 points, it could go down by 1,000 points. The problem is Europe. They are screw-ups, big time, and they have been blundering and muddling for a year. There are a lot of reasons to expect them to continue to do so. 8.30am: Good morning, and welcome to another day of rolling coverage of the European financial crisis. Our last one of the year, alas.As usual, we'll be tracking the latest action in the eurozone crisis – with Spain due to announce austerity measures. And as it's the last trading session of 2011, we'll be looking back at the last 12 months and gathering together predictions for 2012.We'd also like your help, please. Who were your heroes and villains of 2011? Which groups or individuals should be praised for their role in the eurozone crisis, and who should be castigated? And why?It may be a quieter day – there's little economic news on the calendar, and no gripping corporate news. But we'll do our best …