Wall Street stocks slipped and the euro weakened against the dollar after Spain today lost its coveted AAA credit score from Fitch, the second ratings agency in a month to downgrade the country.As the Spanish government battled to push through €15bn (£12.7bn) of spending cuts, Fitch cut its sovereign debt rating for the nation by a single notch from AAA to AA+. The move, which followed a similar downgrade by Standard & Poor's four weeks ago, fuelled fears of contagion throughout the eurozone.Fitch's analyst, Brian Coulton, said the challenges facing Spain in implementing austerity measures were behind the move: "Despite government debt and associated interest costs remaining within the AAA range, Fitch anticipates the economic adjustment process will be more difficult and prolonged than for other economies with AAA-rated sovereign governments."In New York, the blue-chip Dow Jones Industrial Average slid lower on the downgrade, closing down 122 points to 10,136. The euro slipped by 0.8 cents against the dollar, ending at $1.2293, down from $1.32 a month ago. Economists said the development came as little surprise. A week ago, Spain's central bank was obliged to take control of a troubled regional savings bank, CajaSur, after a merger with a competitor fell apart.The Spanish prime minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, won a parliamentary vote by a wafer-thin margin of a single vote on Thursday to implement sweeping budget cuts, including 5% reductions to civil servants' pay. Unions have threatened a general strike over planned labour market reforms.Greece and Portugal have already had their credit ratings cut. Britain still has an AAA endorsement, although both Standard & Poor's and Moody's have made it clear they will be closely scrutinising the Cameron government's plans for debt reduction.Win Thin, a currency strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman in New York, told Reuters: "Spain is the 800-pound gorilla in the room. Greece and Portugal are small countries, but Spain is about five times their size with regards to GDP."Unemployment in Spain is running at 20% and the country's once booming housing market has suffered a US-style slump.• This article was amended on 3 June 2010. The original caption referred to President Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, seen with vice-president Maria Teresa Fernandez. This has been corrected.