Spain is different. At school we learned that Napoleon had made this proclamation after losing at Bailén on 19 July 1808: his first battlefield defeat. In the early 1960s, Manuel Fraga Iribarne, the then minister for information and tourism, translated it into English, as a slogan designed to lure tourists to a country which promised nothing but sun and oranges, flamenco shows and glorious beaches.Now, two centuries after the military campaign and half a century after the marketing campaign, Spain is still different: a country alone, one which throughout the 20th century consistently went the other way, marching to a different beat to that which defined the development of other western nations (with the sole exception, relatively speaking, of Portugal).On the same date – 19 July – in another year, 1936, the failure of a military coup unleashed a long, cruel and devastating civil war which lasted until April 1939, just as the second world war was dawning. Those involved in the coup only succeeded in destroying the Republic, a legally constituted democracy, helped on their way by the axis and – even more significantly – by the singular failure of democratic powers to intervene. The latter made the mistake of thinking that by sacrificing Spain they would dissuade Hitler from extending his talons still further across Europe. The consequences are so well-known they require no further comment.And so began the great historical anomaly of 20th-century Spain, the only country where fascism won a war and remained in power for almost four decades. And not only was the mighty modernising drive of the Second Republic stopped abruptly in its tracks; Franco took Spain right back to the middle of the 19th century.To give you an example: the Second Republic's penal code, one of the world's most advanced, was repealed in order to reinstate the laws of 1851. Women who had been granted the vote in 1933 – later only than in Britain, Australia and New Zealand – became perpetual minors, with no rights to inherit, manage their property or sign legal papers. The war – which plunged the country into unprecedented hardship, from which it wouldn't even begin to recover until 25 years later, in part thanks to tourism – was officially designated a crusade, on the basis that it was God's struggle against the Devil.Yet the identification of Catholic church with the state didn't mitigate a campaign of repression whose appalling scale we still don't really understand, and we may never succeed in doing so. Some historians estimate that it was responsible for the peacetime death of – at the very least – 150,000 people.Thanks to the cold war, which meant that a bloodthirsty dictatorship was more appetising to the west than a democracy with a potent left wing, Spain reverted to being a humble, miserable and stagnant country, a country of women who went about in widow's veils, of men literally dying of fear. The terror, hunger and silence lasted for more than two decades, and still had a discernible effect on daily life for children of my generation in the 60s and 70s.Our parents would force us to eat everything on our plates, a throwback to the hunger which had defined their childhoods. They would snatch old photos from us to bury them hurriedly at the bottom of a drawer; and they would teach us what they had learned from our grandparents, that in the past there lay old, sad, unpleasant stories. Better not to talk about them, better to know nothing.The children of the soldiers who fought in the civil war grew up in this climate of silence. When Franco died and their country's destiny was suddenly in their hands, they could only do what they had learned to do: keep quiet, ask no questions, leave the layer of dust on the photos at the bottom of the drawer. This was the weak link in the transition to democracy, the inherent fragility of a process which, objectively speaking, represents a massive triumph, since it has cemented a secure, solid and stable democracy the likes of which Spain had never known before.For this very reason – because we now live in a humdrum, unshakeable democracy, no longer threatened as it was its early days – it's time to get our memory back. Thirty-six years after the death of Franco – the same amount of time he was in power – there is no longer any trait that links us, the Spanish people, however tenuously, to the imperial mania which the Generalísimo imposed through bloodshed and gunfire. Our here and now symbolises its failure and, at the same time, the posthumous – but in no way vain – victory of the republicans who fought to the death for one clear purpose: to bequeath us our country.It's time we recognised this, so that Spain can, at long last, stop being different.