Spain shares the Iberian peninsula with Portugal. France sits across the Pyrenees, along with tiny Andorra. A giant rock called Gibraltar sticks out of the bottom and there, due to the perfidious nature of Britain, the Union flag flies. Far-flung outposts include the Canary Islands and two north African enclaves called Melilla and Ceuta. It is considered outlandish to suggest these should not be Spanish. The biggest mountain ranges and rivers (like the Duero) mostly run right to left (except a few that run left to right, like the Ebro). High points include the Pyrenees, Gredos, Sierra Nevada and Alpujarras. Spain is not all sunshine and geraniums. The Atlantic north-west at Galicia is rain-drenched and green, while the interior freezes in winter and the parched south-east at Almería (below) can be desert-like – think Clint Eastwood's The Good, The Bad and The Ugly, which was filmed there.There are now 47 million people in Spain, 7 million more than a decade ago. This has nothing to do with big, happy Spanish families and everything to do with big, happy families from Ecuador, Romania and Morocco. About 5 million immigrants came in just eight years. Not all natives want to be called Spaniards. Some prefer to be called Catalans, Basques, Galicians or by another regional name. Most don't mind being called both Spanish and one of these things, though they disagree over which is more important. Others only want to be Spanish. This is not always a recipe for getting along, but it keeps pollsters busy asking "identity" questions.Whizz, bang, pop! Spain's economy grew like a giant souffle in the noughties, only to implode when its massive property bubble burst and the global credit crunch hit. Now 4.3 million Spaniards are jobless – 20% of the total. About 700,000 new homes remain unsold. Spain has less debt than the UK or Germany and has not nationalised major banks, but neighbours like Greece and Portugal make debt markets nervous. Zapatero began swinging the cuts axe even before George Osborne. He also hiked retirement to 67 years. This suits Angela Merkel, who calls the shots.General Francisco Franco died in bed in 1975, restoring the monarchy and handing his dictator's baton to King Juan Carlos. The young king tossed it away and now Spain is a democracy. Juan Carlos stayed on as head of a parliamentary monarchy – the first monarch since 1931. After Franco died the Catalans, Basques and Galicians wanted some self-government. Then other regions wanted some too. Now Spain is divided between 17 regional governments who do most of the spending (excluding social security and pensions) and have much of the power. Some say Spain is federal in all but name.National politics is a two-horse race. The Socialists and the conservative People's party (PP) take governing in turns. Right now the Socialists rule under the increasingly unpopular prime minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero. The PP leader, Mariano Rajoy, though considered dull, looks like a shoo-in in the 2012 elections. There are no Lib Dems (even if Nick Clegg, by virtue of his Spanish wife, is Spain's favourite British politician). But nationalists from Catalonia or the Basque country often hold the balance of power, just like Clegg. It is the Basques' turn now. That means more money and devolution. And it means everyone else wants more too.So the French thought they were the kings of cuisine? First the Basques, then the Catalans and then the whole of Spain drowned in Michelin stars at the start of the 21st century. From funky Ferran Adrià (pictured above) to the nouvelle cuisine of Juan Mari Arzak, Spain calls the shots. A huge variety of grapes means wineries do not have to imitate the monotonous displays of pinot noir and chardonnay churned out by rivals. Instead they produce distinctive reds from La Rioja, Ribera del Duero, Priorat and a hundred less well-known regions. Sharp north-western whites, like the albariños, compete with the smoother verdejos of Rueda or the whites of Penedès[acute last e]. . Fizzy cava makes Christmas cheap and the northern Asturians and Basques like their cider.Not a subject Spaniards always agree on. Try asking who caused the civil war in the 1930s, or whether the Basque country and Catalonia are historical nations. A potted history reads like this: Invaders from north Africa made Spain part of the Muslim world in the 8th century. Seven centuries of sluggish reconquest ended in 1492. Cunning royal marriages and clumsy navigating (by Columbus) gave Spain a massive empire covering bits of Europe and much of South America in the 16th century. Everything went downhill from there, ending with the loss of its last major colonies in the 1890s, a civil war in the 1930s and four decades of Franco. The turnaround came with the 1978 democratic constitution.Pedro Almodóvar, Penélope Cruz, Javier Bardem and Antonio Banderas may be global names in cinema, but the industry at home is struggling. Spaniards are the download kings of Europe. Industry lobbyists claim losses of €4.2bn a year. Only 13 million spectators bought tickets to Spanish films last year – the worst figure for a decade. They provided €80.3m of income – less than the €87m from subsidies.So is this where Opus Dei members mortify themselves to keep their minds off sex? Or is it one of the few countries to recognise gay marriage and transsexual rights? The answer is both. Most Spaniards occupy the wide middle ground between Almodóvaresque sexual experimentation and church-inspired chastity. The average Spaniard loses his or her virginity at 18. Spanish men are said to be the largest brothel-goers in Europe.Siestas, fiestas and holy communion? Not really. Spaniards are too busy working their strangely long hours to have a mid-day kip. Most call themselves Catholics, but they are not big church-goers. Regional stereotypes stretch from partying Andalucians, to dour Castilians, laconic Galicians, penny-pinching Catalans and industrious, chaste Basques. These are considered insulting and politically incorrect – except when people use them to describe themselvesIn 2009 Spain boasted the world's ninth largest economy. Now it is 12th, overtaken by Russia, India and Canada. Spaniards are wildly enthusiastic Europeans and seem largely happy to shape their international agenda around the EU. Exceptions include Cuba, where Spain is a dove, and Morocco. The latter is a short hop from southern Spanish beaches and governments, who fear illegal migrants and terrorism, tread carefully.