The real challenge for Spain – beyond its current economic plight – is how to overcome its public governance problem. Corruption and maladministration are notorious among the political class. For instance, in 2006, almost all the city councillors of the resort of Marbella were imprisoned for fraud and corruption, and similar cases exist throughout the country.In the aftermath of the Franco dictatorship, in the 1970s and early 1980s the focus was on giving power to regional and local governments. However, administrative controls – provided by national officials being sent into local authorities – were weakened through a notion of unrestricted local autonomy. Developing good public administration was neglected; the law and due process were ignored and dubbed an inefficient use of time. This has led to a lack of checks and balances locally and the assumption that politicians who win an election have unrestricted power to do as they see fit.Official reports of the Public Prosecutor General show that in the decade from 2000 to 2010 some 800 political corruption cases were uncovered nationwide; 2,000 politicians were arrested or convicted.Half of the country's local governments scored less than 50% on a Transparency International Spain transparency index and nearly 90% of people in Spain think corruption exists in Spanish local institutions.Any outside monitoring of the work of governments was given to the Courts of Accounts, the main financial accounts bodies regionally and nationally, which had no real power to review public money or impose sanctions if needed.The Spanish solution to fighting corruption, maladministration and illegality is almost exclusively based on criminal law and administrative justice. Judicial remedies are necessary, but insufficient and haphazard. No anti-corruption policy has been enacted, except perhaps in Catalonia which created an anti-fraud office in 2008, modelled on the European Olaf.There is a need to reinforce internal and external controls and to undertake timely audits. Independent bodies should look at the implementation of measures and the way public administration uses public resources and treats citizens. This might be done through a well-functioning ombudsman, an audit institution,Courts of Accounts and commissioners for access to public information.Sound administrative controls over the use of public funds were never generally established by the current democratic regime. A law on the right to access information of public interest was published only on 10 December 2013. Spain was one of the few European states without such a law. The ombudsman office is weak and the ruling party is considering abolishing it altogether.State, regional and municipal public administrations remain politicised and ridden by patronage. Civil servants who are too committed to legalism and the rule of law are often put to one side.All levels of the governance system remain vulnerable to corruption, mismanagement and extravagant public investment. Cases of brand new airports without aircraft, railway stations without trains, and empty highways are often cited.Some regard the decentralisation of power towards regional governments without independent administrative controls as a major source of corruption. A radical minority is advocating to reinstate a completely centralised state, as it was under Franco.More moderate commentators propose a revision of the constitution to enhance the role of the senate. However, very few are proposing strengthening the control mechanisms over governments: there will have to be thorough checks and balances, including better protection of the impartiality of the civil service, which is meant to be politically neutral.An autonomous, non-politicised civil service is lacking, especially at sub-national government levels. Few civil servants dare oppose legally or ethically dubious instructions from their superiors, and those who do face reprisals.No collective sphere is free from party politics. There is an urgent need for institutional designs and procedures that promote legality, accountability and transparency in government if the population's disaffection is to be overcome and corruption reduced.Francisco Cardona is a senior international expert on public governance. He used to work for the OECD