The 10-year-old schoolboy who boarded a train from Lisbon to Madrid on 8 November, 1948, can have had no idea of the extraordinary life that awaited him in Spain. Juan Carlos spoke Spanish with a French accent, had never before been on Spanish soil and was to be, in effect, the ward of Francisco Franco, an arrangement arrived at after difficult negotiations between his liberal father and the dictator.It was by no means clear at that moment whether he would become king or just another of Spain's many royal also-rans, as there were several contenders who might have won Franco's favour in the years before Spain's transition to democracy. But he was to be an essential figure in that transition, and in maintaining Spain's stability and unity in the post-Franco era. Nobody who saw the crowds cheering the royal family at the Barcelona Olympic Games in 1992, where their attendance at any event seemed to be almost a guarantee that Spain would win, could doubt that Juan Carlos had captured the affections and the loyalty of most Spaniards. But in recent years his popularity declined because of the self-indulgent strain in his character.He had too many affairs. He plunged off to Africa to shoot elephants at a time when Spain was in severe recession, an outing that scored no points on either the political or the ecological fronts. His daughter and son-in-law were embroiled in a financial scandal. His role in quashing the 1981 coup, once seen as unambiguously positive, is now viewed by some in a rather different light.Although he still deserves great credit for ordering the generals back to barracks, he may have played a part in creating the conditions for a coup attempt by earlier manoeuvres to get rid of prime minister Adolfo Suárez. Now, by his decision to abdicate, he has done a great deal to rescue a compromised reputation.Like Pope Benedict, he has recognised that age and infirmity may these days call for an earlier departure from these historically lifetime roles than death. And he has ceded his position to a young man who is both popular and experienced – he was at his father's side in 1981, for instance – and can offer a sort of new start for the monarchy.Spain has few out and out republicans and not many passionate royalists, so it might be said the crown is now neither here nor there. Yet it is part of the glue that holds a fragile nation together. The Basque country may be quiet, but Catalonia is heading toward an independence referendum this November, while the social divisions, widened by austerity, are producing a more volatile politics. The armed forces still take seriously, perhaps too seriously, a duty to preserve Spanish unity. There may be troubles ahead in which a respected monarch could play a useful part.