Barcelona? No, Brighton! Western Road, in the East Sussex town, to be exact. This is just one of a number of shopping streets across the country where, come next year, you may well encounter as many as three identically-branded branches of Spanish-owned bank Santander, all just a stone's throw from each other.It emerged this week that Abbey, Alliance­ & Leicester and Bradford­ & Bingley are all to be renamed in a £12m rebranding exercise – bringing to an end hundreds of years of financial history. By the end of 2010, that means there will be more than 1,300 Santander branches across the UK.And, rather than a massive branch-closure programme, Santander says it is "fully committed to maintaining the size of our branch network".A spokeswoman accepts this could mean that, in locations where there is currently an Abbey, an A&L and a B&B branch – such as Western Road and Guildford High Street – you could end up with three Santanders.Apparently this isn't unusual in Spain, and Santander has indicated that closing one (or two) of those three branches might not make sense on the grounds that there will still be the same number of customers to service.But, at the same time, it is not completely ruling out closures. On its website it says: "Inevitably there will be areas where we have two or even three branches near to each other. Where this happens, we will review their ­locations to see how best we can serve the community. In some cases, this might mean some locations could change, although we will maintain the overall size of the network."One of the most important issues for savers will be the cover they receive from the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS), the official safety net for customers of financial firms that have gone bust. The scheme covers the first £50,000 a saver holds with an individual bank, but if one bank is running two savings providers under the same banking licence, sometimes only one set of protection applies.Abbey and B&B share a licence, while A&L has a separate one – so someone with money in both gets two lots of protection. Santander says: "There are no plans to change that, especially as the A&L brand will stay until the end of 2010."