Maria Dolores, 40, has short hair, an expressionless face, dark smudges under her eyes and a wry sense of humour no doubt left over from her recent troubles. She takes a black object from her handbag, a little bigger than a mobile phone but much heavier and without a keypad. "Here it is," she says. In the offices of the Centro Mujer 24 Horas, a centre for battered women in Valencia, Loli, as she asks to be called, displays a mixture of pride and anxiety as she shows the GPS device that has stayed with her at all times since June.Night and day, when out for a meal or to see a film, Loli is never without the transmitter-receiver that connects her directly to the national surveillance centre in the suburbs of Madrid. There, they know where she is at all times – and where her husband is. "The court decided to give him a chance, but it deprived me of any hope of living in peace," Loli says. She never refers to her husband by name, always as "him". Juan (as we shall call him) was imprisoned in January after nearly killing her and released on 7 June. He will be tried next month.When the court authorised Juan's release on parole, it stipulated that he should remain at a safe distance (300 metres) from his wife, requiring him to wear an electronic tag. The system, introduced by Spain in July 2009 to protect the victims of domestic violence, keeps permanent track of victim and assailant, alerting the police in the event of danger.If the battery goes flat, the assailant attempts to remove the tag or tries to enter the victim's safety perimeter, an alarm rings. Loli explains: "The first time it started ringing, I was on my way to the court in Albacete", in Castille-La Mancha province, where she was living with Juan and their two children when the assault occurred. "My whole body started shaking," she says. "Just after that, the phone rang and they told me he was 700 metres away, with the name of the street. I stayed connected until I reached the police station where I was due to meet an officer to accompany me."It was the only incident of this sort, but nothing in the world would separate Loli from her GPS protector. "I hope the people in Madrid keep watch on me round the clock, in fact I would rather they only watched me," she adds.Assisted by her counsellor, Loli has decided to tell her story. She wants "him" to read this article, to realise what he did and to understand what she has to endure: the fear of sleeping alone, the visits to the psychiatrist and the pills "to stop the dreams". In a recurrent nightmare she relives the scene that almost ended in her death, waking up drenched in sweat.On the morning of 5 January, Loli's mother was looking after the couple's two children, aged five and 10, so the parents could clean up their hardware shop in Albacete. The previous summer Loli had told Juan she planned to leave him. Though they slept in different rooms she continued living there, "for the kids' sake". "It was a terrible mistake, but there was no way I could have known. He had never been violent before," she explains.To begin with, Juan tried using tears to win her over. Then he switched to emotional blackmail: "Without you, I'm nothing ... If you leave me, I'll kill myself."But that day a new argument broke out. Loli discovered that Juan had opened a bank account in his father's name and transferred part of the family's savings into it. When she told him she wouldn't let him get away with it, he went wild. "He grabbed a chisel and hacked at my neck," she says, showing us the scar on her throat. "He threw me down and started banging my head on the floor."She thought she was going to die, but neighbours heard her cries and alerted a police officer who happened to be passing. They found her on the ground, her husband on top of her, with his knee on her chest. She was rushed to hospital suffering from multiple injuries to the head and neck, two slipped discs and bruises all over her body. "I looked like a painting by Picasso," she says.The court decided to take Juan into custody while the case was investigated. Loli nevertheless moved out with the children and went to live with her mother in Valencia. "I kept thinking I'd see him wherever I went in Albacete." She gradually began to recover, but then Juan was released on 7 June. It was such a shock that she barely heard the instructions given by the engineer who came to her with the GPS phone.She has been under constant surveillance ever since. Loli is adamant: "If I didn't have the machine I'd never set foot outside the door. It gives me a feeling of security because I know if he comes within 700 metres of me, I'll be warned."The surveillance centre receives around 1,200 serious alerts a month (tag removal or safety perimeter intrusion), triggered by the 450 tags currently fitted in Spain, out of a total of 3,000 that the government purchased in 2009. "We need to improve the courts' appraisal of the risk before enlarging the scope of the system," says Miguel Lorente, a ministry specialist on gender-based violence. Since the beginning of the year, 63 women in Spain have been killed by their partners. Fourteen of them had already lodged a complaint with the police, but none of them had received a GPS phone.Loli has decided to apply for a job on the Valencia underground. "I'd like to sell tickets at the counter," she says. But what she means is she wants a protected position, behind security glass – a dream her psychiatrist finds terribly revealing.Taking its cue from Spain, France is about to start trials of orders requiring violent spouses to wear an electronic tag, and to equip victims with a warning device. "In France, around 3,600 eviction orders were issued against violent spouses between 2006 and 2008, but it is difficult to keep track of them," France's former secretary of state for family affairs, Nadine Morano, said. "As a result the women are not safe."In 2008, 157 women were killed by their partners. "In many cases murder is the culmination of ongoing assault," a parliamentary committee of inquiry reported last year. French homes are more dangerous for women than public spaces, but incidents are often not reported. According to the 2001 National Survey of Violence Inflicted on Women, only 13% of incidents at home are reported, compared with 32% for workplace violence and 43% for assaults in public places.Anne Chemin This story originally appeared in Le Monde