With markets already deeply worried about the outlook for sovereign debt on both sides of the Atlantic, they also have to contend with the ISM [manufacturing] and labour reports in the US and central bank meetings in the eurozone, UK, Japan and Australia [next week]. We still have hopes that US politicians will eventually come to some form of agreement that will prevent a default, but the loss of the AAA rating is looking probable if a long term austerity package is not approved. The deadline the politicians are working to is 2 August for the debt ceiling to be breached. However, in reality there is likely to be a buffer that will take us into the following week given stronger than anticipated tax revenues.With the storm clouds which had gathered over Greece abating, if not disappearing, Moody's has now turned its attention to Spain. And unsurprisingly, it doesn't like what it sees. Spain's banking sector remains in turmoil, unemployment is sky high, and its debt is out of control.Prime Minister Zapatero is perenially upbeat, but the fact is he has almost no way of creating growth. Even with its second bailout, Greece is almost certain to default. When, not if, this happens, the pressure will move to the eurozone's other weak peripheral economies. That pressure will centre on the biggest peripheral - Spain. With its credit rating slipping further, it will struggle to borrow enough to keep itself afloat and could easily become the next Greece.The euro has already fallen today in response, but you might be forgiven for not noticing. With the UK's poor GDP figures this week and the ongoing paralysis over the US debt ceiling, sterling, the euro and the dollar all seem to be locked in a race to the bottom.I am no longer sure if this is reality or I am watching a Hollywood summer blockbuster. With no resolution with regard to the US debt ceiling and with continuing contagion in the European government debt market it is clearly time for the safe haven trade.While it's debatable whether Spain could be described as facing similar challenges to Greece just yet, it's worth remembering that the yield on its 10-year bond has risen by just under 60bps since the start of the month. Lending is all about confidence and as we have seen with Greece, Ireland and Portugal once yields start to creep higher it doesn't take long for confidence to seep away making it more difficult for the borrower to fund.US futures are sharply down on the back of the failure of the Boehner bill re the debt ceiling not even being voted on because of a lack of support. No doubt heads will be knocked together over the weekend and a compromise will be reached in order to avoid a default. That said maybe I am being too optimistic because I am approaching the situation from a logical standpoint whereas a lot of the people actually involved might be approaching it from a political or at least a non-rationale viewpoint. Whilst it is not going to happen wouldn't right now be a great time for the EU to announce common European bonds in order to alleviate pressure on the troubled sovereigns and also provide the market with an alternative to Treasuries.