The number of people confirmed to have swine flu has risen above 250, the World Health Organisation said today, adding that it would stop using the term "swine flu" to avoid confusion over the danger posed by pigs. Instead the virus will be called Influenza A H1N1.The announcement came after the WHO raised its global epidemic threat level to phase five – the second highest level – in recognition of the growing number of countries affected by the virus.Health experts believe it is a only a matter of time before the WHO raises the alert to phase six, confirming a pandemic is in progress.More than a dozen countries have reported cases of the H1N1 strain, many of them in Europe.The Irish Republic confirmed its first probable case today, an adult male who has recently returned from Mexico. The chief medical officer, Dr Tony Holohan, said the man had tested positive for type A flu, and was now being tested for the H1N1 strain. Experts said the case was "likely to be positive" when the test results returned from the UK.The Netherlands and Switzerland confirmed their first cases ‑ a three-year-old child and a 19-year-old student respectively ‑ both of whom had travelled to Mexico.The Swiss student was mistakenly released from a hospital after test results were misinterpreted and then hastily readmitted. Switzerland has a further 29 "suspicious" cases. In Britain three new cases were confirmed, bringing the total to eight, while Spain, the worst affected European country so far, raised its confirmed cases to 13, with another 84 under observation.In France, medical authorities were conducting tests on 41 people for possible swine flu and said five of those were considered "probable" cases.Françoise Weber, head of the state health monitoring agency InVS, said three of the people considered probable cases had been in Mexico. France has no confirmed cases yet of the disease.France today proposed a suspension on all EU flights to Mexico at a meeting of European health ministers in Luxembourg but representatives from other countries including Austria, Spain, Denmark and Germany cast doubt on the effectiveness of such a move.Arriving at the talks, Spain's health minister, Trinidad Jiménez, said: "We have to wait and see what is the evolution of the disease before taking such a drastic measure." But the Spanish airline Air Europa said it was cutting most of its flights to Mexico due to plunging demand since the outbreak began.While some country co-ordination on travel curbs could be possible, the European commission - the EU's executive arm - does not have the power to impose an EU-wide ban. EU countries themselves may impose national travel restrictions. The ministers were also expected to discuss development of vaccines and the idea of common vaccine stockpiles.The US vice-president, Joe Biden, caused controversy earlier today when he said he would advise his own family not to travel on commercial airlines, the subway or "confined spaces". But as his stark comments prompted accusations of scaremongering, a spokeswoman for the gaffe-prone Biden later clarified that he was just telling sick people to avoid such places.The virus has so far claimed a confirmed seven lives in Mexico, although the death toll is believed to be significantly higher – many suspected deaths are yet to be confirmed as H1N1. There has also been one confirmed death in the United States.