Switzerland is a major international financial centre doing substantial business with non-residents, just like London or New York, so I was alarmed by the negative image of the country sketched in your Tax Gap series (In the country where tax evasion is no crime, Swiss private banks are unrepentant about siphoning off other governments' income, 5 February).To say that "tax evasion is no crime" is not the full story. While it's true the Swiss do not believe a citizen should go to jail for tax evasion - such a drastic sanction is reserved for serious financial and other crimes - anyone suspected or discovered evading taxes in Switzerland actually goes through hell, and without all the procedural protections of the criminal justice system to boot. Back taxes, penalty taxes and other fines mean virtual confiscation of assets several times the evaded amount.Privacy is the default setting in our society, and our tax authorities have no right of forced entry into a bank account outside a criminal investigation. However, should the authorities become suspicious and turn on the spotlight, it's then up to the citizen to supply documentary evidence to clear their position. This approach, combined with the highest withholding tax rate in the world, encourages a very high degree of taxpayer honesty without having to make tax evasion a criminal offence, and without having to trample on privacy.Your report also stated: "The Swiss openly assist not merely legal tax avoidance but also the deliberate concealment of wealth for the purpose of evading tax." This is not true. Swiss banks are forbidden to provide any active assistance with tax evasion, for example by providing incomplete or misleading attestations, and they are also forbidden to actively assist with capital flight - in other words, the transfer of capital from countries whose legislation restricts the investment of funds abroad.But the Tax Gap sketch of Switzerland's international position caused me greatest alarm. The impression given is of an impenetrable, uncooperative fortress and a banking industry that hisses and spits at every attempt to make it cooperate - "they have refused to sign any tax information exchange agreement", or "they have refused to sign up to the EU savings directive". In reality Switzerland has a dense network of bilateral, double-taxation treaties with some 70 countries that include provisions to exchange information in tax matters. Switzerland also helped the EU close a potential loophole in its savings tax directive by generously offering to impose equivalent measures. Thanks to Switzerland's cooperation with Brussels, EU taxpayers cannot circumvent the EU's directive simply by using a paying agent in Switzerland.Ultimately, however, chronic tax evasion is a symptom of illness in a state's relationship with its citizens. Critics of Switzerland would do well to study our tax model with a view to improving things in their own countries. The OECD has drawn attention to Switzerland's code of conduct for tax authorities, taxpayers and tax advisers as an example of how to promote what it calls an "enhanced relationship" between taxpayers and revenue bodies.• Urs Roth is chief executive officer of the Swiss Bankers Associationoffice@sba.ch