Europe's hopes of translating its economic power into global political clout have suffered a severe setback as a result of the timid choices on new leadership made this week, analysts, officials, and diplomats conceded on Friday.Others countered, however, that the new faces promoted to European leadership positions – Herman Van Rompuy of Belgium and Lady Ashton from Britain – should be given the benefit of the doubt.Critics within EU structures and experts outside agreed that low politicking had prevailed over lofty ambition in deciding who should take the two posts running EU summits and leading European foreign policy.Both posts – the president of the European Council (Van Rompuy) and the high representative for foreign and security policy – are established by the Lisbon treaty, finally endorsed this month and coming into force in 10 days. A central aim of the reform blueprint is to enable the EU to punch its weight more effectively on the international stage."We've got a great opportunity with this [foreign policy] post," said Mark Leonard, director of the European Council on Foreign Relations thinktank. "Is Ashton up to it? Based on her track record, it is quite possible that she is."But Carl Bildt, the ambitious Swedish foreign minister who was keen to secure the job for himself, ridiculed the appointment as "an historic missed opportunity".On the other side of the political spectrum, Daniel Cohn-Bendit, the Franco-German Greens leader, said: "Europe is sinking to a new low."The bulk of the criticism was directed at the appointment of Ashton rather than Van Rompuy since the Belgian, as a prime minister, is viewed as more qualified for his role which, in any case, is being scaled back to that of chairing EU summits and mediating between government chiefs."People say she might grow into it," said a senior EU official. "But I doubt it. It's very disappointing. This job demands political answers and strategies."Thursday's EU summit in Brussels, at which leaders made the two appointments, had been preceded by weeks of argument and contest for the highly coveted posts. The ferocious manoeuvring meant there was no consensus, portending a lengthy and acrimonious summit.But in the end, it appeared EU leaders did not have the stomach for the fight. The decisions were taken by consensus in record quick time by agreement on obscure figures, neither of whom have the standing or experience to threaten EU national leaders or the European commission chief, Jose Manuel Barroso.The main criticism was the failure to aim high, instead settling for two leaders seen by many as decent, respectable mediocrities."The EU is losing influence rapidly and these appointments make that worse," said Simon Hix, professor of European politics at the London School of Economics. "The rest of the world was expecting big figures. But Europe has shown it would rather be a super-sized Switzerland."Ashton sought to deflect the reservations, while acknowledging that policy-makers and experts would harbour severe doubts. "I think for quite a few people, they would say that I am the best person for the job and I was chosen because I am, but I absolutely recognise there are a number of candidates around, all of whom would have been extremely good, extremely able," she told the BBC. "I hope that my particular set of skills will show that in the end I am the best choice."Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, the former Danish prime minister who leads the European Socialists, grouping the various national social democratic parties, and who played a key role in securing the job for Ashton, insisted she had "high capability and a smart style"."The appointments have strengthened the influence of the European parliament and of the European political parties," he told the Guardian.Hix responded that the jobs were distributed not on the basis of merit, experience, or qualification, but for internal reasons of a European political fix."It's a typical example of how dysfunctional the EU has become. Cathy Ashton knows nothing about foreign policy. She got the job because she is a woman, she is British, she is from a big member state. But she gets no respect from anyone in foreign policy circles."Supporters counter that in her current job as EU trade commissioner, Ashton has proved competent and effective in a tough brief that entails negotiating as an equal on Europe's behalf with the Chinese, the Brazilians and the US."She is used to speaking for Europe internationally and she's been effective," said Leonard. "And Europe has real clout on trade. But the challenge is geopolitical, how the EU can build itself into a big global power. And the question is how quickly will she be able to make the shift to a totally different prism."Amid the fallout from Thursday's summit, at which Van Rompuy was the favourite but which Ashton obtained hers by default, a hardheaded reckoning was tallying the winners and losers."Barroso is the happiest guy in Brussels," said one EU official. "He can't believe his luck."The German and French leaders, Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy, looked satisfied. Van Rompuy was their preference and Ashton's victory means they face no British competition for the powerful economic portfolios in the new European commission.There was surprise and drama in Brussels on Thursday, but today a mood of worried anticlimax settled over the European capital. The new age of mature European assertiveness and leadership that is supposed to be the purpose of the Lisbon treaty was less than palpable. Instead there was a familiar sense of nagging self-doubt and decline.