Like many skiers and snowboarders, I'm instinctively drawn to big-name resorts that boast hundreds of kilometres of piste. But often, on getting there, I feel like I've been hoodwinked. Slow, shuffling lift queues, overcrowded runs ... the sheer number of people renders piste-mileage figures meaningless. I also find that spending a week in one resort can dull the senses as you hit the same trails again and again. So last season, I devised an alternative to the standard one-week-one-big-resort holiday - a rail ski safari to several small ones. The fact that it would be greener made it even more appealing.Europe's rail network can speed a skier to hundreds of destinations all over the continent, but with its picturesque mountain railways and 243 ski resorts (many with stations), Switzerland was the obvious choice.When I felt the weight of my friend Grant's snowboard bag, though, I wondered whether it would be as easy as it first seemed. In the coming fortnight, we'd be hauling our luggage on and off 16 trains. I had visions of our adventure turning into a shoulder-torturing schlep, with Grant eventually crushed beneath the weight of his bag gasping: "You go ahead without me ... I'll only slow you down ... " Our first destination, Engelberg in central Switzerland, was just under 11 hours from St Pancras - door to door the journey didn't take much longer than it would by plane. The French countryside slipped away and the ground became blanketed in snow, as if in the space of a few hours spring had turned to winter. On either side, mountains loomed in the dusk and the huge expanse of Lake Zurich came into view on our left. Engelberg has a loyal following of experienced Swedish skiers and snowboarders who save up at home all summer so they can ski there all winter, without having to work. Looking out from the top of the 3,028m Mount Titlis on our first morning we could see why: in every direction, expansive off-piste is accessible without any hiking, though the crevasse-riddled terrain means it's wise to ski with a guide. We avoided crevasses, but still ended up lodged in ice, at Iglu-Dorf, an igloo hotel halfway up Titlis. The cavernous, candlelit rooms had sheepskin rugs, Jacuzzis and a bar serving glühwein. We took a guided snow-shoe walk in the dark, gazing down from the edge of a cliff at the twinkling lights of the town, 1,800m beneath us. And we stayed warm and comfortable all night, though, much as I like Grant, the romantic atmosphere would be better experienced with a lover, not a friend. After another day on the slopes we headed to Meiringen, two hours west, in a carriage full of suited Swiss commuters. Meiringen's slopes aren't visible from the village and, with so few people heading up on the cable-car next morning, we assumed the skiing would be tame. But as we ascended, an impressive panorama of empty pistes covered in soft snow unfolded before us. "People don't really come to smaller resorts like this except at weekends and holidays," explained Marcus, a Swiss skier from nearby Bern. Halfway along a red run, we were stopped in our tracks, Road Runner-cartoon style, by the incredible sight of a body somersaulting above us, and dropping, upside down, out of sight below. We had chanced upon the practice session of a team of professional aerial ski jumpers. One of them was the 2006 Olympic champion, Evelyne Leu. By coincidence, we ended up in the same gondola as Leu on the way back to the village. "We practise these jumps into lakes during the summer, for safety," she said. Safety being a relative term. Searching the town for après-ski, we found a bronze statue of Sherlock Holmes, who was fictionally pushed off a cliff (or not) by arch-rival Moriarty at the nearby Reichenbach waterfall, and has a small museum dedicated to him.Nightlife in these small resorts is limited to cosy bars, especially midweek; so our solution was to go off-brief to party in Zermatt, Switzerland's stellar resort, for a couple of nights. By day we battled through blizzards to rustic mountain restaurants, including Chez Vroni, a snug cabin with homemade sausages dangling from the ceiling in the tiny hamlet of Findeln. Leaving Zermatt the next morning, we realised it's a mistake to travel between resorts in the evening. Through the huge windows of the Glacier Express we were treated to the spectacle of a snowy St Gotthard valley, which runs from Zermatt to Andermatt. For an hour, cross-country skiers glided along a path next to the track.Within an hour of reaching Andermatt, we were ascending Gemsstock mountain in the only cable car to access a phenomenal off-piste area. Next, Disentis, an hour down the line but a very different region of Switzerland, where people speak a Romanche dialect, not German. Disentis is presided over by a Benedictine monastery, its cream walls glowing pink in the late afternoon sun. It had been four days since the last snowfall, but with too few people to track it out, powder remained in abundance, right next to the pistes. All too soon we were heading east to our final destination, Pontresina, a pretty resort next to St Moritz. Any regrets about taking one of our last trains melted when we boarded a 75-year-old wood-panelled dining carriage, redolent of the Orient Express, wit h tables set with wine glasses, folded cloth napkins and candles. The dining cars on Swiss trains are typically excellent waiter-service restaurants, but here the baby-leaf salad, polenta, ratatouille and hake in breadcrumbs surpassed the rest. The train clattered through the beautiful Rheinschlucht valley, known as the Grand Canyon of Switzerland, past hilltop villages, a turquoise river, and otherworldly grey rock formations. Two glorious days' cruising Pontresina's long, sweeping runs ended with a blissful soak in Europe's highest outdoor Jacuzzi, in front of the excellent Berghaus restaurant at the 2,978m summit of Diavolezza - more proof that settling for less piste does not mean compromising on altitude. The next morning, reluctantly boarding a homebound train, I thought back over our trip. While a normal ski holiday can fast-forward to the end, each day blending into the next, the varied nature of our ski safari had made it feel like an epic adventure. I took a last glimpse down the railway track where, further along the line, dozens of other small, deserted resorts were waiting to be discovered. • Getting there London to Paris by Eurostar (from £59 rtn) then Paris to Basel (from £38 rtn) then an InterRail Switzerland pass (£168) giving eight days' travel within a one-month period. Book through Rail Europe (0844 848 4070, raileurope.co.uk). • Where to stay Hotel Garni Hostatt in Engelberg (hostatt.ch), doubles from £37pp B&B. Iglu Dorf Engelberg (iglu-dorf.com) from £78pp. Sporthotel Sherlock Holmes in Meiringen (sherlock.ch), doubles from £87 half-board. Hotel Perren in Zermatt (hotel-perren.ch), doubles from £54pp B&B. Hotel Drei Koenige & Post in Andermatt (3koenige.ch), doubles from £136 B&B. Hotel Sax in Disentis (hotelsax.ch), doubles from £49 half-board. Hotel Allegra in Pontresina (allegrahotel.ch), doubles from £125 B&B. More information myswitzerland.com.Les Arcs, FranceThe most convenient Alpine train destination is the Tarentaise valley. A Friday night Eurostar runs all the way to Bourg-St-Maurice, arriving Saturday morning. (NB There are no couchettes - take earplugs, eyemask and pillow.) Taxis and the odd bus go to Val d'Isère and Tignes and a funicular links the station to Les Arcs. • Erna Low (0845 863 0525, ernalow .co.uk) offers 7 nights in a two-bedroom Radisson SAS apartment in the newest village, Arc 1950, from £331pp inc train travel.Méribel, FranceThere are two other stations along the Tarentaise valley with access to ski areas; Aime, for La Plagne, and Moutiers, for the Trois Vallées. The shortest road transfer is Moutiers to Méribel - about 20 minutes. • First Choice (firstchoice-ski.co.uk, 0871 664 0130) offers seven nights' half-board in the Chalet Renardeaux, from £679pp, inc train.Kitzbühel, AustriaMedieval Kitzbühel, spa town Bad Gastein, and lakeside Zell am See are served every week by the Bergland Express from Aachen, Germany (reached by Friday afternoon Eurostar to Brussels and a short connection). • European Rail (erail.co.uk, 020-7619 1080) offers seven nights at the 3-star Minotel Resch in Kitzbühel, inc Eurostar and 6-berth couchette on the Bergland, from £593pp. La Molina, SpainThe Pyrenees are harder to reach than the Alps by train - there's no railway in Andorra, for example - but it's not too tricky to reach the pretty town of Puigcerdà, in Catalonia, via Toulouse. The stylish spa hotel, Hospes Villa Paulita, in an art nouveau building, is an attractive base, 15km away at the linked areas of La Molina and Masella. • Double rooms from £110 room-only (0034 972 884 662, hospes.es). Return rail tickets from £169pp (eurostar.com).Grindelwald, SwitzerlandLeaving from London on Eurostar at 8am, travelling via Paris and Basel, you can be in Grindelwald at 6.40pm - and it's a beautiful journey, to the foot of the Eiger - there's even a tunnel through it! • Inghams (020-8780 4433, inghams .co.uk) offers 7 nights' half-board in the 3-star Hotel Hirschen from £588pp, inc train.Aviemore, ScotlandIn good conditions (don't book too far in advance), the Cairngorms can be fun for a weekend, and it's cheap, especially with an Adventure Pass (visitscotland.com/adventurepass). • Aviemore's traditional Cairngorm Hotel (£44pp B&B, cairngorm.com) is opposite the station, from where a bus runs to the ski hill. Super off-peak return with National Express (nationalexpress.com) from London £117, from Newcastle £81.St Anton, AustriaThe Bergland Express continues from Kitzbühel to St Anton, one of Europe's greatest ski areas with extreme skiing and unbeatable partying. Regular Post buses link to Lech and Zürs as well. · European Rail (020-7619 1080, erail.co.uk) offers London-St Anton for £213pp in a 6-berth couchette. The cool Hotel Banyan (banyan-hotel.com) costs from €75pp pn B&B.Bardonecchia, ItalyThe Dolomites are a schlep by rail, but there is a good Paris-Turin connection, stopping in Oulx (for Sauze d'Oulx and the 400km Milky Way ski area) and the market town/ski resort Bardonecchia, which hosted snowboarding at the 2006 Olympics. It has 110km of mainly intermediate skiing.• London-Bardonecchia, from £109pp with European Rail. Seven nights' half-board at the Villa Myosotis, from £350pp, with Alpine Answers (020-7801 1080, alpineanswers.co.uk).Chris Madigan 