Tax authorities would not have been able to break Swiss banking secrecy for 10 years or more, a senior civil servant has said, in a defence of HMRC's controversial tax deal under which tax will be paid on cash in Swiss bank accounts, but under condition of anonymity. Critics say eventually international pressure would have forced Switzerland to remove the veil of anonymity from account holders there. But HMRC permanent secretary for tax Dave Hartnett told the Treasury sub-committee on Monday that in the next 10 years breaking down Swiss banking secrecy certainly "seemed very unlikely".Tax campaigner Richard Murphy has argued that the deal has delayed international efforts to break down Swiss secrecy. "I am not saying Swiss bank secrecy was going to break down tomorrow. But the US is making big progress, the direction of travel is substantially in the direction of openness. This deal has guaranteed that anonymity is reinforced," he said on Monday.The Swiss deal has been heavily criticised by some, who suggest that in allowing some tax evaders to pay a one-off repayment of tax due, as well as ongoing tax on interest earned in Switzerland, it has let evaders off much bigger bills. The cash held in Swiss accounts may not have been taxed when it was earned, some suggest, and normally tax evaders face big penalties on top of having to pay the tax due.The tax rates applied to Swiss accounts are also fractionally lower than the equivalent rates in the UK. Hartnett told MPs on Monday that the rates were lower because the tax would be taken earlier in the year, and therefore reflected timing differences.HMRC, and Hartnett in particular, have been beset with criticism in recent years. The UK Uncut tax protest movement has campaigned against what it argues were cosy deals done by Hartnett and HMRC with taxpayers like Vodafone and Goldman Sachs to write off significant tax liabilities relating to tax avoidance set-ups.A steady feed of allegations apparently leaked from within HMRC has appeared in Private Eye in relation to both the Vodafone and Goldman's arrangements.Hartnett told MPs he could not discuss either deal on Monday, but did dispute suggestions that he had received corporate hospitality from Goldman Sachs, compromising his position: "I have been to a supper with Goldman Sachs. I went with a managing director from the Treasury to talk to 20 chief financial officers about developments in tax policy. I knew nothing of Goldman's tax affairs when I was at that supper. I don't deal with Goldman's tax affairs."