Tucked into a natural basin in the sunniest corner of the Lower Engadine, the spa town of Scuol – a cluster of traditional houses decorated with sgraffito – is skirted by dazzling 3,000m peaks and overlooks the Swiss national park. The charming Bun di Scuol bed and breakfast is a traditional Engadiner property with five double rooms close to the ski bus stop. As well as serving breakfasts of homemade apple cake, hosts Leah and Michael let guests use the kitchen to self-cater free of charge.This winter, ski passes are included in the price of the room. The snow-sure Motta-Naluns ski area (up to 2,800m above sea level) has a collection of easy and intermediate runs, including a delightful 7.4-mile red down to Scuol. Treat yourself by relaxing in the thermal waters at the Bogn Engiadina Scuol spa – which offers reduced rates of CHF18.50 (£13) after 7.30pm – or by dining while gazing at charcoal-coloured summits at Pizzeria Taverna (meal for two around £42, including drinks, +41 81 864 0147).The outlay: Bun di Scuol (+41 81 860 09 19, bundi-scuol.ch) costs from £68 a night including ski passes. Ski hire at Sport Heinrich (sport-heinrich.ch) costs around £68 for five days. EasyJet (easyjet.com) flies from Luton to Zurich from £69 return. Zurich main station to Scuol-Tarasp by train costs from £44 return with an SBB (sbb.ch) supersaver ticket.Total approximate cost per person for five nights: £427 (B&B)There is a thrill in making the first tracks on untouched pistes – not to mention the awe of spending the night high on a mountain with only the moon for company. High above Laax (which, along with Flims and Falera, makes up the largest winter resort in Graubünden canton), the functional, 132-bed Mountain Hostel Crap Sogn Gion is just off the mountain station – and the pistes – at 2,228m above sea level.Lift passes are included with each overnight stay, making for relatively affordable access to the 146 miles of blue, red, black and unprepared slopes, and four snow parks – one of which is home to Europe's largest half-pipe. After dark, guests can use the hostel's sauna (free), or share stories of huge airs and wipeouts while gathered around the open fire in the hostel's Capalari bar, where beers cost around £3.40.The outlay: Mountain Hostel (mountain-hostel.ch) costs from £300pp for five nights half-board, including a six-day lift pass and sauna access. Ski or snowboard hire at any of the valley stations costs from £111 for six days (laax.com). Expect to pay around £12 for lunch with a drink at the self-service restaurant. EasyJet (easyjet.com) flies from Luton to Zurich from £69 return. Zurich main station to Laax Bergbahnen by train costs £75 return (sbb.ch)Total approximate cost per person for five nights: £652 (half-board)The journey to Pontresina is as spectacular as the arrival: the famous red trains of the Rhaetian Railway glide across mountain passes and viaducts, skirting St Moritz, to Pontresina. The resort, a collection of glitzy hotels and high-end boutiques, is the last place you would expect to find a youth hostel. But, just as the glamorous village has a curious reputation as a centre for outdoor pursuits, nothing here is as it seems.Pontresina Youth Hostel's Cross Country Skiing Hit package is an antidote to the glamour and expense of the area. Four cross-country ski tours for beginners are included with six nights half-board in the hostel, which serves four-course dinners every night. The hostel is steps from the 130 miles of cross-country ski tracks that stretch through the Upper Engadine, passing beneath the Roseg Glaciercorrect and crossing frozen lakes.The outlay: Pontresina Youth Hostel's (youthhostel.ch/de/hostels/pontresina) Cross Country Skiing Hit costs £303, including membership, for six nights half-board in a six-bed room (also bookable as a group), with four beginners' cross-country ski tours. Cross-country ski hire in the youth hostel's basement shop (pontresina-sports.ch) costs £89 for four days. The youth hostel will provide packed lunches for £6 a day. EasyJet (easyjet.com) flies from Luton to Zurich from £69 return. Return train tickets from Zurich main station to Pontresina cost from £49 with an SBB (sbb.ch) supersaver ticket.Total approximate cost per person for six nights: £540 (half-board)  The Gruyère district, between Lausanne and Berne, is most famous for its eponymous cheese, but it also has an array of family-friendly winter resorts. And because this region of jagged pre-Alpine summits is off the beaten track, it is uncongested, with accordingly low prices. Moléson is at the heart of it, beneath the 2,002m peak of the same name, and has views of Lake Geneva and Mont Blanc.The resort's 18.6 miles of pistes encompass a beginners' slope, several blue and red runs, and a black run from the summit of Le Moléson. There are also two snowshoe trails, a two-and-a-half- mile sledge run and a snow park. Stay in a self-catering apartment with the Alpine Winter Adventure package and enjoy free access to it all, leaving you budget to sample the region's renowned cheese fondue, followed by meringues and double cream – Canton Fribourg's "afternoon tea" – at Plan Francey, a chalet-style restaurant on the slopes (fondue from £16 and meringues £6 each).The outlay: An Alpine Winter Adventure (moleson.ch) costs from £447 for two adults and two children for seven nights in an apartment, including six-day lift passes and free access to the sledge run. Ski hire costs from £85 for adults and £51 for children for six days from Castella Sports SA (+41 26 921 33 49); sledges, rentable at the funicular, cost £7 each. EasyJet (easyjet.com) flies from Gatwick to Geneva from £60 return. Moléson is 1.5 hours from Geneva; car hire costs from £176 a week (genevaairportcarhire.net)Total approximate cost per family for seven nights: £1,135 (self-catering)The Portes du Soleil ski area is one of the largest in Switzerland, comprising 12 linked Swiss and French resorts and occupying a 154-square-mile wedge of the mountainous Rhône valley region. A good base is Champéry, a traditional village with some 150 years' experience in welcoming tourists at the foot of the multi-summited Dents du Midi. The skiing is low-lying (up to 2,400m above sea level) but it is varied, with 296 slopes and 194 mountain lifts – so you'll find it helps to have a guide to help you find the best powder.Think that sounds expensive? Well, this winter, ski hostel Le Petit Baroudeur, with self-catering facilities and close to the Croix du Culet cable car in Champéry, has put together a budget Ski Safari package, including a ski pass for the region and a guide from the Swiss Ski School for three days, as well as a ticket to the warm-water pools at Thermes-Parc, which would normally cost from £15.The outlay: A Ski Safari stay at Le Petit Baroudeur (champery.ch), including four nights' bed and breakfast and three days' skiing with a guide, costs £282pp, based on a group of between seven and 10 people. Ski hire costs from £92 for three days at Berra Sports (+41 24 479 1390, berra-sports.com), with up to 20% discount if booked in advance. EasyJet (easyjet.com) flies from Gatwick to Geneva from £60 return. Return train tickets from Geneva to Champéry cost from £31 return (sbb.ch)Total approximate cost per person for four nights: £494 (B&B)Prices based on exchange rates at time of going to press and subject to change