Switzerland faces economic sanctions if it delays opening up its notoriously secretive banks to international scrutiny. The threat will be made today by world finance ministers in a key meeting to discuss how to broaden the crackdown on tax havens that are draining exchequers of tens of billions of dollars each year.The meeting of finance ministers in Berlin will report on progress towards complying with new international demands on tax transparency following the G20 summit in London in April. Failure to comply will be greeted with "hostility" warned one official. Unlike at London, Switzerland has been invited to attend.The Swiss are rushing to sign bilateral information-sharing agreements with 12 countries by the end of the year. So far it has agreed six but it needs 12 treaties to remove itself from a "grey list" of countries deemed not to have met international tax transparency standards.Switzerland reached a double tax agreement with the United States last week. However, its leading bank, UBS, still faces a potentially damaging court trial next month for its part in a tax evasion scandal allegedly involving up to 52,000 US account holders. It has also suffered a huge outflow of money from its private banks in recent months as the wealthy grow nervous that the end of Swiss bank secrecy is coming closer.Jeffrey Owens, director of the OECD Centre for Tax Policy and Administration, said last week that summit participants would stipulate what signs of progress they expect to see from countries on the list, and also suggested that the patience of world powers with tax havens such as Liechtenstein, the Caymans and Switzerland was running out. "Political tolerance for non-compliance is headed rapidly towards zero," he said. Owens added, however, that there had been a great deal of progress on the tax haven issue over the last six months.But campaigners argue that the weight of evidence required by tax ­investigators to force tax haven officials to hand over details of accounts on suspected tax evaders is so onerous that the current treaties are ineffective. There is pressure on the OECD, the thinktank of leading nations which sets international tax standards, to force countries to sign more treaties and to introduce automatic information-sharing agreements.Stephen Timms, the financial secretary to the Treasury, will use the Berlin meeting today to call for the introduction of a radical new measure to force global firms to reveal exactly the profits they make and the tax they pay in each jurisdiction they operate in. Known as country-by-country reporting, the proposal is likely to gain strong support from the French and Germans as a way of ensuring countries economies can weather the financial crisis that has destroyed tax revenues.The role of tax incentives in propagating the bank crisis is also likely to come under the microscope following a recent IMF paper arguing that "tax distortions are likely to have encouraged excessive leveraging and other financial market problems evident in the crisis". Private equity firms, in particular, have used tax incentives on debt to finance corporate raids that are now unwinding.