Cadbury, the British confectionery company taken over by Kraft earlier this year, is being secretly restructured in a move that will help its new American owner avoid millions of pounds in UK taxes.Kraft is reorganising the Bournville-based manufacturer's UK business to allow much of the profit to be booked in Switzerland. The switch means the Dairy Milk manufacturer will pay a much lower rate of corporation tax and is likely to deprive the exchequer of millions of pounds in tax revenue. It mirrors previous changes to tax structures implemented at Kraft, as well as other large food groups.News of the restructuring is likely to prompt further debate about one of the most controversial takeovers of a British company, which raised issues about foreign ownership of UK assets and the job security of British workers. Kraft pledged to retain a key Cadbury factory in Somerdale, near Bristol, in order to win support for the £11bn bid, only to announce its closure, with the loss of 400 jobs, just days after gaining control. Kraft boss Irene Rosenfeld then declined to appear in front of a committee of MPs investigating the takeover.The Kraft restructuring plan involves inserting a Swiss holding company above Cadbury's UK operations. The UK offshoots will then effectively become sales and manufacturing service businesses paid commissions by the parent. The British subsidiaries will almost certainly employ roughly the same number of people as under the old structure. However, as key staff are being relocated to Switzerland, and the UK companies will technically no longer own the raw materials or products they make and sell, much of the tax liability will be transferred to Zurich.Richard Murphy, a director at Tax Research UK, said: "We have seen this kind of structure before with [crisp company] Walkers where, after being acquired, the UK operation is moved to a Swiss holding company. The advantages are twofold. First, if you actually locate the management in Switzerland, you'll have an argument with the Revenue but you can move profit from the UK and save tax. Second, as the brand is vital to profits, you can also transfer that value out of the UK to Switzerland. The UK company will then pay royalties to use the brand, which is also tax deductible."The Guardian understands that Kraft is still running accounting models to determine the best structure. It is expected to be implemented by the middle of next year, so it is not yet clear exactly how much tax Kraft will end up saving. However, in its last year as a public company, Cadbury accounts show the company paid £197m in taxes.The current corporation tax rate in the UK is 28%. In Zurich, where Kraft has its European headquarters, rates begin at 15%, although foreign holding companies using the canton as an administrative base can be exempt from tax on non-Swiss earnings. Businesses can also apply for "mixed company tax privilege" and agree a much reduced rate. Swiss federal corporation taxes are levied at a rate of 8%.A spokesman for Kraft confirmed: "Since 2006 we have been implementing our European model involving a [holding] company based in Zurich together with local companies in country markets. The reorganisation has given us greater focus on our priority brands and has helped us grow faster. We are integrating Cadbury into this model. This involves the transfer of certain roles to Switzerland, though the majority of UK-based roles will remain in the UK."When asked how much the company would save in tax, the spokesman replied: "Yes, Switzerland is a tax-efficient location, but the business decision was about growing the top line of the company."Exactly how much the UK Exchequer will lose following Kraft's move may emerge over time. However, previous examples of similar moves provide a guide to the potential savings.In June 1999, the US food group PepsiCo transferred ownership of its Walkers crisps brands, built up in the UK over decades, out of England and into a Swiss subsidiary, Frito-Lay Trading GmbH. The British factories were reduced from a major profit centre to mere contract manufacturers, paid a margin over their costs by PepsiCo's Swiss trading company.The year before the transfer, Walkers Snack Foods was turning over £469m. This generated profits in the UK of £91m and a tax bill of £28m. But in 1999, the year the brands were sold, Walkers Snack Foods turnover almost halved, as did its profits, and the UK tax bill went down to £14.7m.Kraft's plan differs slightly and the company insists that Cadbury brands will continue to be owned by a British company, which mirrors how accountants have previously arranged the US group's European businesses.Kraft – whose brands include Toblerone, Dairylea cheese triangles and Ritz crackers – pulled off a similar restructuring last year and Kraft Foods UK's 2009 accounts state: "Until April 2009 the principal activity of the company was the manufacture and distribution of food products to the retail, food service and vending beverage market places ... The directors approved the sale of the assets and liabilities associated with Kraft Foods UK Ltd's service and procurement functions to the UK Branches of the Swiss entities, namely Kraft Foods Europe Procurement GmbH and Kraft Foods Europe Services GmbH ... After the completion of the restructuring Kraft Foods UK Ltd acts as a sales and distribution company selling Kraft Food products into the existing United Kingdom markets and customers."