Switzerland considered sending in commandos or spies to free two of its citizens who were unjustly detained in Libya for more than a year, the country's president revealed today.President Doris Leuthard condemned leaks to the media reporting that Swiss special forces or secret intelligence agents could have been deployed to take on Muammar Gaddafi's security forces – a surprise for those who may confuse the country's famous neutrality with a reluctance to use force when necessary."That the relevant authorities considered the possible use of security forces in a hostage situation is correct and cannot be criticised," Leuthard said in confirmation of extraordinary claims about ways to end the so-called "Gaddafi affair".The Swiss were outraged by the saga of Max Göldi and Rachid Hamdani. The two men were arrested in Tripoli in July 2008 days after the arrest in a Geneva hotel of Hannibal Gaddafi, a son of the Libyan leader, and his pregnant wife, on charges of abusing their domestic servants.The two employees, subsequently compensated by the couple, later dropped assault charges. The Swiss government apologised to Libya for the arrest after a furious Muammar Gaddafi retaliated by closing Swiss businesses in Libya and throwing out the country's diplomats.Göldi and Hamdani took refuge in the Swiss embassy in Tripoli but were abducted, taken to court and jailed for visa irregularities. Hamdani was released in February, but Göldi had to serve a four-month prison sentence and returned to Switzerland only last week.Swiss media had reported at the weekend that military options were considered by the federal government. The Tribune de Genève mentioned plans to smuggle the two men out of the country aboard the ambassador's plane. Another idea was to take them across the Algerian border but that was dropped after Algiers demanded the return of dissidents living in Switzerland as its price for co-operating.The most extraordinary claim was that the men were to be "exfiltrated" via a submarine waiting for them off the Libyan coast, the paper said. It did not specify who the submarine belonged to.Yet another plan was to take the businessmen south overland across the desert to Niger. According to the Tages-Anzeiger, Tuareg guides were ready but the operation had to be cancelled when the Libyans heard about it from a leak in Algeria.The Swiss foreign minister, Micheline Calmy-Rey, said on Friday that different options had been examined. "We're talking of a unique crisis. Considering unconventional possibilities is part of the process. We always have to look at every option – if we didn't, people would ask us why not."Neutrality does not mean pacifism. Switzerland has conscription for men over 20. It also has a special commando unit, DRA10 (Détachement de reconnaissance d'armée 10), whose main function is to rescue Swiss citizens trapped overseas.Still, military experts were relieved the commandos did not go in. "The Swiss army isn't equipped for such risky operations, which have to be planned in incredible detail," said Albert Stahel of the Institute for Strategic Studies in Zurich."It appears that the operation was imminent," the Christian Democrat MP Jakob Buechler, head of parliament's defence committee, told the SDA news agency. "This could have ended in a total disaster."Peter Malama, of the centre-right Radical party, said Libya's reaction "would have been impossible to predict."The revelations from the top are likely to ensure that controversy over the Gaddafi affair continues. Christophe Blocher, leader of the far-right Swiss People's party, has been pressing the government to raise "Libya's hostage taking" with the UN and break off relations with Tripoli.