Two people were seriously hurt yesterday in postal bomb attacks on diplomatic missions in Rome.Italy's interior minister, Roberto Maroni, linked the blasts to a similar spate of bombings last month in Athens.The two victims were both working in embassy postrooms when packages blew up in their hands. Doctors who attended the two non-diplomatic employees said their injuries suggested that the explosive devices had been packed with metal.The first blast took place at the Swiss embassy. A couple of hours later, there was another at the Chilean mission.Last night an Italian anarchist group, the FAI or Informal Anarchist Federation, claimed responsibility for the blasts.One of the victims risked losing a hand, and the other an eye. Doctors said that neither was in danger of his life.Last night, the Swiss police said bomb disposal experts were examining a suspect package at the European Union's office in Berne. Some parts of the building had been evacuated, a spokesman said.In Rome, a packet reportedly similar to those that exploded was being examined at the Estonian embassy. There were also alerts at the Ukrainian and Slovenian embassies, but in both cases suspect packages were found to be harmless.Police in Rome said they had alerted all the city's embassies for them to take extra care with their post. The foreign minister, Franco Frattini, said that a message urging special attention had been dispatched to Italy's diplomatic missions overseas.The first victim was a 53-year-old Swiss national. Professor Nicolo Scuderi, who led a team at the Policlinico hospital operating on him, told the news agency AGI that the victim's worst injuries were to a hand which had "practically exploded with the blast." Scuderi said the injured man also suffered wounds on the rest of his body from "fragments of metal evidently put in the package".The employee at the Chilean embassy, named in Santiago as Cesar Mella, lost two fingers and had injuries to his throat, face and an eye. The head of surgery at the Policlinico, Massimo Coletti, said a bolt had been removed from his throat.The Chilean ambassador, Oscar Godoy, said the packet bomb was addressed to the cultural attache. But, he added: "We don't even know if the packet arrived by post or with a courier."Chilean and Swiss embassies were also targeted in postal bomb attacks last month on embassies in Athens and governments outside Greece. A Greek police official told Reuters news agency the authorities had stepped up checks of parcels at airports following the attacks in Italy. But he said that, contrary to an earlier report, they had not so far received a request for help from the Italian police.