The galleries were packed for the first encounter between the chancellor, George Osborne, and his new Labour shadow, Ed Balls. Mr Osborne was clearly nervous: he had even increased the taxes on banks, seemingly ad lib, on the radio yesterday morning. Since he reckons to take £800 million more from the banks, this makes the encounter one of the most expensive in history – nearly £200 million per minute!Both sides had come with folders full of sound bites. And a host of dubious statistics. The economy generates such an immense quantity of numbers that it is possible to prove almost anything you want. And they did.Mr Balls asked how it was that the chancellor had blamed the slowing in the UK economy on the weather, whereas the Americans also had terrible weather and their economy was rebounding. Was it the wrong kind of snow?Mr Osborne's lip curled even more than usual. "Now you and the leader of the opposition know how it is to be people's second choice!" he sneered. "He is a man with a past!" he added, going on to list the many disasters that occurred when Mr Balls was working for Gordon Brown.Mr Balls got his Y-fronts in a twist. The chancellor should have spent less time on the ski slopes of Switzerland and more in the meeting halls of Davos, where he would have been able to hear the US treasury secretary explain why Labour was right. Mr Osborne grew even sneerier. "He had a lot of time to prepare that, and I'm not sure it came out as expected." Was there a winner? Osborne, I would say, but who cares? It means little.Then, after hearing the mewlings and squeakings of various underlings, satraps and myrmidons, up arose Sir Peter Tapsell. (Others stand up; he arises.) Immediately a crack team of seamstresses at the Gobelin factory were alerted to their latest commission: Sir Peter Tapsell Addresses The House Of Commons On The Topic Of Bankers' Bonuses. Improverished women in the stews of Paris wept for joy, for this monumental tapestry would mean their children would have food! And shoes!Sir Peter's assumption of the vertical position was met by loud Labour cheers. He paused for the tidal wave to die down. He spake. (Others speak. He spakes. ) "Do Tweasury ministers [Sir Peter has a slight speech impediment] agwee that the real pwoblem about bankers' bonuses is that they are not paid out of pwofits, but out of wevenues? Taxing banks after bonuses are paid merely depwesses dividends, particularly for pension funds.'Why are bankers' bonuses not paid out of pwofits, not wevenue, as they always were by own very efficient stockbwoking firm?"It was a very good question. He sat down to even louder Labour applause, having landed a heavy blow on the government front bench. As for the minister, one Mark Hoban, he had no reply, but blithered and wittered and chuntered until he embarrassed himself.Sir Peter is no Labour supporter. But I bet lots of Labour MPs wish that he was.