The first commodity in which the Swiss dealt was themselves. For centuries they exported mercenaries to fight in other people's wars, a trade which came to an effective end after the Swiss contingent in Napoleon's army was decimated at the battle of Berezina in 1812. The Swiss have since had to find other ways to earn a living and, as with the trade in soldiers, the balance between morality and economic advantage is a hard one to strike.The dark side of Swiss banking was visible again in Westminster last week: as George Osborne delivered his autumn statement he promised to raise £5bn from otherwise obscure Swiss bank accounts. This is the latest chapter in a history which includes the long tussle over the funds of Holocaust survivors, as well as the old charge that Switzerland profited massively from trading with the Nazis. It may also be the first serious sign that the Swiss economic model will have to be tweaked.Even Swiss chocolate, on the surface as innocuous a subject as could be, has been put in the dock in a film which begins with a man chomping happily on a bar of it and then switches to exploited children bringing in the cocoa bean harvest in west Africa. Swiss NGOs have established that the country's chocolate firms are prominent among those dragging their feet on the implementation of a protocol which was supposed to outlaw such activities. As a report in this paper last week underlined, the whole field of commodities trading has become a subject of controversy in the federation.Swiss dealing in commodities like oil, copper and zinc, as well as food items like sugar, coffee and grain, has grown massively in the last 10 years. The concern is that light Swiss regulation is allowing companies to get away with some things which they would not be able to get away with elsewhere. A government commission is due to report soon, but some Swiss are concerned it will not go far enough. They want legislation to make Swiss parent companies legally liable for human rights and environmental offences abroad.It comes as no surprise to find that Darth Vader's mask was based on an old Swiss infantry helmet, or that a Swiss artist has imaginatively reworked Vader's headgear with motifs of clocks, cows and rustic figures. The world is of course addicted to a Jekyll and Hyde view of the Swiss republic. The truth is that Switzerland's faults shrink in significance when compared with the way the Swiss have turned their neutrality into an asset benefiting the whole world, the most obvious example being the Red Cross. The contradictions they display are similar to those in other trading states, including Britain, with which there are some close parallels, and their record in dealing with them is no worse and, in some ways, better.