British engineering firm Invensys is being stalked by international rivals considering a bid for the company which employs 8,000 people and is valued at £2.7bn.City sources say predators include Honeywell and Emerson Electric of the US, ABB of Switzerland, Alstom of France, Germany's Siemens and two Chinese firms, CSR and CNR.No offer has been tabled, but potential bidders are said to be reviewing their options. If one fires off a bid, a takeover war is likely to erupt, as Invensys is viewed as one of only a handful of medium-sized engineering firms listed on the stock market, making it vulnerable to a bid. Private firms are more difficult to acquire.Invensys's investors include M&G (10%), Schroder (6%), Standard Life (5.98%), Legal & General (5.7%) and Marathon Asset Management (4.7%).It manufactures rail and signalling equipment and hi-tech products for industrial plants such as oil refineries.Harry Philips, an analyst at Evolution Securities, said the economic cycle had reached a point where companies had a lot of cash after cost-cutting during the recession. "Now they are looking for acquisitions. In the last fortnight, we have seen GE buy a division of Wood Oil and drugs company Sanofi-Aventis buy Genzyme for £12bn. Invensys wouldn't be a stretch for a company such as Siemens which is capitalised at €90bn (£76bn) or Honeywell, valued at $40bn (£24.6). But it could be a 'dial changer' for a buyer wanting to beef up in fast-expanding sectors."Philips said the market for rail equipment, worth $100bn globally, was booming, with massive infrastructure projects due to come on stream in emerging markets. "A bid for Invensys would make sense for any of these companies," he said.Last year chief executive Ulf Henriksson annoyed the Takeover Panel when he told a newspaper that the rail group, CSR, had the option of acquiring Invensys, implying it would be a logical move. The company had to rush out an announcement to make it clear it wasn't in bid talks with the Chinese firm.Invensys was formed in a merger of Siebe and BTR in 1999. In the past decade, Invensys underwent major restructuring to cut costs. A major disposal programme, combined with debt restructuring in 2004, saved the firm from collapse.