Reports in the Iranian press today are saying that the next round of the Iran nuclear negotiations are going to take place in Lausanne, Switzerland. If true, and the Iranian media have usually been reliable on such logistical details, it will extend a tour of luxury hotel destinations the long-running talks have taken in, in the wake of Vienna, Geneva and Montreux. Clearly, the negotiators from the seven countries (and EU) taking part feel they deserve a certain degree of comfort for the very long hours they have put in so far.This will be the last negotiating round before the Persian New Year, Nowruz, on March 21, though the Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, has said is he prepared to soldier on at the expense of family festivities. Western negotiators say that this five-day session is intended to be the decisive round for producing a framework agreement. At the moment, there are no plans for a further round, and if progress is being made, they diplomats will extend this session, most likely in the presence of foreign ministers, rather than adjourn.We have heard this several times before. These negotiations on the future scope of Iran’s nuclear programme have bulldozed two previous deadlines. The end-March target for a framework agreement, laid down by foreign ministers when the last deadline was missed in November, is supposed to be bolstered by political urgency supplied by an impatience and sceptical Congress. The Senate had given the Obama administration until March 24 to come up with a framework. But even that looks a bit fuzzy now. As Politico notes, the Senate goes into recess three days after that date until April 13, so the diplomats do in theory have a few more weeks. The final deadline for a full deal with all the details worked out, is not until the end of June.However, while the dates may get blurry, western negotiators say that the framework agreement when it comes will have to be a lot more than a statement of intent. It will have to include the main parameters and numbers, including the crucial limits on Iranian uranium enrichment capacity and a timetable for lifting sanctions. Even if that is agreed, the diplomats warn, the deal could still be derailed when it comes to do filling in the details afterwards. It is only if and when that is done that this diplomatic marathon can be said to have reached the finishing line. 