Norway is a country of exceptions. During summer, the sun never sets. In winter, people travel from all over the world to see the northern lights. Its relationship with the European Union is no less exceptional, but much less attractive. Many of those who want to strip our relationship with Europe back to the "common market" look to Norway, and even Switzerland, as viable alternatives to EU membership. Sadly, the comforts of these relationships are as cold as the midnight sun.In 1960 Britain, Norway and Switzerland founded the European Free Trade Association, an alternative to the European Community. Those paths split in 1973, when the UK joined the EC, while Norway and Switzerland stayed in Efta. Inside the EU, the UK became an influential player, one of the big three, but also one of its least integrated members. Outside, Norway became by far the most closely integrated non-EU country, but with no say whatever.Norway enjoys full access to the EU's internal market because it is part of the European Economic Area, which was created in 1992. In return, Norway is obliged to implement all the EU's laws relating to the internal market.Because Norway is not a member of the EU, it has no representation in any of its institutions and no right to participate in its decisions (except regarding the Schengen border-free area, of which Norway is a signatory). Norway has had to implement about three-quarters of all EU legislation, including the working time directive.Not only does Norway suffer the indignity of implementing whatever regulation or directive comes off the fax machine, but it also pays around €340m a year into the EU budget. Under similar circumstances, the UK, given its size, would probably pay £2.5bn-£4bn a year, which is close to half of our current net contribution. But imagine being told what to do by a body over which we had no influence.We would contribute to EU funds, but get nothing back. The balance of power, and the rules we would have to accept, would inevitably tilt in favour of less liberal policies. A recent report on the EEA, commissioned by the Norwegian government, concluded that it was suitable, if anything, "for small states with limited ambitions to influence policy". The Swiss model is even less appealing. Its relationship rests on some 120 separate bilateral agreements, many of which Switzerland started to negotiate after it rejected EEA membership in 1992. These require Switzerland to follow EU law in the areas that give it access to the EU market. The Swiss also pay into the EU budget, but less than the Norwegians.Britain benefits from the collective bargaining power that the EU's market of more than 500 million people wields in global trade negotiations. Switzerland and Norway conclude separate trade deals, as would the UK if it adopted either model.The EU is a broad church. We are not members of the euro, Schengen, or a European banking union. No one is seeking to force us into any of those arrangements. We do not realise that we already have the foundations for the best option for a relationship in Europe.Europe is by no means perfect, and sometimes infuriating, but it is our home market and a force multiplier for Britain globally. Giving that up for the cold comforts of Norway or Switzerland would greatly diminish Britain.Roland Rudd is chairman of Business for New Europe and of RLM Finsbury 