• There has been a hunt for the foreign bolthole of the former head of the Royal Bank of Scotland, Sir Fred Goodwin, as he seeks a quiet place to stir his pension pot. Reporters at the Guardian have been begging us not to reveal his true whereabouts as they try to persuade a sceptical newsdesk to let them follow up their own hot tips that the hideaway is in St Lucia/Buenos Aires/Tahiti and so on. Now we hear from an unimpeachable source who offers us the "100%, red-hot, bottom dollar" info that Sir Fred has been given refuge by Sir Jackie Stewart, for many years an RBS ambassador, at his gaff in Switzerland. Switzerland. Suddenly, the hunt seems less urgent.• But what of that "lost weekend", when Sir Fred's compensation package was agreed? David Lowry, a researcher working in both the UK and European parliaments, put in a Freedom of Information request to try to find out just what did take place. He received this response from the Information Rights Unit on behalf of the Treasury. "Dear Dr Lowry, Thank you for your inquiry ... You asked for: all minutes, memoranda and related emails of meetings held between Treasury ministers and officials with the Royal Bank of Scotland officials between 6-12 October 2008. I confirm that the Treasury holds information falling within the description of your request. However, we estimate that the cost of complying with your request would exceed the appropriate cost limit. The appropriate limit has been specified in regulations, and for central government is set at £600. This estimates the cost of one person spending three and a half working days in determining whether the department holds the information and locating, retrieving and extracting the information. Under section 12 of the Freedom of Information Act, the department is not obliged to comply with your request and we will not be processing your request further." Is there anybody out there - in the Alps maybe - who could help with the cost? • Where was David Cameron on the night that Gordon Brown and Barack Obama and 18 other national leaders sat down to save the world last week? At Tramp, the London "nightclub". He was there to celebrate the publication of the new racing novel Citizen, by Charlie Brooks, the partner of the editor of the Sun, Rebekah Wade. Oh, Dave, Dave, Dave, Dave, Dave. Of all the gin joints in all the towns in all the world, could you not have found somewhere - anywhere - more statesmanlike, not to mention cooler, than Tramp?• The campaign to halt the extradition to the US of computer hacker, Gary McKinnon (left) continues apace. The former Beirut hostage Terry Waite is just one of many to offer his support. Now singer-songwriter Graham Nash has agreed to let the campaign change the lyrics of his 1968 song Chicago to send a musical message to President Obama, urging him to intervene and prevent what is now widely accepted as a disproportionate response to something that happened years ago. David Gilmour, formerly of Pink Floyd, and other leading musicians are also helping Gary's mother, Janis Sharp, to produce a new version of the song. A judicial review of home secretary Jacqui Smith's refusal to consider medical evidence of McKinnon's Asperger's syndrome is listed for 9 June. Still time for a musically hip president from Chicago to hear a CD and take appropriate action.• We know all about North Korea's long-range rocket but, much more important, how is the top official in its London embassy transported? It may be one of the poorest countries in Asia, but the ambassador to London of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) has a top of the range Mercedes, with the bashful registration number of PRK1D to take him from the Ealing, west London, embassy. But then he does have to keep up with his flashy southern neighbour - the ambassador of South Korea, or the Republic of Korea, who is whizzed around London in an equally glitzy limousine, ROK1. Instead of an expensive arms race, how about one between the two embassy motors twice round the North Circular?