It has become a depressingly familiar tale. On Monday, the shoe chains Barratts and PriceLess filed for administration, as did Sofa Workshop and the gay retail chain CloneZone. Land of Leather and childrenswear retailer Adams, already in administration, announced a swathe of store closures. The high street is beginning to look like a smile with missing teeth.But it is not just retailers that are buckling under the weight of recession. In recent months there have been company failures in industries from oil exploration to car dealerships, newspapers and the leisure industry, including the first new racecourse in Britain for 80 years.Just as consumers became addicted to borrowing, so much of corporate Britain has become bloated by cheap debt.Private equity firms have been widely condemned for loading debt on to the balance sheets of businesses such as Debenhams to pay themselves hefty dividends. But shareholders have also acted as cheerleaders, encouraging boards to "sweat" their balance sheet or face being condemned as poor managers.Many are also guilty of raising debt for deals at the top of the market, others with a nervous glance over their shoulder, ramping up their borrowings and handing money to shareholders to avoid being victims of a private equity takeover themselves.Like previous recessions most companies are facing a sharp drop off in demand. Unlike previous recessions the banks are at the heart of the crisis and are unwilling to lend more or even to refinance debts.Many of Britain's companies are like junkies being forced to go cold turkey after their dealers, the banks, have suddenly cut off supplies. Figures published by accountants Deloitte yesterday showed the number of firms in administration in the fourth quarter of 2008 was up 30% on the same months in 2007."We started to see an increase in the number of insolvencies at the beginning of last year, starting with small regional property firms," said Richard Fleming, head of restructuring at the accountants KPMG."But we are only just starting here. In two years' time, there will be an awful lot more insolvencies. The difference between this and the previous recession is that the financial services sector is in utter turmoil. It is the repayment and refinancing of debt that is the big issue faced by corporations now."He said companies had been going under in the past few months at "hyper-speed".The first hit have been in the front line of consumer spending. Notable casualties have included the music retailer Zavvi, furniture retailer Ilva, fashion groups MK One and Miss Sixty, which controls the Energie brand, home decor chains Fads and MFI and of course Woolworths, the collapse of which has scarred almost every high street in Britain."Customers are short of spare money and are nervous of spending what spare money they have got – especially now that many people have fears about their jobs," said Richard Dodd at the BRC.What begins on the front line soon spreads to suppliers. That is already becoming evident in house building, which has been thrown into turmoil. The building materials group Wolseley admitted this week its debt has climbed to £3bn amid a profit slump. The company has already cut about 15,000 jobs since the middle of 2007 and is likely to need further cash if it is to survive.DarwinianThe beginning of a recession at least can be characterised as a Darwinian exercise, a winnowing out of the weakest businesses. Chris Higson at the London Business School posed the question of whether the "right" companies are failing."The first ones that go are the fragile ones, the ones that were hanging on by their fingernails," he said. "Woolworths is everyone's favourite example. No one could really understand how it had survived so long. It had lost its franchise. Its profit margin in the past few years was so low it had no margin for error."The other reason for the failure of Woolworths, Higson said, is common to many retailers. When the business was still owned by Kingfisher, it sold off its property and leased it back to Woolworths, stripping equity from its balance sheet, saddling the chain with high ongoing commitments on lease payments and offering it very little flexibility in a downturn."Woolworths is not the only one that sold its shops and leased them back," he said. "This is very much something that has happened over the past 10 years. It is often blamed on private equity but everyone was doing it."But the "true disaster", he said, had been the withdrawal of the banks. A 20% drop in sales would have pushed Woolworths further into loss, but in normal circumstances "it could have survived with the help of a friendly bank. Traditionally the banks have absorbed the shock of a recession but they are not now able to do that. The banks have exited the scene. There is nobody to help."In the last recession, interest rates were at 15%, making even small debts difficult to deal with. Even so, he said, there is "no doubt" that many companies are more vulnerable in this recession than in previous downturns.Recession also cuts off other sources of cash: there is little appetite in the equity markets and companies trying to sell assets are doing so at just the moment when there are few buyers. Governments are showing some willingness to step in, but resources are limited.Who's next?Some of the most highly indebted quoted companies include Sports Direct, Ladbrokes, Next and Intercontinental Hotels."Consumer debt is so stratospheric that any business that has dependency on the consumer will have trouble," said Fleming. "We are starting to see hotel groups under pressure, travel and leisure, anything associated with the consumer."The sectors that tend to suffer are those that have high fixed costs and can't quickly be reshaped. The classic examples are airlines and hotels. XL, the third largest package holiday group, has been the first domino to fall. After the last recession, accounting firms became the largest hotel operators in the country.The head of restructuring at one large investment bank said there was some complacency among boards until Lehman Brothers went under in September. "People suddenly thought if it could happen to Lehman, it could happen to them."Investors that specialise in buying distressed debt at a discount in the hopes of profiting from a restructuring, are looking widely – at auto parts firms, chemicals, financial services, retail, media, property and construction."There will be very few sectors that don't get adversely affected," said Kevin Hewitt, head of FTI Corporate Finance.One of the most heavily indebted industries is house building. During the boom, builders were encouraged to use debt to expand more quickly, buying land and leveraging their return on investment. "There was a backdrop of a supply and demand imbalance, there was a low stable interest rate environment. It felt like you didn't need to make moribund returns, you could leverage up and sweat your assets," said Mark Hughes, an analyst at the City firm Panmure Gordon. "The sensible ones like Bellway or Berkeley kept a lid on it."Oakdene Homes became the first publicly quoted house builder to file for administration last week after failing to negotiate new debt terms with its banks, which were demanding repayment.Barratt Homes and Taylor Wimpey, both involved in consolidation at the peak of the market, are shouldering the heaviest debt: Barratt has £1.4bn and Taylor Wimpey £1.5bn. The absolute number is not necessariliy the one that counts. Banking covenants are often tied to gearing – debt as a proportion of capital or assets – so even if the homebuilders continue to pay off their debts, they might still be in danger of defaulting as the value of their land falls. Hughes reckons the banks could step in by exchanging the debt for a stake in the firm, potentially seizing control.The behaviour of the banks is also likely to limit the growth of many businesses as recession ends. Perversely, the companies that have been best managed are now having their banking facilities curbed. Bovis is having its facility cut from £220m to £160m by 2011, leaving it with less flexibility to pursue opportunities as they arise.So far it has been mostly small or medium sized firms that have gone bust. In downturns larger companies tend to turn the screws on smaller firms. But in previous recessions, large corporations have also gone down and experts think this will be no different.As it wears on, it won't only engulf badly run companies. It is not about virtue, said Higson. "When a hurricane arrives, where your house happens to be and how it is built determines whether it will collapse."