Is this a proper thing to be worrying about? With the recession crashing over us like a wave and the coming environmental catastrophe and all that, it seems a little odd in some ways to be fretting about whether the battle to get consumers to back away from intensively-reared fowl is being won or lost. But if you've been banging on for years and years about the ethical treatment of food animals it must be heartbreaking to imagine that suddenly all your hard work might be undone. The recent high-profile campaigns undertaken by Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall and Jamie Oliver rest on the shoulders of mountains of man-hours from organisations like Compassion in World Farming, the RSPCA, Sustain, the Food Commission and the Soil Association. Will all the years of effort getting the message across to the public turn out to have been in vain now that we're all trying to save money? Will people start sneakily buying a £2 supermarket chicken where previously they would have made the trip to their local organic butcher? Actually the news so far seems to be good. Yes, that's right, I said good - you may have forgotten what good news feels like. The handful of butchers and farmers that I've spoken to say that this year's sales of organic turkeys are approaching last year's numbers, and nowhere near as bad as they had feared. Boathouse Farmshop in East Sussex for example - where I get a wonderful organic turkey every year, 'tis a succulent, flavoursome bird - has ordered fewer turkeys, but has been doing very well for a couple of months and is now almost completely sold out. Like the butchers I spoke to, they reckon that people are staying in more and buying good food to cook and eat at home. It's particularly wonderful news if the small independent traders are still going strong, although I suspect that the news might not be so good for some.I rang Sainsbury's to find out what was happening in the supermarkets, and they said that shoppers are boxing clever. Take spaghetti bolognaise for example: customers will still choose the higher-end more ethically produced mince for the sauce, but buy cheap pasta from the Basics range. But they didn't give me figures: I'm crossing my fingers and hoping that this really holds true across the board. And I'm optimistic, because I do believe that this issue is akin to Pandora's box. Once you really understand what happens to animals on our farms, you can't just put that knowledge away again when money gets tight. (It's also very hard to go back to the flavourless powdery meat of an intensively-reared bird when you've got used to real meat, which is good news for the animals - except the one you're eating, obviously.)Perhaps people feel that in the coming age when we're all going to have to start looking after each other a lot better, we should be looking after the animals that feed us a little better too? Or is that just hopeless optimism, bought on by a sudden rush of Christmas spirit? What are you planning for your Christmas dinner?