What happened to the Armenians in 1915?During the first world war, Armenians from the Caucasus formed volunteer battalions to help the Russian army against the Turks. Early in 1915, these battalions organised the recruiting of Turkish Armenians from behind Turkish lines. The Young Turk government reacted by ordering the deportation of the Armenian population to Syria and Palestine. About 1 million died from starvation or were killed by Arab or Kurdish tribes along the route. Many survivors fled to Russian Armenia where, in 1918, an independent Armenian republic was established.What is the definition of genocide?The legal definition is found in the 1948 UN convention on the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide. Article two of the convention defines genocide as "any of the following acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such: killing members of the group; causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group; deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part; imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group; [and] forcibly transferring children of the group to another group".Did genocide take place in 1915?Armenians think so. Turkey accepts that atrocities took place but argues that there was no systematic attempt to destroy the Christian Armenians. It puts the number of deaths during 1915 at around 300,000 and says many innocent Muslim Turks also died in the turmoil of war. Argentina, Belgium, Canada, France, Italy, Russia and Uruguay are among more than 20 countries that have formally recognised genocide against the Armenians. The European parliament and the UN sub-commission on prevention of discrimination and protection of minorities have also done so.What is the US position?During the US presidential election campaign, Barack Obama had no doubt that genocide occurred. "The Armenian genocide is not an allegation, a personal opinion or a point of view, but rather a widely documented fact supported by an overwhelming body of historical evidence," he said. But in a visit to Istanbul last year, he avoided the word genocide, and described the events of 1915 as "one of the great atrocities of the 20th century". The Obama administration does not want to antagonise Turkey, viewing it as a valuable interlocutor on a host of regional problems, including Iran's nuclear programme.How has Turkey responded?Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the Turkish prime minister, said his country had been accused of a crime it had not committed, adding that the resolution would hamper efforts by Turkey and Armenia to end a century of hostility. Under US prodding, Turkey and Armenia last October signed a landmark accord to improve ties. The agreement, the culmination of more than a year of intensive diplomacy, committed both countries to reopen their land border and restore diplomatic ties, which Turkey severed in 1993 over Armenia's occupation of Nagorno-Karabakh, a territory claimed by Ankara's ally, Azerbaijan. As part of the agreement, the two countries also agreed to form a joint historical commission to examine the events of 1915.What happens next?Both the White House and Turkey will be hoping that the current row will become a rerun of 2007, when the house foreign affairs committee passed an identical resolution, prompting Turkey to recall its ambassador in protest. The 2007 resolution never came to a vote on the house floor after intense lobbying by the Bush administration.