At its peak, the Ottoman empire held sway over the entire Arab world. Even today, that legacy is difficult to ignore in Egypt: Ottoman architecture has left its mark on the skyline of old Cairo and Turkish words litter the local dialect.Despite these imperial echoes, Turkey's second coming as a major power in the Middle East is viewed by many as a reason for hope rather than fear. And so, when the Turkish prime minister, Recep Tayip Erdogan, arrived in Cairo at the start of his "Arab spring" tour, it was not as a scion of Egypt's former conqueror, but more as a long-lost friend.Diplomatically, Turkey is on a roll at the moment. It has won kudos in Arab eyes by taking a robust stance over Israel's excessive and unreasonable use of force against the Gaza flotilla – which also reflects negatively on the Egyptian government's more wimpish response to Israel's killing of five Egyptian police officers following an attack by Palestinian militants in the border area last month.More importantly, there are many Arabs who regard Turkey's political development during recent years as a model to be aspired to, and possibly copied. Turkey straddles two continents and seems to have achieved a relatively painless blending of Islam with democracy and tradition with modernity – all accompanied by steady economic progress. That, at least, is how it looks from outside, though Turks themselves might disagree.After the Bush administration failed to turn Iraq into a model for Middle Eastern democracies, Turkey became the obvious example to look to. Its political system has bits that can please almost anyone – it even had admirers among Egypt's unlamented Mubarak regime.Turkey's domestic image as a nice, unobjectionable emerging democracy also had its parallel in foreign relations where Erdogan's government has successfully pursued a policy of "love thy neighbours" – or, if not exactly love them, try to avoid conflicts.This is looking less viable now, though, as a result of the Arab spring. Turkey cannot continue being nice to everyone and is having to choose sides. In Syria, for instance, it has been broadly supportive of the opposition and politely critical of the Assad regime.Traditionally, the Arab regional heavyweights have been Egypt and Saudi Arabia, though Egypt lost a lot of its former influence in the declining years of the Mubarak regime. Closer ties between Turkey and Egypt could boost Egypt's position and create a powerful axis – republican and relatively secular – as a counterweight to Saudi Arabia's absolute monarchy and religious conservatism. But this is unlikely to be anything more than short term, because Egypt will be seeking to pursue its own regional interests again once it recovers from the revolution.Turkey too, despite its good neighbours policy, has its own fish to fry. Like Syria, Iraq and Iran, it has issues regarding the Kurdish population. It is also firmly in the Sunni religious camp. This may explain why Turkey has given cautious support to the repressive (but Sunni) regime in Bahrain, even though it has backed popular uprisings elsewhere.There is also the pull of Europe. Long term, Turkey still has aspirations to join the EU and at some point may have to decide whether to face mainly east or west. Close as it may get to the Arab countries, it will always, to some extent be an outsider – for the simple reason that Turks are not Arabs.