When Selahattin Demirtaş shrugged off the formal traditions of Turkish political campaigning and went on a television talk show equipped with a saz, a Turkish folk guitar, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan sensed an opportunity to land a blow.The co-leader of the Peoples’ Democratic party (HDP), sniffed the Turkish president, was a mere “pop star”. But, far from hurting Demirtaş, the remark merely served to highlight Erdoğan’s fear of the 42-year-old’s youthful, telegenic appeal and sense of humour.His musical performance was just one of the ways in which Demirtaş – the man who has done more than anyone to thwart Erdoğan’s aspirations to build an all-powerful presidency – achieved electoral breakthrough by thumbing his nose at political convention. In Sunday’s parliamentary elections, the HDP broadened beyond its Kurdish roots, to become a liberal umbrella group with particular appeal to women, gay men and lesbians, anxious about Erdoğan’s growing power and deepening conservatism. Related: Election result heralds a new Turkey, but not the one Erdoğan wanted In May, Demirtaş invited the television cameras into his home, where he made a leisurely Turkish breakfast for his wife, Başak, and their two daughters. “Breakfast is the only time we truly enjoy each other’s company,” he said. “After that everyone goes to either school or work.”Born in the majority-Kurdish town of Elazığ in 1973, Demirtaş did not, however, grow up as a separatist. He says he only became aware of his ethnic identity at the age of 15 when he went to the funeral of a prominent Kurdish politician believed to have been murdered by security forces in Diyarbakir, the country’s main Kurdish city. Unidentified gunmen opened fire on the mourners, killing eight.“This was when I learned what it meant to be a Kurd,” he told Turkish media in an interview last year. Although his brother Nurettin joined the insurgent nationalist PKK party, and was jailed for his membership, Demirtaş remained a moderate. When history repeated itself and an HDP rally was bombed in Diyarbakir last month, Demirtaş appealed to his followers for calm.He studied law at Ankara University and began his career as a human rights activist, becoming a founding member of the Turkish Human Rights Association. He entered politics eight years ago as a member of the Democratic Society party, a forerunner to the HDP closed down by an order of the supreme court two years later.In 2012, he came to London as part of a Kurdish delegation to highlight the plight of Turkish lawyers who had been jailed for defending dissidents and opposition politicians, and to argue the case of Syria’s Kurds during the early months of the Syrian civil war. 