Barack Obama extended an olive branch to the Muslim world from the floor of Turkey's parliament yesterday by declaring the US was not "at war with Islam" but instead sought its partnership to pursue common goals.In his first visit to a predominantly Muslim country, he praised Islam's contribution to civilisation and said America's relationship with it must extend beyond fighting terrorism. Obama's appeal carried greater weight for being delivered in Turkey, a Nato ally, where the image of the US has been tarnished by opposition to the war in Iraq.Acknowledging that the war had sown Muslim mistrust of the US, he said: "The United States is not and will never be at war with Islam. In fact, our partnership with the Muslim world is critical not just in rolling back the violent ideologies that people of all faiths reject but also to strengthen opportunity for its people."America's relationship with the Muslim community, the Muslim world, cannot be based just on the opposition to terrorism. We seek broader engagement based on mutual interest and mutual respect." The remarks were applauded by Turkish MPs during a 25-minute speech that was also witnessed by the top brass of the country's military. While Obama's visit to Turkey - the last stop of his week-long European tour - had been intended primarily to demonstrate Washington's commitment to a strategic ally, the sentiments were clearly designed to resonate beyond the chamber.Obama, who signalled his intention to seek a fresh understanding with Islam during his inauguration speech in January, pledged to match his words with action by advancing education, healthcare and trade in Muslim countries.Mindful of Turkey's offer to mediate in settling America's 30-year-old dispute with Iran, he reiterated his previous offer of rapprochement to the leadership in Tehran but warned it must abandon any ambitions to acquire nuclear weapons. Obama won further applause when he referred obliquely to his Muslim father and to having spent part of his childhood in Indonesia, another majority Muslim country.Turkish television channels emphasised Obama's supposed links to Islam throughout the day yesterday by repeatedly referring to his middle name, Hussein.That reflected a more positive attitude held by Turks generally towards the president compared with his predecessor, George Bush, who was deeply unpopular.Obama's message on Islam was striking given that White House aides had signalled beforehand that Turkey would not be the venue for a keynote address he has promised to make to the Muslim world by the end of his first 100 days in office.Other parts of yesterday's address were devoted to emphasising Turkey's secular character, as defined by the modern state's founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, whose tomb he visited. Obama said he had chosen to visit Turkey to send a message to the world. "Turkey is a critical ally. Turkey is an important part of Europe and Turkey and the United States must stand together and work together to overcome the challenges of our times," he said.The message was aimed partly at Europe: "The US strongly supports Turkey's bid to become a member of the European Union," he said. "Europe gains by the diversity of ethnicity, culture and faith - it is not diminished by it. And Turkish membership would broaden and strengthen Europe's foundation once more." That represented a subtle change of tack from the Bush administration, which often lauded Turkey as an example of "moderate Islam" rather than emphasising its European credentials. It also amounted to a rebuke to some European leaders, particularly the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, who oppose Turkey's membership bid.Obama sidestepped the one issue with the potential to offend his hosts: the controversy over the deaths of hundreds of thousands of Armenians at the hands of Ottoman Turkish forces during the first world war. The president had previously supported US congressional resolutions that would declare the massacres a "genocide", a definition contested by Turkey. Yesterday he avoided using the term but backed talks aimed at restoring ties between Turkey and Armenia. Soli Ozel, an analyst at Bilgi University in Istanbul, said Obama had pressed "all the right buttons". "It looked at both sides of Turkey's identity, secular and Islamic," he said.