Lately, there has been a flood of articles in the western media arguing that Turkey is turning into a police state.Here is an excerpt from one of those so-called western "experts":In Turkey, we are used to analogies comparing Erdogan to Russia's Vladimir Putin, but comparing the Turkish leader to Hitler is a first. The author of that excerpt is Michael Rubin and it's from the most hawkish publication of the neoconservative movement, Commentary.This is not the first time Rubin has displayed his deep hatred and venomous views about Erdogan. Nor is Rubin the only neocon who has attacked the Turkish prime minister. Others have made groundless accusations that there are financial links between Erdogan and al-Qaida. Rubin is often invited to Turkish military academies to lecture on the Middle East. Indeed, he has many acquaintances in the top brass of Turkey and among Turkish officers.The dislike of the Erdogan government among pro-Israel neocons in Washington can be partly explained by the deterioration of relations between Turkey and the Israeli state. The recent arrests of four journalists working for Oda TV has given them another golden opportunity to criticise the Turkish government. For the neocons, the arrests were designed to silence independent and critical journalism (Oda TV is known for its fierce opposition to the government).Respectable publications such as the Washington Post, the New York Times, the Financial Times, and the Economist have followed their lead – albeit in a much more reasonable fashion than Rubin – in arguing that the arrests demonstrate that Turkey does not respect freedom of expression. Editorials that appeared in such western newspapers and magazines seem unaware of the domestic context within which the recent arrests in Turkey were conducted.Here is what they are missing: the journalists who've been arrested were not arrested because of their journalistic activities or for expressing their opinions: they are suspected of being part of a plot to topple the civilian government.In the 1990s, elements within the Turkish media became part of the psychological operation spearheaded by the army in 1997 to oust the Necmettin Erbakan government. Some of the same people now complain about violations of media freedom and the emergence of a so-called police state in Turkey. With their neocon allies such as Rubin in Washington, they make strange bedfellows.As anyone who regularly follows the Turkish media can attest, there is no shortage of sharp criticism of the Erdogan government in the Turkish media. Freedom of expression is part of the daily routine.Turkey may still not be a liberal democracy, but those who argue that it is turning into a police state are misleading world public opinion. At a critical time of change in the Middle East, Turkey by far provides the best example of a Muslim democracy and this deeply bothers the old ruling elite whose backbone is the military. They are determined, as are their neocon friends in Washington, to launch a new campaign against the current Turkish government.It is time to expose this dangerous alliance.