Ocellated turkey, Meleagris ocellata (synonym, Agriocharis ocellata), Cuvier, 1820, photographed at Yucatán, Mexico (Central America). Image: George Harrison/USFWS, 10 February 2010 [velociraptorize]. Here's the original image crop that I shared as the mystery bird two days ago:   Question: This Mexican mystery bird shares part of its name with several other, unrelated taxa. Can you identify those taxa? Can you identify this mystery bird's taxonomic family and species? Response: This is an adult ocellated turkey, Meleagris ocellata, one of two members of its genus. Its sister species, the wild turkey, M. gallopavo, may have held the place of honour in your Christmas feast today, and the beauty of these two species was my inspiration for sharing this species with you today.The turkeys were recently replaced into their original taxonomic family, Phasianidae, after being separated into Meleagrididae. Like other phasianids, they are excellent short-distance fliers, but are mainly terrestrial birds, foraging and nesting on the ground. These birds have a general diet, consuming a wide variety of plant materials from leaves to seeds, nuts and berries, also including insects. The chicks appear to feed exclusively on insects for the first month or so of life, due to their tremendous energetic demands. Several other taxa are known as turkeys. The Australian bustard, Ardeotis australis (Gruiformes), is more commonly known as the Australian turkey. A number of species of Guineafowl (family: Numididae), that are also included in the same taxonomic order, Galliformes, were commonly known as turkey fowl due to their featherless heads, although this name is not in common usage today. Ocellated turkeys are distinctive. They are smaller than the wild turkey and have a large white patch on their wings (which you were looking at the original mystery bird image) and males have much longer spurs on their legs. They have iridescent bronze and green plumage with blue and purple hues. Both sexes have distinctive ocelli (eye-shaped spots) near the end of their tail feathers, a distinctive trait for which this species is named. Even though males are brighter than females, both sexes are absolutely stunning. Here's a video of a male strutting for a group of females. It not only gives you an idea of these birds' courting behaviours, but you can also hear their calls (uploaded 2010):Visit TransAmericasJourney's YouTube channel [video link]. The scientists in the crowd will be interested to know that an ongoing project is investigating the life history of wild ocellated turkeys. A collaboration between Texas Tech University, the National Wild Turkey Federation, and the State of Campeche, this three-year study will conclude at the end of 2013 (uploaded 15 November 2010):Visit omorenof85's YouTube channel [video link]. You are invited to review all of the daily mystery birds by going to their dedicated graphic index page. If you have bird images, video or mp3 files that you'd like to share with a large and (mostly) appreciative international audience here at The Guardian, feel free to contact me to learn more. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. twitter: @GrrlScientist facebook: grrlscientistevil google+: grrlscientistemail: grrlscientist@gmail.com