Support for a controversial package of constitutional reforms appears to be strengthening as Turkey prepares to vote in a referendum that has turned into a test of the popularity of the ruling neo-Islamist Justice and Development party (AKP) led by prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.A clutch of opinion polls over the past month has suggested that Sunday's vote is too close to call. But the most recent survey, by research company Genar, predicted a high turnout of around 88% and a victory for the pro-government yes camp, 53.8%, against 46.2% for the noes.The apparent shift in favour of the reform package – most notable among previously undecided voters – followed a robust campaign by Erdogan in which he accused opponents of effectively supporting the 1980 military coup, which led to the creation of the current constitution.Hüseyin Çelik, the AKP deputy chairman, said the reforms would transform Turkey into a democratic republic."What we have now is a bureaucratic republic," he said. "Military influence over our society is so high – that's why this amendment is crucial. We should have a democratic constitution but the one we have now was imposed after a coup d'etat."The 26-point reform package contains numerous unremarkable measures intended to strengthen individual rights and civil liberties and ensure, for example, that military personnel accused of crimes against the state will in future be tried in civilian courts.But proposals to change the way top judges and prosecutors are appointed, apparently strengthening the powers of the executive at the expense of the judiciary, have provoked bitter opposition. Erdogan has been accused by opposition leaders and media of secretly plotting an "Islamist coup" against Turkey's secular institutions and planning to install himself in an all-powerful presidency.Devrim Yıldırım of the militantly secularist Kemalist Thought Association said the package was designed to destroy the legacy of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, the founder of modern Turkey."Rights and freedoms will be nullified," he said. "Europe has gone through this and it's called fascism. Do you remember how Hitler changed the [German] constitution in 1933?"Supporters of the reforms say that if anything the package does not go far enough in bringing Turkey into line with modern western democracies. Erdogan previously promised a complete overhaul of the constitution. He now says the more modest package will assist Turkey's EU membership bid and provide a bulwark against a recurrence of intervention by the military.The referendum has been cast as a vote of confidence in Erdogan and the AKP, which are widely credited with managing strong economic growth, curbing the powers of the army, and raising Turkey's international profile, especially in the Arab world following Erdogan's strong criticism of Israel over May's storming of the Gaza relief flotilla.Analysts say victory for the yes campaign could propel the AKP towards a third successive election victory in national polls that must be held by July next year.Similarly, victory for the no camp would give a big boost to the conservative, secular opposition, and in particular to the CHP whose new leader, Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, has endured a rough ride since taking over at short notice after his predecessor was engulfed in a sex scandal.Residents of the Istanbul neighbourhood of Kasimpasa, where Erdogan grew up, were enthusiastically in favour of a yes vote. Soner Ozmen, 52, a projection engineer with a film company, said a "yes" vote would be a vote against "the Zionists".Ozmen said: "Today Zionists are running the world. Everybody knows that … this yes vote is not a vote against the army or a vote against civilians, it's a vote against Zionists."In the religiously conservative neighbourhood of Fatih, three computer software engineers said they would vote yes, but admitted they did not understand the details. "Erdogan has a self-esteem that makes us feel confident as well," said Fatih Apaydin, 33.But Cavit Akyaz, 39, a taxi driver, said he would be voting no because he disliked Erdogan, whom he accused of trying to turn Turkey into an Islamic state. Akyaz said: "The prime minister is initiating this change in the constitution in order to save himself. After this law, someone can come to your house in the middle of the night and pick you up and arrest you easily, because the prime minister is appointing judges according to his own will … We believe he would bring sharia law to this country but we won't let him do so."