Refuseniks aside, there is a bit of turkey for everyone: the brown leg meat as deeply flavoured as any game bird; the pure protein of the fatless breast; the blistered and burnished skin; those crisp and chewy wing tips that stick like burnt caramel to the bottom of the roasting tin. Others would rather have the luscious accompaniments, relishing the sauces and stuffings more than the bird itself, their parson's nose presumably being a crisp-edged roast potato dipped into hot, port-coloured gravy.Some, obviously more fussy than I am, won't have a speck of brown meat on their fork, while others sneer at the white meat as 'turkey for people who don't really like turkey'. I have always cooked the creature as a whole bird, ignoring the various other cuts now readily available. My loss. Those 'other cuts' are good for the lead-up to the day itself, when you want a meal that rings out with the flavours of Christmas but isn't a spoiler for the Great Day. I recently encountered a large breast joint, some thick, juicy steaks and spanking-fresh turkey mince in one shop alone, and all of them free range. Any of them would do for bringing the taste of Christmas into the kitchen at almost any time of year. And if you ask nicely, and not when there is a queue trailing out of the door, a decent butcher will probably come up with a turkey leg, boned and ready for you to stuff. (I'd give them a couple of days' warning at this time of year and ask them to take out the sinews while they're at it.) A rolled and stuffed leg could well be the answer for any family for which the white meat holds no charms. I have served it twice this season already and it has pleased all comers with its crackling skin and luxurious stuffing. Its price pleased me, too. A boned leg of turkey, its meat dark and sumptuous, can be batted out with a rolling pin, stuffed with good sausage meat, minced bacon, pistachios, apricots and thyme. The skin shines in the candlelight, the meat falls apart on the plate, spilling its cargo of fruit and spices, and no one has to suffer any white meat. A simple pan gravy finishes it off. Turkey-breast meat can be cooked like a steak with a walnut-sized lump of butter to which you have added tarragon or thyme, and to whose juices you can introduce a trickle of cream or a shot of lemon. Alcohol in one form or another will make this otherwise uninteresting cut sing like a choirboy. The test is making a slice of pure white protein special enough to celebrate. I have got round this by making a gravy drunk with glad tidings, heady with Madeira and dried fruits. It smells and tastes like Christmas, even if it doesn't look like it. Minced turkey can be useful for many of the meals we need to turn out at this time of year. You can make a juicy turkey burger, seasoning the mince with herbs, minced bacon, pine kernels, grated lemon and Parmesan - the bacon being essential if the meat isn't to dry out. Press all the ingredients together, then cook in a nonstick pan till the patties have formed a glossy and mildly sticky coat. It's the sort of thing you could eat with shredded Brussels sprouts, tossed quickly in butter or bacon fat or the braised red cabbage below. I suggest you order the turkey leg a couple of days before you need it. Ask the butcher to bone it and remove the sinews. A large leg should weigh about 1.8kg. Serves 4.a large leg of turkey, boned, sinews removed, ready for stuffinga small-to-medium onion150g fresh white breadcrumbs75g soft dried apricots45g pistachios350g interesting sausagesthymegrated zest of a small lemonparsleyolive oilvermouth or white winePeel the onion, chop it finely and put it in a mixing bowl. Stir in the breadcrumbs. Chop the apricots and pistachios, then add them to the bowl. Slit the sausages' skins and peel them away, then mix the meat in with the other ingredients. Add a tablespoon or so of thyme leaves, the zest of the lemon and a handful of chopped parsley, then season thoroughly with salt and a little pepper. Set the oven at 160C/gas mark 3. Put the turkey leg skinside down on the work surface and bat out the meat with a rolling pin or cutlet bat to roughly 1cm (there will be holes and tears). It needs to be no more than 1cm thick, thin enough to roll into a thick sausage when stuffed. Spread the stuffing over the meat, almost to the edge. Roll up the meat and its stuffing to give a long, fat sausage, then secure with string at 3cm intervals. Place the meat in a roasting tin, moisten with olive oil and roast for 2 hours, covered in foil. It is done when the juices run clear when tested with the point of a skewer. Remove to a warm place to rest, covered with foil (such as the switched-off oven) and tip most of the fat from the roasting tin, leaving behind the darker residue and any crusty pan stickings. Put the roasting tin and its juices over a moderate to high heat. Pour in the wine or vermouth. Stir to dissolve the gooey flavours stuck to the pan to make a thin, delicious gravy. Simmer for a few minutes, taste for seasoning and pour into a warm jug. Put the meat on a carving board, slice thickly, and serve with the hot pan juices. Christmas flavours, but no bird to roast - a simple way to please white meat lovers. Last week we ate this with braised red cabbage and apples. Serves 2.For the gravy:an oniona thick slice of buttera small carrota stick of celery2 tbsp flour200g soft, stoned prunesa few sprig of thyme2 bay leaves200ml dry Marsala500ml light stock or, at a push, waterFor the turkey steaks:a little butter4 large turkey steaks, about 125g each a few leaves of thymePeel and roughly chop the onion. Put it in a pan with the butter and let it soften. Scrub and dice the carrot and celery, and add to the onion. Let the vegetables cook till soft and lightly coloured. Stir in the flour and let it turn pale biscuit in colour, then chop the prunes and add them with the thyme and bay leaves. Immediately pour in the Marsala and the stock. Turn the heat down to a simmer and leave to bubble quietly for 20 minutes, stirring occasionally. To prepare the steaks: melt the butter in a large pan. Season the turkey steaks with salt, black pepper and thyme. When the butter sizzles, lay the steaks in the pan and let them colour on the underside before turning over and continuing on a gentle heat till tender (about 8 minutes). Remove and serve with the hot prune sauce. Serves 6 as a side dish.2tbsp olive or groundnut oila small red cabbage, shredded finely8 to 10 juniper berries 3 tbsp cider vinegarHeat the olive oil in a wok or deep pan, add the red cabbage and turn in the oil till the colour is bright - a matter of a minute or two.Squash the juniper berries roughly, maybe with the flat of a heavy knife blade or a pestle. You don't want them so much to be a powder, simply well bruised. Add them to the cabbage with half of the cider vinegar and a seasoning of salt and pepper. Leave the cabbage to cook, covering with a lid and tossing occasionally. It will take 7 to 10 minutes to be tender but have some crunch left to it. Give it another 5 to 10 minutes if you prefer it soft. Freshen the taste if necessary with the last of the vinegar.