Ever since the BBC Today programme announced this morning that Turkey's department of religious affairs has begun a major revision of the hadith - the non-Qur'anic commentary on the words and deeds of Muhammad - I've been trying to find out more. But on the basis of what I have been able to find out so far, this story is the one that got away. The BBC website has nothing further about it. The Reuters, AP and other wire services say nothing either. For the non-Turkish speaker, it's a deeply frustrating experience.It's frustrating mainly because of two things. First, if true, this is surely a serious event in the Islamic and non-Islamic worlds alike. The BBC went so far this morning as to project it as potentially an Islamic equivalent to the 16th century Christian Reformation. That smacks of massive folly and exaggeration on many counts - not least because Islam has no supreme authority equivalent of the Pope, against whom any such reformation could be directed. But just because the Today programme may have gone over the top it doesn't mean that the prospect of a more liberal, more modern, more commonsense, less absolutist version of Islam is either impossible or unimportant. On the contrary. This is in no way the first time that there has been a reforming movement within Islam - there have been many such over the centuries - but in the context of today's global awareness of Islam, a move to remove some of the anti-women and some of the most brutal injunctions of the hadith (a move that has long been debated in several quarters, I believe) has to be progress and has to be welcomed. If it's true, of course.The second reason that the non-you-see-it-now-you-don't story is frustrating is because it is happening in Turkey. I think there is no more interesting country in Europe today than Turkey. And I think that there is no more interesting political leader in modern Europe than Turkey's prime minister, the Islamist AKP leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan. No head of government in Europe - with the arguable exception of Spain's José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero - manages to combine the successful promotion of a clear agenda of national change with consistent electoral success better than Erdogan. That doesn't necessarily make Erdogan right - but it does make him intensely interesting. It's a tremendous indictment of the western European news media that they pay such intermittent attention to the Erdogan revolution, of which the re-editing of the hadith - which, if true, has been ordered by a ministry directly under the Turkish prime minister's control - is (or may be) just one newsworthy example.Those of us who are interested in Turkey and well-disposed towards Turkey but who only visit the country very rarely need to be careful not to pretend to greater knowledge or insight than we actually possess. But since this is the internet, and anyone can say what they like, I will say that my view is that everything that is happening to do with Turkey at the moment is connected. Whether it's rewriting the hadith, or passing a law allowing women to wear the headscarf in university, or the army mounting an attack on PKK positions in northern Iraq, or the conviction of an academic last month for supposedly insulting Kemal Ataturk, or the election of Abdullah Gül as president, or last weekend's election of a less Turkophobe president in Greek Cyprus, or the AKP's extraordinary record of electoral and economic success, or the stupidity of parts of the European Union (not Britain, I am proud to say) in opposing Turkey's application to join the EU - it's all connected. It's connected to a radical and, from what I can judge, realisable 21st century transformation of a major country in enormously difficult and dangerous circumstances. It's not clear where it will all end - or even what precisely is happening (see today's Today story) - but I think it's the most important thing happening in Europe right now.