 2.34pm BST • The UN security council has been discussing a Turkish call to create a safe haven inside Syria for people fleeing the conflict. However, the security council seems unlikely to agree. Meanwhile, France has announced plans to support "liberated zones" inside Syria – though it is unclear how these might be protected.• UN secretary-general Ban Ki-moon has told Syria that fighting must stop, "with the primary responsibility resting on the government to halt its use of heavy weapons".• Rebel fighters have been attacking security compounds and bases in and around Aleppo. Activists have told AP this is part of "a major operation".• The father of American journalist Austin Tice, who went missing in Syria earlier this month, has said he believes his son is alive. The Committee to Protect Journalists says there is "a strong indication" that Tice is being held by the Syrian government.• Syrian civilians' living conditions are worsening dramatically and it is becoming harder to obtain food and other basic needs, the International Committee of the Red Cross said today.• Etihad, the UAE airline, has suspended flights from Abu Dhabi to Damascus because of "the deteriorating security position". 2.34pm BST Since the uprising began, we have heard very little about Latakia, the port city in northern Syria which is regarded as a stronghold of the Assad regime.Our colleague Mona Mahmood has been trying to find out what life is like for opposition activists there. She spoke via Skype to a woman who gave her name as Lubna Sulaiman.Latakia is a different city in Syria, it is not like Aleppo or Homs. Intelligence and security are everywhere. You would be asked about any movement inside or outside Syria even before the revolution. If you travel abroad, they will ask why you are travelling. This has planted fear in the hearts of people.Latakia has different sects – Alawites, Sunnis, Armenians, Christians – but only the Sunnis and a few Christians are protesting.Alawites are causing lot of problems for people who protest against the regime. The security situation here does not allow any revolutionary or armed movement like attacking checkpoints.Young men are trying to ignite the revolution here and praying that Latakia will be like Aleppo or Damascus, but I always say that our situation is different. We are surrounded by entire Alawite villages and Armenians – these sects are with the regime.People are always careful not to to do anything that would provoke the security [forces].When the protesters started to write graffiti on walls, people could not believe it. People were asking: "Really, how could someone write a word against the regime?"In Ramadan 2011, the Syrian army stormed al-Ramel town where most of the protests were happening. The army was shooting the people there in a mad way. Within two weeks, al-Ramel town was almost empty of any young man and until now you have only 14 or 15-year-old men there. Most of the young men fled to Turkey.Latakia and Banyas were the first cities in Syria to support Deraa when it was the attack from the Syrian army. A huge protest was held on March 20, 2011 from Khalid Ben al-Waleed mosque. More than 15,000 people took part. The protesters marched in most of the Sunni neighbourhoods in Latakia, and in every street where they marched more people joined the protest. At that time, the security did not do anything to stop the protest.After a week a protest was held in al-Ulabi square for three days. Young men were raising banners calling for reforms but not the toppling of the regime. At night hundreds of members of security arrived and they were shooting the people – more than 150 people were killed, it was a massacre. Till now we do not know the right number for the martyrs.I swear to God after the massacre, the security washed the place with water to clean the blood.In April, 2011, when Bashar delivered his speech, people went down to streets protesting against the speech and calling for the toppling of the regime. A massacre happened near the train station in al-Slaiba neighbourhood. It is the neighbourhood most affected by the revolution, more than 200 were killed.We were able to count 300 martyrs who were killed by these two massacres. People started to be scared to protest in these neighbourhoods. Young men went to al-Ramel al-Janoubi district to protest there. It is very populated, inhabited by middle-class people and villagers.The young men were protesting almost every day, carrying candles and calling for the toppling of the regime in Ramadhan 2011. The security were watching that but did not move because they did want to make a big fuss about it.All of a sudden, on the morning of 12 Ramdan, 2011, we woke up to the sound of heavy shooting. They even used ships to attack the people. More than 100 people were killed and a lot of people fled.That was the big beat to the protest in Lathiqia. You can't imagine the atmosphere of horror in the city at that time.There was a big quarrel in al=Qala'a neighbourhood: the Allawites got into knife fights with Sunni young men. They were not protesting but the situation was very tense. Now there is a real division between the Allawites and Sunnis in Latakia. All the checkpoints are in Sunni districts, but the dignitaries from both sects were able to quell down the tension. 2.34pm BST Syria Truth, a pro-Assad website, has posted an article today (in Arabic) claiming that Austin Tice, the missing US freelance journalist, was working for the CIA and "assistance in the field of communication" for Syrian rebels in the Darayya district of Damascus when he disappeared.The Guardian has no information about the truth or otherwise of this claim, but it is likely to complicate matters if, as some reports suggest, Tice has been detained by the Syrian authorities. 2.34pm BST UN secretary-general Ban Ki-moon had a meeting today with Syrian prime minister Wael al-Halaqi and foreign minister Walid Muallem, AFP reports.The talks took place on the sidelines of the non-aligned summit in Tehran. The UN chief reportedly said fighting in Syria must stop, "with the primary responsibility resting on the government to halt its use of heavy weapons". 2.34pm BST • The UN security council has been discussing a Turkish call to create a safe haven inside Syria for people fleeing the conflict. However, the security council seems unlikely to agree. Meanwhile, France has announced plans to support "liberated zones" inside Syria – though it is unclear how these might be protected.• Rebel fighters have been attacking security compounds and bases in and around Aleppo. Activists have told AP this is part of "a major operation".• The father of American journalist Austin Tice, who went missing in Syria earlier this month, has said he believes his son is alive. The Committee to Protect Journalists says there is "a strong indication" that Tice is being held by the Syrian government.• Syrian civilians' living conditions are worsening dramatically and it is becoming harder to obtain food and other basic needs, the International Committee of the Red Cross said today.• Etihad, the UAE airline, has suspended flights from Abu Dhabi to Damascus because of "the deteriorating security position". 2.34pm BST Two children have been killed and many people injured – one of them a critically – as a result of shelling at Yarmouk Palestinian camp in Damascus, the activist Local Coordinating Committees report.There is no independent confirmation at present. 2.34pm BST Latest from the government news agency's Twitter feed:#Syria's National Youth Fencing team will participate in the Asian Championship in September to be held in #Russia#Syria's President Al-Assad Congratulates Uzbekistan on their national day#Italy Recorded it's highest unemployment rate since 1999#Syria Event Calendar: Live Singers and 'The Big Hangout' in #Damascus Tonight twitter.com/SANA_English/s… 2.34pm BST For anyone interested, the Syria Online website now has a full English translation of President Assad's recent TV interview. 2.34pm BST The latest fighting in the Aleppo area is part of "a major operation" aiming to strike at security compounds and bases around Syria's largest city, the Associated Press says citing activists.AP views this as evidence that "weeks of intense bombardments by the Syrian military, including airstrikes, have failed to dislodge the rebels".The rebel offensives in Aleppo are led by a brigade made up mostly of army defectors who specialize in operating artillery and tanks, said Mohammed Saeed, an activist based in the city.He said the first attacks began shortly before midnight Thursday and lasted until Friday, when the "Brigade of Free Syrians" launched coordinated strikes on several security compounds in Aleppo."The new operations aim to strike at regime forces' centers and air bases throughout Aleppo (province)," Saeed said via Skype.The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said one of Friday's targets was a compound in the Aleppo neighborhood of Zahraa, killing and wounding a number of troops. It gave no figures.Saeed said rebels attacked four security buildings around Aleppo, using tanks, rocket launchers and machine guns.The state-run news agency, SANA, said troops killed and wounded several gunmen in the clashes.Rebels took parts of Aleppo, Syria's commercial capital, last month. Since then, government forces have been trying to recapture them. Rebels also control much of the wider Aleppo province, including areas on the border with Turkey. 2.34pm BST A new problem for Syrian refugees in Lebanon. Many of them have been sheltering in schools but now they are being told they have to leave before the start of the school year next week, al-Arabiya reports.It adds: "Lebanese officials have been handing out tents, but refugees have had to find somewhere to erect them." 2.34pm BST Syrian civilians' living conditions are worsening dramatically, as dozens are killed every day in the fighting and it is becoming harder to obtain food and other basic needs, the International Committee of the Red Cross said today.The independent agency, whose 50 aid workers in Syria are confined to Damascus because of the lack of security, has been unable to send out convoys with supplies for the past two weeks, ICRC spokesman Hicham Hassan said."The situation in many parts of Syria is currently edging towards irreversible deterioration. Assisting the fast-growing number of needy people is a top priority," the ICRC said in a statement. 2.34pm BST Etihad, the UAE airline, has suspended flights from Abu Dhabi to Damascus because of "the deteriorating security position", AFP reports.Earlier this week, the US state department revised its travel advice to say that it "strongly recommends that US citizens remaining in Syria depart immediately".One reason given was that "that seats on flights out of Syria are becoming increasingly scarce". 2.34pm BST France plans to channel aid to rebel-held parts of Syria so that these "liberated zones" can administer themselves and stanch an outflow of refugees, foreign minister Laurent Fabius said in remarks reported by Reuters.He said France and Turkey had identified areas in the north and south that had escaped President Bashar al-Assad's control, creating a chance for local communities to govern themselves without feeling they had to flee to neighbouring countries."Maybe in these liberated zones Syrians who want to flee the regime will find refuge which in turn makes it less necessary to cross the border whether in Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan or Iraq," Fabius said after a UN security council meeting in New York on Thursday.However, civilians in rebel-held parts of Syria have suffered frequent deadly airstrikes from Assad's forces.It was not clear how Fabius's promise to allocate much of its future five million euros ($6.25m) aid for Syria to these areas would protect civilians and deter them from fleeing ...Credible protection for "liberated" areas would require no-fly zones patrolled by foreign aircraft, but there is no chance of securing a U.N. Security Council mandate for such action, given opposition from veto-wielding members Russia and China. 2.34pm BST In the Israeli-occupied Golan, where most people call themselves Syrian, opponents of President Assad say they are being intimidated, Guardian journalist Harriet Sherwood reports.A small minority of residents of the four villages populated by Syrian Druze high in the Golan have been open in their support for the uprising. But, they say, intimidation has stopped others speaking out ...A few weeks ago, a small gathering of anti-Assad activists in the main square was pelted with eggs and shoes, along with insults and curses. A restaurant, Aood al Nana, connected to an arts centre that had held an exhibition of anti-regime cartoons in May, was forced to close this month because of an unofficial boycott ...For now, most of the anti-Assad activists have retreated from the streets to Facebook and other internet forums. But, according to some, there is also clandestine activity: groups helping to smuggle supplies of food and medicines by circuitous routes into Syria. 2.34pm BST Turkey sees little hope of the UN security council agreeing to a safe haven in Syria, the Press Association reports:"How long are we going to sit and watch while an entire generation is being wiped out by random bombardment and deliberate mass targeting?" foreign minister Ahmet Davutoglu said. "Let's not forget that if we do not act against such a crime against humanity happening in front of our eyes, we become accomplices to the crime."Mr Davutoglu proposed that the security council establish camps for refugees forced to flee their homes and take "long overdue steps" to help the suffering people. "Apparently, I was wrong about my expectations," he told the council. "This meeting will not even end with a presidential or press statement, let alone a robust resolution."The path to the security council's agreement on a safe zone for Syrians is fraught with obstacles, headed by the reluctance of Russia and China, Syria's most important allies. The countries have vetoed three western-backed resolutions in the security council seeking to pressure President Bashar Assad's government with the threat of sanctions.Moscow and Beijing were highly critical of the no-fly zone established by Nato to protect civilians during last year's Libyan revolt against long-time dictator Muammar Gaddafi, saying its enforcement went beyond the security council mandate. But western diplomats said enforcing the zone required taking out Libya's air defences and attacking tanks and military vehicles that posed threats to civilians.Before Thursday's meeting, Britain and France announced new funding for refugees and left open the possibility of more aggressive action, including a military-enforced no-fly zone to protect a safe area for those fleeing the war. "We are not ruling out any options for the future," Foreign Secretary William Hague told a news conference.Mr Hague said safe zones should remain an option, although he did not say when they might be seriously considered. "We do not know how this crisis will develop ... over the coming months. It is steadily getting worse," he said. "We are ruling nothing out, and we have contingency planning for a wide range of scenarios." 2.34pm BST The UN refugee agency says it is seeing a growing number of Syrians fleeing to Lebanon's eastern Bekaa Valley, near the Syrian border, AP reports.Agency spokesman Adrian Edwards says local authorities report about 2,200 people arrived in the valley over the past week, almost double the weekly average. He told reporters Friday in Geneva that about 400 Syrians are arriving in northern Lebanon each week.Edwards says one of the agency's biggest concerns is the great demand for shelter across Lebanon, where many refugees are staying in schools that need to be used for children in the next few weeks.He says Turkey has opened two more refugee camps forSyrians in the past week and is now hosting 80,410 people in 11 camps and schools in its border provinces. 2.34pm BST The Committee to Protect Journalists has called on the Syrian authorities to immediately release US freelance journalist Austin Tice."There is a strong indication that the Syrian government is holding Austin Tice," said CPJ executive director Joel Simon. "Damascus should acknowledge his captivity and release Tice immediately. All sides fighting in Syria must ensure the safety of media personnel and respect their internationally recognised status as civilians."In an interview with Czech television on Tuesday, the Czech Republic's ambassador to Syria who also represents U.S. interests there, said that according to embassy sources, Tice "is alive and that he was detained by government forces in the outskirts of Damascus, where the rebels were fighting government troops." 2.34pm BST The Associated Press has a little more information about today's fighting in Aleppo:Activists say rebels are attacking several security compounds in the northern Syrian city of Aleppo.The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said one of Friday's attacks targeted a compound in the neighborhood of Zahraa, killing and wounding a number of troops. It gave no figures.Aleppo-based activist Mohammed Saeed said rebels are attacking four security buildings around Syria's largest city, using rocket launchers and machine guns. 2.34pm BST The Iranian government's preference for ignoring President Morsi's remarks about Syria means that it is rather restricted in what it can say about the speech by way of criticism.The Israeli Haaretz newspaper notes that Hossein Sheikholeslam, the Iranian parliament's Middle East adviser (and a former deputy foreign minister) "was not only the first Iranian official to criticise Morsi but also the first who acknowledged that he made those remarks".However, even Sheikholeslam seems to have avoided repeating what Morsi said. Instead, he accused the Egyptian president of lacking "the necessary political maturity". 2.34pm BST Two Iranian TV channels found an interesting way to deal with President Morsi's embarrassing critique of the Syrian regime during his speech in Tehran yesterday, Le Monde reports (in French).It says the translation of his speech into Persian simply replaced the word "Syria" with "Bahrain". 2.34pm BST The Aviationist blog is sounding a cautionary note about claims of Syrian warplanes being shot down.The Aviationist was initially fooled by the video above. On Tuesday it commented:Although it’s hard to determine the real cause of the crash, it looks like the pilot got hit during the turn. Indeed, there are no apparent signs of failure nor clear signs of pilot error/miscalculation: the plane seems to fly into the ground without the pilot trying any recovery action. Most probably he was unconscious.The Aviationist has now established that the aircraft shown in the video was a radio-controlled model (see below).Here on the live blog we expressed some doubts about it at the time (mainly because the apparent crash and the subsequent explosion didn't seem to match up). 2.34pm BST Rebels attacked a security service building in Aleppo early today, the Lebanese Naharnet website reports, citing the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.The assault on the feared security services came in west Aleppo, sparking a firefight between rebel fighters and agents, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said.Clashes also broke out between troops and rebels in the battleground districts of Saif al-Dawla and Salaheddin in the southwest of the city and Hanano in the northeast, the Britain-based watchdog said.There are also reports of fighting in Sayyida Zeinab, a suburb of Damascus and in Albu Kamal near the Iraqi border. Government forces are said to have bombarded the mountain resort of Rankus, north of Damascus. 2.34pm BST Welcome to Middle East Live. Here is an update on the latest developments relating to Syria.• The UN security council has been discussing a Turkish call to create a safe haven inside Syria for people fleeing the conflict. However, the security council seems unlikely to agree.• President Morsi's speech in Tehran yesterday has "all but completed Iran's isolation", Simon Tisdall writes in the Guardian.Morsi's fierce condemnation of the Syrian regime, Iran's close ally, was as eloquent as it was piercing, and it came like a bolt from the blue. He didn't just rain on the Iranians' parade. It was as if Hurricane Isaac had taken a sharp turn north across the Caspian and unleashed its wrathful furies on an unsuspecting Tehran.Scott Peterson, in the Christian Science Monitor, shares that view:Iran's charm offensive and attempts to seize the high ground were dampened by the words of the UN chief and by Mohamed Morsi ...• The father of American journalist Austin Tice, who went missing in Syria earlier this month, has said he believes his son is alive and being detained by the Syrian government.