This April, Tripadvisor's Travellers' Choice Awards voted Istanbul the world's number one place to visit. But how do you do a metropolis of 13 million residents with kids? Your best bet is to live like a local – shop at the markets, eat street snacks, then ditch the bustle and relax in your own space. Istanbul Sweet Home is an owners' collective offering 11 apartments throughout the city's European Beyoğlu district. The two-bedroom (both doubles, one with mezzanine bed) Bohemian Rhapsody occupies the second floor of a 19th-century building, and is spacious enough for a family of four. The apartment's large windows look out over the Crimea Memorial Church and its leafy garden. • istanbulsweethome.com, €540 (£439) a week for Bohemian Rhapsody (contact via internet/email only)These six apartments are located within a few minutes' stroll of the teen shopping heaven that is Istiklal Caddesi (imagine a pedestrianised Oxford Street lined with a smattering of the usual chains and snack shacks, plus street stalls selling cheap highstreet knock-offs). The flats have Turkish carpets, original artworks, stacks of books and DVDs plus houseplants – in other words, about as far removed from impersonal rental accommodation as you can imagine. Owner Marco Graal lives on the top floor of La Casa di Maria Pia, and is happy to point your family in the right direction for everything from the neighbourhood's friendliest restaurants to his favourite Black Sea beaches (around an hour north of the city). • + 90 541 624 5462, lacasadimariapia.com, €700 a week for two-bedroom duplex The DogsThe second-largest of the nine Princes' Islands, Heybeliada is less than an hour's ferry ride from downtown Istanbul. Like the rest of this archipelago, Heybeliada is car-free. Horse-drawn fayton carriages (favoured by both locals and tourists, with rides around £4-£8 a pop) are the island's organic taxis. Base yourself at Karamanyan, a late 19th-century Ottoman mansion that has been transformed into four spacious apartments. Pick of the bunch is the Garden Flat, which sleeps four in two double bedrooms. All four apartments have their own designated outdoor space. But the Garden Flat's direct access to a terraced garden, with swings, sun loungers and a barbecue, makes this apartment best for families.• 020 7436 8009, istanbulislands.com, £890 a week for the Garden FlatThe Olive Villa is perched on the shores of Cunda Island. For British travellers, this sandy speck is almost unheard of. It's all pretty cobblestoned alleys and pastel pavement cafes, bobbing between Greek Lesbos and the Turkish coastal resort of Ayvalik. Owned by Dutch designer Sharon Kilinger, the pink and white villa features playful, super-stylish decor: wooden floors, an open fireplace, a unique banquette dining area and walls adorned with locally-inspired artworks. A spiral staircase snakes around the interior to three sea-view bedrooms (two doubles and one with three single beds). Outdoors, kids can while away summer afternoons playing in the shared pool or scampering around the shady garden. Even more enticing for all ages is the semi-private beach that's just steps away. • +31 20 53 53 163, theolivevilla.com, from €1,120 a week for a family of fourBrand-new Q Spa Resort manages to be sleek, modern and family friendly all at once. Large two-bedroom flats sleep four over a master bedroom and a smaller twin. Each apartment boasts a full kitchen, satellite TV and Wi-Fi, as well as a balcony. The resort has plenty of activities on site – indoor and outdoor pools (plus kids' pool) and petite children's playground, plus Turkish baths and tennis courts. For a splash around in the Mediterranean waves followed by ice-creams on the sand, it's just 10 minutes' walk to the resort's beach club. This is on Side's Blue Flag beach and there's a free shuttle service.• +90 242 763 7690, qsparesort.com, two-bedroom apartments from €1,040 a weekAbandoned by its Anatolian Greek residents during Turkey's 1923 population exchange, Kayaköy – just south of the Aegean resort of Fethiye – is perhaps the world's prettiest ghost town. Quince Cottage, amid a scattering of pomegranate, fig and quince trees, makes a good base for exploring this historic village. The two-bedroom (one double and one twin) stone cottage has its own private terrace and barbecue, as well as a large swimming pool, shared with three-bedroom Fig Cottage next door. A cot, pushchair, car seat, inflatable pool and children's toys can be provided on request. Turkey's most photographed beach, Ölü Deniz, sits just a dozen miles south of here. Families with older kids can trek a leg of the long-distance Lycian Way hiking trail, which passes near the villa's front door. • +90 532 613 8107, thefiggarden.com, £679 a weekTraditional stone-built Serenity Cottage is just a couple of miles from fourth-century Ephesus, Turkey's most impressive Roman ruin. The cottage is even an easy stroll to the remains of the Temple of Artemis, one of the Seven Ancient Wonders of the World. Serenity may tout itself as romantic – the two double bedrooms are both en suite and there's a panoramic roof terrace – but its decor and amenities make it an equally ideal home-from-home for families seeking a slice of local living. With its garden daybed for afternoon reading and the Roman-style hot tub for night-time stargazing, Serenity Cottage is best suited to families with older children.• +90 232 892 0050, ephesusrentals.com, $1,120 a weekOn a hill a couple of miles south of the Aegean resort of Kas, midway between Antalya and Marmaris, Müstakil Ev is a riot of traditional Turkish decor. Colourful textiles adorn the three bedrooms (one double, two singles). Bright cushions are piled high on the massive outdoor terrace, and one of the more challenging legs of the Lycian Way coastal trail runs just behind the garden. There's even a piano. Kids will love Büyük Çakıl beach, a pristine pebbly stretch – flanked by a handful of seafood restaurants, and just a short stroll from the apartment. There's an hourly shuttle service (journey time 10 minutes) into Kas town centre.• airbnb.com/rooms/1581120, from £497 a week for four guestsPoking into the sea, west of the teeming resort of Marmaris, is the unspoilt Datça peninsula. Today it remains a little corner of paradise, dusted with almond and olive groves, plus a bevy of Roman ruins. Just inland from Datça town, the 12 Marphe Villas are simple and spacious. Each boasts two large bedrooms (that can be adapted as doubles or twins), a well-equipped kitchen and whitewashed walls. As the villas are the self-catering extension to the Hotel Marphe, guests can use the hotel's facilities, too. There's a bougainvillea-trimmed swimming pool with kids' area in the tiered Mediterranean garden, plus a poolside bar, hammocks and teak sun loungers. Family outings can be had exploring the peninsula further via the regular boat trips that depart from Datça harbour.• +90 252 712 9030, marphevillas.com, from £845 a week for four guestsAround a mile west of Kalkan proper, Villa Frida can sleep up to eight guests (two doubles and two twins) comfortably. Airy rooms are tiled in local travertine (the marble that makes up the tumbling waterfalls at Turkey's most otherworldly sight, Pamukkale) and hung with bright contemporary artworks. For families with younger children, the villa's alfresco dining area, barbecue and six-metre swimming pool offer plenty of entertainment. Older kids can make their way down to the rocky beaches of Kalamar Bay, a five-minute walk from the front door. When it's time to let off serious steam, the windswept shores of Patara Beach – 10 miles of golden sands dotted with tumbling Roman ruins – are just a short drive away. The equally enticing Kaputas Beach, frequently rated one of Turkey's finest, is just south of town.• +90 532 425 0934, villa-frida.de, from €1,100 a week