whole turkey 1, 4-5 kgchicken stock 1.5 litresmelted butter for brushingwater 5 litrestable salt 300grose salt 150ggranulated sugar 150gcarrot 1, diced into 1cm cubes onion 1, diced into 1cm cubessprig of thyme 1leek ½ diced into 1cm cubes clove garlic 1salted butter 150gchicken breast 300gwhipping cream 300gminced pork 300gturkey offal (heart, liver, kidney) 150g, finely choppedvacuum-packed cooked chestnuts 135g, roughly choppedclear honey 3 tbspsalt and pepper sage ½ bunch, roughly chopped fresh white bread soaked in milk 4 slicesBrussels sprouts 500g, preparedsmoked bacon 200g, dicedonion 150g, choppedfresh thyme 3 sprigssalted butter 50gfresh chestnuts 200g, roughly choppedKing Edward potatoes 1.8kgduck fat 450gTo make the brine, boil the salt, rose salt and sugar in the water until dissolved. This will take a few minutes. Allow to cool.Remove the turkey giblets and place the turkey in a large container. Cover the turkey with the brine until completely submerged and leave for 4 hours. Rinse the bird thoroughly with water, pat dry with kitchen towel and leave to air-dry overnight.Peel and chop the potatoes and parboil until soft. Drain well, and set aside in the fridge.To make the stuffing, place the chicken breast and whipping cream into a food processor, blend to a smooth paste and set aside in the fridge. Take the remaining ingredients for the stuffing and place into a mixing bowl. Mix well, then add the chicken and cream paste to the bowl and mix together. Using a large metal spoon, stuff the turkey.Preheat the oven to 220C/gas mark 7. To cook the turkey, put all the ingredients from the mirepoix list into a roasting tray. Place the turkey on top of the vegetables and brush with a little melted butter. Put the bird into the preheated oven for 40 minutes, then add the chicken stock and reduce the temperature to 170C/gas mark 3. Cook for a further 3-3½ hours, depending on the size of the bird. Then give it a final 30 minutes at 200C/gas mark 6.To roast the potatoes, melt the duck fat in a second roasting tray in the oven 1 hour before the turkey is finished. When the fat is smoking, place the potatoes carefully on the tray, baste and sprinkle with salt. Cook until golden and crispy.To prepare the Brussels sprouts, blanch them in a pan of boiling salted water. Save two large ladles of the cooking water. In an oven tray, brown the bacon and onions and add the thyme. Place the sprouts into the bacon mixture and add the reserved cooking water and butter. Cover with foil and place in the oven; cook until the sprouts are soft. Just before serving, add fresh chestnuts, season with pepper and salt.