The number of Syrians in neighbouring Turkey has surpassed 1 million, the Turkish deputy prime minister has said.There are more than 20 refugee camps in Turkey near the roughly 500-mile border with Syria housing more than 220,000 people. But the bulk of people who have crossed the border are living in Turkish cities, mostly in the provinces of Hatay, Gaziantep and Sanliurfa. They have taken advantage of the "open border" policy maintained by Turkey, a staunch opponent of the regime in Damascus, towards Syrian refugees.The Turkish deputy prime minister, Besir Atalay, told a news conference on Thursday that the number of Syrians in Turkey had reached 1.05 million since the uprising against Bashar al-Assad began more than three years ago. It began with largely peaceful protests but has become increasingly bloody, with a number of jihadist groups joining the fight to depose Assad and no end to the civil war in sight. Activists put the number of people killed at more than 160,000.The first Syrian refugees crossed into Turkey in April 2011, prompting the Turkish government to set up an emergency tent camp for them in southern Hatay province. In 2012, it set up six container camps, including one in Kilis, which were meant to offer a better standard of shelter to incoming refugees. But Turkey has struggled to cope with the sheer numbers entering the country and conditions in other camps are much harsher. On 1 June, the UN refugee agency put the number of Syrians in Turkey at 760,000. According to the UN high commissioner for refugees, more than 2.8 million people have fled Syria. There are also more than a million Syrian refugees in Lebanon, making up a quarter of the tiny country's population, and 600,000 in Jordan. Iraq (225,000) and Egypt (135,000) have also taken in significant numbers.As well as those who have fled the country, there are about 6.5 million internally displaced people within Syria and more than 9 million in Syria are believed to be in need of humanitarian assistance.