Calories: 170 per 100gArchbishop Cranmer made the first record of turkeys in English in 1541. Using the sumptuary laws, which dictated what people could wear and eat, he permitted members of the clergy just one large fowl per meal, "turkey cocke" among them. By 1575, the turkey had overtaken heron, boar, peacock and goose as the main Christmas meat, and in 1851 it usurped swan on Queen Victoria's yuletide table. When turkeys were marched to 18th-century London markets from Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire, they were sometimes given little boots to protect their feet. Today, though, far from being pampered, they are reared so plump that they can't mate, and turkey farmers rely instead on artificial insemination. The largest ever turkey weighed 39.1kg and was raised in Washington.Calories: 27 per 100g"Brussels sprouts are my favourite vegetable" gets four results in Google, one on a forum called Tell A Lie. Originally cultivated in, you guessed it, Brussels, the mini cabbages didn't appear in British gardens for another 50 years. 1796 marks the first English reference, in Charles Marshall's Plain And Easy Introduction To Gardening, but they didn't make much impact until the first world war, when eating vegetables was encouraged. Since then, they've never exactly become popular, not least because most people overcook them, releasing sinigrin, which smells of sulphur.Calories: 27 per 100gThanks to anthocyanin, a pigment with twice the antioxidant power of vitamin C, red cabbage turns various shades depending on the pH value of the soil in which it's grown, making it an edible litmus test (the juice turns red in acid, blue in alkaline), so to maintain that red colour, vinegar or lemon juice is added in cooking. It has six to eight times as much vitamin C as green cabbage, which has more vitamin C than oranges. Cato the Elder recommended it as a hangover cure and preventative: "If you wish to drink deep at a banquet, eat as much raw cabbage as you wish… it will make you feel as if you had not dined, and you can drink as much as you please."Calories: 35 per 100gMichael Jackson once ate so many carrots, his hands went orange, says his brother Tito. It's the only vegetable that is healthier after being cooked – tough cell walls are broken down, making the vitamins easier to absorb. But they weren't eaten in England until the 16th century, nor were they orange (early varieties were purple). Dutch horticulturalists crossbred varieties, increased the level of carotene and "Tangoed" the carrot. The colour was political, in tribute to the House of Orange, struggling for independence from Spain. Joe Atherton of Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, grew the longest ever carrot, at just under 19ft 2in.Calories: 247 per 100gMade by colonialists from what Native Americans called ibimi ("bitter berry"), it features in America's first cookbook in 1796. It later initiated one of the many "McCartney is dead" rumours: at the end of Strawberry Fields Forever, Lennon says, "I buried Paul" – or so conspiracists thought. Apropos of nothing, he actually says "cranberry sauce".Calories: 138 per 100gNigella does hers in goose fat; Delia loves lard; Jamie opts for olive oil. While it would become our most important crop, when it arrived in the 1500s the potato was greeted with suspicion: having heard that it caused lust, clerics spread the rumour that it caused leprosy. Another possible reason for the shaky start is the spud is related to deadly nightshade, containing a toxin called solanine. Friedrich Engels argued that the potato was equivalent to iron in its "historically revolutionary role", underpinning, as it did, the industrial revolution.Calories: 116 per 100gMarilyn Monroe once scribbled down a stuffing recipe that included 11 ingredients. Despite its spelling errors and lack of measurements, it's the work of a dab hand. Humans have probably been stuffing animals for as long as they've eaten meat, but the practice was first recorded in De Re Coquinaria, a collection of Roman recipes from around 500AD. For details on how to stuff boars, kids or dormice, it remains a kitchen essential. The Victorian upper classes rebranded the common-sounding "stuffing" as "dressing", a term still used in the US.Calories: 312 per 100gBreadcrumbs were a common thickening agent in medieval sauces, but bread sauce is the only surviving example in Britain. In giving her reasons for not living in England, Mrs Touchett, in Henry James's Portrait Of A Lady, says bread sauce is one: it "looked like a poultice and tasted like soap". Gordon Ramsay agrees, calling it "the most disgusting sauce ever".Calories: 64 per 100gThe wild parsnip is native to Britain, and the edible roots cultivated from it have changed little in their 2,000 years on record. In 1475, the Italian humanist Platina wrote that, while difficult to digest, if boiled twice, parsnips settle coughs, pleurisy, dropsy, and arouse passion. They contain mild, light-activated toxins, called psoralens and are one of the few crops that benefit from frost.Calories: 311 per 100gAngels on horseback (oysters wrapped in bacon) feature in the Aberdeen Weekly Journal in 1800; the same dish is called "Little pigs in blankets" in the Hampshire Telegraph & Sussex Chronicle in 1887. It's likely that the prune (devils on horseback) and chipolata versions descended from this. During the Blitz, the Ministry of Food ordered that all piglets be distributed locally: when inspectors called, some owners wrapped theirs in blankets and walked them around in pushchairs to avoid sharing.Calories: 23 per 100g (from granules)Hieroglyphs found in the tomb of the first dynasty pharaoh Djer show juices running from roasting meats. And in Dickens's Martin Chuzzlewit, Mrs Todger says that making it adds 20 years to one's age: "The anxiety of that one item… keeps the mind continually on the stretch. There is no such passion in human nature as the passion for gravy." The last World Gravy Wrestling championship in Lancashire was won by a man dressed as a rabbit and a woman as Bo Peep.