You won't believe how difficult it is to find turkey abroad. I've seen almost any kind of animal available for consumption here in Asia. Live octopus. Bony snake. Wiggling scorpions, fresh donkey meat and spitting clam. But little old turkey? No way. How about turkey sandwich? Don't even bother.It's my first Thanksgiving outside the US, and my American friends and I are panicking online. By this time of year, back home, the big, juicy birds have all rolled out, complete with special deals and packages. But it's slim pickings abroad.I could sympathise when my friend Sara Watson tweeted about not being able to find turkey in Chongqing, deep in the heart of China. For the city's 30 million people, the fourth Thursday of November is just another Thursday. What's worse, even when she did locate a turkey, she had to cook it in a crockpot, as Chinese homes rarely come with ovens.I, too, struggled as I poked around Manila in search of turkey. Thanksgiving never caught on in this former colony, and most of the birds I could find were imported and therefore way too expensive. So I opted instead for ground turkey, to be sculpted into meatloaf.What's the deal with turkey, anyway? Even staunch vegetarians will make the effort to cook "Tofurkey". Having shared Thanksgiving meals with families from many different backgrounds, I've learned that everything else about Thanksgiving is negotiable. If we can't find potatoes to mash, we'll find rice to steam. If we can't locate celery sticks, we'll happily swap in chick peas or bok choy. For me, turkey represents Thanksgiving more than anything because it can't be had alone. It makes a community come together. Like the first pilgrims, we hunt them out, only this time in expat-friendly grocery stores. We collectively strategise on the best cooking methods with the tools at hand. We can't possibly finish one bird by ourselves, so we invite our neighbors to join in the feast. And then, we all pass out a few hours later, at last able to rest easy in a foreign land.Unlike the pilgrims, we at least have the internet. We gather around our digital tables, in faraway cities like Chongqing and Manila, where we'll be tweeting, Facebooking and Instagramming our makeshift turkey meals. Twelve hours later, when supper time rolls around in your time zone, we'll be waiting for your pictures, too.