Thanksgiving is the occasion or requirement, not necessarily welcome, that one eats with many other people, while looking at their faces even. As a contemporary American, I take many meals alone while staring at a medium, which in my case is the computer and, before that, the newspaper. I eat in silence and darkness. It hasn't always been this way.My first Thanksgiving, I had just turned 12 and had been in the US all of six months. I was living in Tacoma with my father, kid brother and a woman who would morph into my stepmother. Even then, we hated each other. For $150 a month, we had a one-bedroom apartment not far from my school, McKinley Elementary. My brother and I slept in sleeping bags on the living room floor, with our treasure: a tiny black-and-white TV, a tutor in American culture and English.Each afternoon, the magic box would usher in Bugs Bunny, then Shirley Temple or the Three Stooges, to be followed by Jimmy Snuka. No more dismal or heroic singing, as on Vietnamese television. No more body counts or political speeches. This is America, boys and girls, where everything is goofy and fun! Though they hardly knew us, the people next door generously invited us to Thanksgiving dinner. It wasn't a family but two young couples, with the men bearded. We ate on the floor. I had just learned "May I …", so I tried out, "May I have the corn, please." This linguistic feeler elicited a compliment from one of our sweet hosts, which flattered me. In Vietnam, I had studied French from kindergarten onward, but since I had no need to speak it, I never owned any French, not even a mouthful; yet, here I was, already careening forward with a new, reckless tongue that I wagged about like some lashing weapon.Eight years later, I had another memorable Thanksgiving dinner, this time at the home of a professor, Boris Putterman. It was 1983 and my second year in art school. I had started out calling Boris "Mr Putterman", but he insisted on "Boris", which is the informal, American way. Boris liked my progress as a young painter, and also my confidence, which later he would discover, to his dismay, if not disgust, to be an unwarranted cockiness. Life would kick my ass good upon leaving school, however; so I got my comeuppance.It's strange, but from all the conversations of that night, the only bit that's stuck in my mind was uttered by Boris's mother. "I don't see how people can eat chicken wings. There's no meat on them!" Instead of fading, this will only mean more and more in the years ahead, I suspect – and not just to me, but to nearly all Americans.