On first glimpse, the Mediterranean coastal town of Kalkan was exactly as a somewhat cynical traveller like me might expect: a world of chartered planes, private pools and exclusive cruises. But among the steady stream of upscale tourists, the undemanding ambience of this old Ottoman Greek fishing village has survived. People stroll and linger, not many here are simply passing through.This may have something to do with the long journey from Dalaman airport, a two-and-a-half-hour drive away, or the fact that Kalkan, along Turkey's Turquoise coast and in one of the historically most interesting regions I've ever visited, might be considered more of a base than a destination. Although it can make the village feel a bit intimate, it also means that Kalkan holds on to the exclusivity and luxury that it has become known for. And despite the town's remoteness, many Lycian cultural sites, such as the sunken city of Kekova and Patara beach, are within easy reach.Hotel Villa Mahal, our base for the week, is a fancy resort, isolated from the town by a bay on one side and a hilly path on the other, and full of people exchanging and discussing their summer reads by the pool. Most of these people, it turned out, had been here many times before."Have you met Joan, yet?" they asked, as they passed around a copy of Gillian Flynn's novel Gone Girl.Like any self-respecting holiday representative, Joan carried a smile and a clipboard and was not fazed by far-fetched requests and petty complaints. She was also first to inform us about our upgrade to the hotel's only villa, the Cliff House. I wondered how many of the guests at the hotel have Joan on their Christmas card list, and whether we should add her to ours.The Cliff House is a small, Greek-style white villa overlooking Kalamar Bay, its islands and mountaintops. Once famous for piracy and an old safe harbour for ships during rough weather, the modern-day view across this bay is one of serenity, especially from the infinity pool – perfect for what travel brochures might describe as "quiet reflection".After we dropped our bags and met Sebnem, one of the hotel's owners, it was time to start thinking about dinner. "You must try the Korsan Fish Terrace," Sebnem said. "You'll find the best food in town." Following an unsuccessful attempt to reserve a table at the popular restaurant, she added: "Why don't you take my reservation?"The steep, cobbled streets of Kalkan offer an abundance of bars and restaurants, most of which – understandably – specialise in seafood. The Korsan Fish Terrace (Yaliboyu Mah, Kalkan), run by Uluc and his British wife, offers fish straight from the boat – so fresh that not everything on the menu is available if it hasn't been caught that day."Are you coming back again this week?" Uluc asked, after we finally finished our Turkish coffee and delight."Only if you can catch me some lobster," joked Claire, my girlfriend and travel companion."Just tell me when you want it", Uluc replied.This might have been considered a joke, but anyone who has been in Kalkan for more than two hours knows how seriously people here take service.The next morning I woke to the sound of the morning call to prayer, from the town's mosque across the bay. I made my way down stone stairs into the living room, through glass floor-to-ceiling doors. The pool looked as calm as the sea, where elegant wooden gulet boats were already sailing between the hills and the harbour, and a breeze rustled through the groves of olive trees. A few feet away, the hotel's gardener watered a collection of aloe vera plants and waved enthusiastically in my direction. "Good morning, Cliff House," he said."Did you ask Joan about the mountain trekking?" Claire asked, as she resurfaced after diving in the pool."I'm not sure," I responded. "Maybe we should just stay here and read."• The trip was provided by Exclusive Escapes (020-8605 3500, exclusiveescapes.co.uk). Seven nights' B&B at Hotel Villa Mahal starts from £1,000pp, including return flights from the private terminal at Stansted or Manchester to Dalaman, transfers, and a one-day gulet cruiseRead Lindy's winning entry for the 2012 competition at  here 