It’s a country with a war raging on its borders, embroiled in a conflict with Russia, and fighting terrorism on its own soil. Yet Turkey also has the fastest rising house prices in the world, according to figures from global estate agents Knight Frank. Prices in Turkey are up 18.9% over the past year, compared to the 2.7% global average. Ukraine, whose economy has been devastated amid the ongoing dispute with Russia, saw the biggest price falls, down 14.8%.Knight Frank said: “Strong levels of foreign investment, an expanding population – a 1.2% increase per annum – and a slowdown in construction explain the upward pressure on prices.”.The Scandinavian countries, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand are also among the countries suffering the worst house price inflation. Sweden is in the grip of a debt-fuelled house price boom, especially around Stockholm. Its price growth was the highest in Europe, up 11.1% over the past year. Knight Frank said this is “in part due to an historic undersupply of housing. Demand is outpacing supply with household borrowing having risen at twice the rate of economic growth since 2009.”Hungary and Ireland recorded annual growth of 9.5% and 8.9% respectively in the year to September, yet prices in both countries remain some way off their pre-crisis peaks.On an annualised basis, house prices in Australia are up 9.8%, and now sit 48% above their financial crisis lows. However, separate data from CoreLogic RP Data’s home value index show that prices have started to fall in Sydney and Melbourne. Recent mortgage rate rises by the big banks and tighter lending standards and affordability constraints in Sydney and Melbourne have helped to cool the market.Plenty of major property markets around the world are showing price falls. In France and Italy house prices are down 3% over the year, while in China they have fallen 2%. The Greek economic crisis has pushed prices there and in neighbouring Cyprus down by around 5%, although it is war-torn Ukraine that has witnessed the biggest falls. Knight Frank said the prospect of rising interest rates in the US is likely to reduce house price pressures in 2016. “The focus now is on when, and how quickly, the Federal Reserve raises the US interest rate,” it said. “If analysts’ estimates of December is right, it will be the first time the US has embarked on a policy of monetary tightening since 2004 and it will have repercussions not just for the US housing market, but for those currencies pegged to the US dollar as well as emerging markets globally.”