It’s easy to fall prey to compassion fatigue at Christmas. You know how it is. You’ve worked tirelessly all year to improve the lot of the little people with no thought of any public recognition for your efforts and still everyone just complains that you haven’t done enough for them.So you might have claimed to have cut the deficit by half when the actual figure is only a third, but that’s the kind of slip of the tongue anyone who had given so much of themselves could make. Damn it, it’s hardly your fault if thousands of pensioners will insist on dropping down dead in the cold; the excess winter death statistics, as you so caringly refer to them, cut you to the quick as much as the next man. Especially when the man next to you is all too frequently Iain Duncan Smith. For the last few months, every prime minister’s questions has been an election debate rehearsal in miniature and in his last outing before going home to the social niceties of trying to avoid Rebekah Brooks and Elisabeth Murdoch at the Chipping Norton Boxing Day meet, David Cameron had the look of a man who had peaked too early. Nothing was going to plan.The economy was meant to have been his personal gift from Santa and he wasn’t at all happy that the grinch opposite him had already unwrapped it and discarded it as faulty.“It comes back to the point that the opposition now seem to be basing their entire economic policy on some throwaway remark on the BBC at about 10 past 6 on a Monday morning,” the prime minister said snippily, making it sound as if the idea Britain was returning to 1930s levels of public spending as a percentage of national income was an Orwellian plot cooked up by the BBC and some Commies in Camden, rather than a statement of fact contained in a recent report by the Office for Budget Responsibility.Ed Miliband was a great deal more upbeat. After being a no-go area for the Labour leader for the best part of a year, the economy is now proving to be more equal ground as voters have wised up to the fact that both parties plan more cuts, but would rather be killed by well-meaning incompetence than hardline ideology.Although the prime minister tried to dig himself out of the hole by arguing state spending was actually at the same levels as in 2002 in real terms, Miliband pushed him back in by saying he couldn’t have it both ways. “The right honourable gentleman has spent four years saying that we spent too much; now he is saying that we spent too little.”The Conservative benches were quieter than usual as turkey after turkey stood up to ask a planted question about why the government’s long term economic plan was so extraordinarily successful.Cameron had one last go at offering them a Christmas bonus by triumphantly waving the leaked document on how Labour candidates should deal with the electorate. Its author, Lucy Powell, folded her arms in preparation for her career ending before it had really started.She needn’t have worried because the only new point of interest the prime minister had discovered was something everyone already knew: that the Tories were currently ahead on running the economy.Though not necessarily for much longer. Determined to get the last word, Cameron opted for seasonal ill-will. “He’s a complete waste of space,” he yelled. MPs looked around in confusion, not sure quite to whom he was referring. There were a number of possibilities.