Even in a pitiless battle zone like Syria, there is still room for farce. On Saturday night, a convoy of 39 tanks and 57 armoured vehicles, carrying 572 Turkish soldiers, cut south from Kobani to the site of Suleyman Shah’s tomb on the bank of the Euphrates, where, according to legend, he died while swimming. Suleyman Shah is a figure of moderate importance in Turkish history, since his grandson became Osman I, founder of the Ottoman empire. Suleyman’s mausoleum was built beside the river, then rebuilt in the 19th century by Hamid II. In 1921, it became a Turkish exclave – in practice, if not quite in theory. According to the treaty that concluded its war with France, Turkey was only specifically granted the right to “appoint guardians for it, and may hoist the Turkish flag there”.In 1973, the mausoleum was re-rebuilt a bit further from the water to prevent it being flooded by a new dam. Since last March, however, it has come under threat from Isis. The ironic result is that, having insisted that this football-pitch-sized bit of land is Turkish soil, Turkey now has to defend it – but it has to invade Syria to do so. Saturday night’s operation “Shah Euphrates” was the strange solution – not a mission to defend the tomb, but to move it again. “The idea of moving the remains of iconic individuals from the past is really quite common,” says Mike Pitts, editor of British Archaeology. “But this is a bit of an odd one. There’s a strange undercurrent of complete surrealism.”It gets weirder still. Worried that the removal of the tomb might look like a retreat or a loss of territory, Turkey has kept Suleyman Shah’s remains in Syria, but closer to the border, in territory that Turkey now controls. Naturally, they need to be kept somewhere, so a new-new-new-new mausoleum has been built. In the pictures, it looks more like a substation or a cowshed. The Turkish prime minister, Ahmet Davutoğlu, has promised to return the remains to the Euphrates site eventually, when of course they will need a new-new-new-new-new mausoleum, since Turkish forces blew up the new-new-new one to stop Isis defiling it.Even more absurdly, no one really knows whose remains are being carted about. “One would need evidence to show that what they have taken from the site has anything to do with Suleyman Shah or his original tomb,” Pitts says. “To be honest, I think that would now be impossible to prove.” Elsewhere, meanwhile, in the bitterest irony of all, there are some true archaeological emergencies. “What is happening in Syria at the moment, as far as heritage sites and religious sites are concerned, is a tragedy on a world scale,” Pitts says. “Syria has six world heritage sites. All six, as far as we understand it, have been severely damaged.” Perhaps moving what is left might be a good idea.